Research article

Development and disease

5577

Inactivation of NF1 in CNS causes increased glial progenitor
proliferation and optic glioma formation
Yuan Zhu1,4,*, Takayuki Harada1, Li Liu4, Mark E. Lush1, Frantz Guignard1, Chikako Harada1,
Dennis K. Burns2, M. Livia Bajenaru3, David H. Gutmann3 and Luis F. Parada1

1Center for Developmental Biology and Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for Basic Research on Nerve Growth and Regeneration,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9133, USA
2Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9133, USA
3Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA
4Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Departments of Internal Medicine and Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
*Author for correspondence (e-mail: yuanzhu@umich.edu)

Accepted 12 October 2005

Development 132, 5577-5588
Published by The Company of Biologists 2005
doi:10.1242/dev.02162

Summary
The  gene  responsible  for  neuroﬁbromatosis  type  1  (NF1)
encodes  a  tumor  suppressor  that  functions  as  a  negative
regulator  of  the  Ras  proto-oncogene.  Individuals  with
germline  mutations 
in  NF1  are  predisposed  to  the
development  of  benign  and  malignant  tumors  of  the
peripheral  and  central  nervous  system  (CNS).  Children
with this disease suffer a high incidence of optic gliomas, a
benign but potentially debilitating tumor of the optic nerve;
and  an  increased  incidence  of  malignant  astrocytoma,
reactive astrogliosis and intellectual deﬁcits. In the present
study,  we  have  sought  insight  into  the  molecular  and
cellular basis of NF1-associated CNS pathologies. We show
that mice genetically engineered to lack NF1 in CNS exhibit

Introduction
Astrocytic tumors or astrocytomas account for a vast majority
of  primary  central  nervous  system  (CNS)  tumors  (Holland,
2001; Kleihues and Cavenee, 2000; Maher et al., 2001; Zhu and
Parada,  2002).  According  to  the  World  Health  Organization
(WHO) grading system, astrocytomas can be classiﬁed into four
histopathological  grades.  Grade  II-IV  astrocytomas  are
malignant neoplasms that diffusely inﬁltrate surrounding brain
structures. Such astrocytic neoplasms may occur at any age, but
are  more  common  in  adults  than  in  children.  By  contrast,
pilocytic astrocytomas, classiﬁed as Grade I neoplasms in the
WHO  grading  scheme,  are  generally  benign  and  tend  to  be
better  circumscribed  (Holland,  2001;  Kleihues  and  Cavenee,
2000;  Maher  et  al.,  2001;  Zhu  and  Parada,  2002).  Although
pilocytic astrocytoma is the most common glioma in children,
the molecular and genetic basis is largely unknown.

Individuals  afflicted  with  a  familial  cancer  syndrome,
neuroﬁbromatosis  type  1  (NF1),  are  predisposed  to  the
development  of  astrocytomas  (Listernick  et  al.,  1999).
Approximately  15  to  20%  of  children  with  NF1  develop
pilocytic  astrocytomas  predominantly  within 
the  optic
pathway,  hypothalamus  and,  occasionally,  in  the  other  brain
areas (Listernick et al., 1999; Listernick et al., 1997). Like their

resulting 

in  global 

a variety of defects in glial cells. Primary among these is a
developmental  defect 
reactive
astrogliosis in the adult brain and increased proliferation
of glial progenitor cells leading to enlarged optic nerves. As
a  consequence,  all  of  the  mutant  optic  nerves  develop
hyperplastic  lesions,  some  of  which  progress  to  optic
pathway  gliomas.  These  data  point  to  hyperproliferative
glial  progenitors  as  the  source  of  the  optic  tumors  and
provide a genetic model for NF1-associated astrogliosis and
optic glioma.

Key words: Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1, Optic glioma, Glial
progenitor, Astrocyte, Tumor suppressor gene, Mouse

sporadic 
counterparts,  most  NF1-associated  pilocytic
astrocytomas are benign and can remain static for many years.
However,  despite  histological  benign  features,  a  signiﬁcant
number  of  these  tumors  will  endure  and  cause  vision
impairment and other neurological symptoms (Listernick et al.,
1999).  The  NF1 gene  encodes 
the  protein  product,
neuroﬁbromin,  which  shares  homology  with  members  of  the
family of Ras GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) (Ballester et
al.,  1990;  Viskochil,  1999;  Xu  et  al.,  1990).  Like  GAPs,
neuroﬁbromin attenuates the Ras-mediated signaling pathway
by accelerating the conversion of activated Ras-GTP to inactive
Ras-GDP. Consistent with the role of the NF1 gene as a tumor
suppressor gene, loss of heterozygosity at the NF1 locus and
loss  of  neuroﬁbromin  expression  have  been  observed  in  a
variety  of  NF1-associated  tumors,  including  astrocytomas
(Gutmann et al., 2000; Kluwe et al., 2001). In one case report,
loss  of  neuroﬁbromin  expression  in  an  NF1-associated
pilocytic  astrocytoma  correlated  with  the  elevated  Ras-GTP
and activation of Ras downstream effectors such as mitogen-
activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-
kinase (PI-3K) (Lau et al., 2000).

Functional  activation  of 

through
upregulation  of  receptor  tyrosine  kinases  such  as  PDGF  and

the  Ras  pathway 

Development5578

Development 132 (24)

Research article

EGF  receptors  has  been  well  documented  in  diffusely
inﬁltrative  malignant  astrocytomas  (Holland,  2001;  Kleihues
and Cavenee, 2000; Maher et al., 2001; Zhu and Parada, 2002).
However, similar molecular alterations have not been observed
in  pilocytic  astrocytomas  (Gutmann  et  al.,  2002;  Li  et  al.,
2001).  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  NF1 gene  might  be
involved  in  regulating  the  proliferation  of  mature  astrocytes
(Bajenaru et al., 2002). Although neuroﬁbromin is expressed
below  detection  levels  in  normal  astrocytes  (Daston  and
Ratner, 1992; Daston et al., 1992; Huynh et al., 1994), it was
reported  that  loss  of  NF1 confers  a  growth  advantage  to
neonatal  astrocytes 
(Bajenaru  et  al.,  2002).
Conventional NF1 knockout mice (Nf1–/–) are embryonic lethal
(Brannan  et  al.,  1994;  Jacks  et  al.,  1994)  and  although
heterozygous  mice  (Nf1+/–)  are  cancer  prone,  they  do  not
develop astrocytomas (Jacks et al., 1994). Conditional mutant
mice lacking NF1 speciﬁcally in neurons also fail to develop
astrocytomas  although  increased  number  of  non-neoplastic
GFAP  (glial  ﬁbrillary  acidic  protein)  expressing  reactive
astrocytes  was  observed  (Zhu  et  al.,  2001).  These  results
suggest  that  NF1  can  regulate  the  growth  of  astrocytes  both
intrinsically and also indirectly through neurons.

in  vitro 

During  embryonic  development,  multipotent  neural
lose  developmental
stem/progenitor  cells  progressively 
potential  and  become  lineage-restricted  neuronal  progenitor
cells  or  glial  progenitor  cells  (Gage,  2000;  Temple,  2001).
Gliogenesis  occurs  after  neurogenesis  and  extends  into
postnatal  stages.  In  the  setting  of  NF1,  the  greatest  risk  for
development  of  optic  glioma  is  the  ﬁrst  6  years  of  life
(Listernick et al., 1999). This observation suggests that the NF1
gene  might  play  a  role  in  regulating  the  proliferation  of
progenitor cells. Furthermore, recent reports demonstrate that
pilocytic astrocytomas express molecular markers reminiscent
of glial progenitor cells (Gutmann et al., 2002; Li et al., 2001).
To determine the role of NF1 in the development of neural
cell types and understand cellular and molecular basis of NF1-
associated  astrocytoma  formation,  we  used  a  bacteriophage
Cre/loxP system to target a Nf1 mutation (Zhu et al., 2001) into
multipotent neural stem/progenitor cells and their derivatives,
including glia and neurons (Zhuo et al., 2001). We show that
loss of NF1 promotes the proliferation of glial progenitor cells
resulting in increased numbers of GFAP-expressing astrocytes
in  both  developing  and  adult  brains.  Furthermore,  NF1  also
plays  an  indispensable  role  in  the  maintenance  of  the
differentiation state of mature astrocytes. Finally, we describe
a new mouse model for NF1-associated optic pathway glioma.

Materials and methods
Control and mutant mice
The  control  mice  used  in  this  study  are  the  pool  of  phenotypically
indistinguishable  mice  with  genotypes  Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox,  Nf1ﬂox/+ and
Nf1ﬂox/+;hGFAP-cre+.  The  mutant  mice  designated  Nf1hGFAPKO
include both Nf1ﬂox/-;hGFAP-cre+ and Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;hGFAP-cre+, which
have similar phenotypes. The genotyping procedures for the Nf1ﬂox
allele,  Nf1-null  allele  and  Cre  transgene  have  been  described
previously (Zhu et al., 2001).

Size and weight analysis of mice
Nf1hGFAPKO and  control  littermates  at  the  age  of  P0.5,  P8  and  2
months  were  used  to  determine  mass  (g).  Age-matched  mutant  and
control mice were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Brains

were dissected and post-ﬁxed in 4% PFA overnight, and separated into
forebrain and hindbrain for analysis. Statistical analysis was carried
out using Student’s t-test. P<0.05 was considered to be signiﬁcant.

lacZstaining and double immunoﬂuorescence
E10.5,  E12.5  embryos  or  cryostat  sections  from  postnatal  or  adult
tissues  were  prepared  and  subjected  to  X-gal  analysis  as  described
previously  (Zhu  et  al.,  1998).  Adjacent  sections  were  subjected  to
double immunoﬂuorescence with anti-lacZ (rabbit, 1:200, 5⬘ and 3⬘)
and anti-NeuN (mouse, 1:200, Chemicon) or anti-lacZ and anti-GFAP
(mouse, 1:100, Pharmingen).

BrdU assay
P8 mutant and control littermates were pulsed with BrdU for 2 hours,
and adult mice (4-6 months) were pulsed with BrdU ﬁve times a day
at 2-hour intervals. The dose of BrdU was 50 ␮g/g (gram, body mass).
Mice were perfused with 4% PFA 2 hours after the last pulse. Brains
were dissected and processed for either paraffin-embedded or cryostat
sections.  BrdU  immunohistochemistry  was  performed  as  described
previously (Zhu et al., 1998). The dilution of BrdU antibody was 1:50
(Becton Dickinson). The number of BrdU-positive cells was counted
in one out of each ten serially prepared sections. Statistical analysis
was carried out using Student’s t-test. P<0.05 was considered to be
signiﬁcant.

Immunohistochemistry
After  post-ﬁxed  in  4%  PFA  overnight,  tissues  were  prepared  for
free-ﬂoating  vibratome  sections  at  50  ␮m,  cryostat  sections  at  14
␮m  or  paraffin  wax-embedded  sections  at  5  ␮m.  Paraffin  sections
were  deparaffinized  and  rehydrated.  Sections  were  subjected  to
immunohistochemical analysis as described previously (Zhu et al.,
2001). The visualization of primary antibodies was performed with
either a horseradish peroxidase system (Vectastain ABC kit, Vector)
or immunoﬂuorescence by using Cy3-conjugated anti-rabbit/mouse
and  Cy2-conjugated  anti-mouse/rabbit  secondary  antibodies  at
1:200  dilution  (Jackson  Laboratories).  The  dilution  of  primary
antibodies used in this study were: GFAP (rabbit, 1:2000, DAKO),
nestin (mouse, 1:200, Chemicon), BLBP (rabbit, 1:1000, a gift from
N.  Heintz),  PAX2  (rabbit,  1:1000,  a  gift  from  G.  Dressler),  P-erk
(rabbit, 1:200, Cell Signaling), Cre (mouse, 1:1000, BABCO), Ki-
67  (Rabbit,  1:1000,  Novocastra  Labs).  Sections  were  examined
under  either  light  or  ﬂuorescence  microscope  (Olympus).  The  co-
localization  of  two  antigens  was  further  conﬁrmed  by  confocal
microscopy (Zeiss).

Results
Generation of neural-speciﬁc Nf1knockout mice
Previous  studies  have  shown  that  the  Cre  transgenic  strain
under  the  control  of  human  GFAP  promoter  (hGFAP-cre)
expresses Cre recombinase not only in mature astrocytes, but
also  in  multipotent  radial  glial  cells  that  exhibit  neural
stem/progenitor cell properties and can give rise to both glia
and  neurons  during  development  (Malatesta  et  al.,  2003;
Malatesta  et  al.,  2000;  Noctor  et  al.,  2001;  Zhu  et  al.,  2005;
Zhuo  et  al.,  2001).  To  target  the  Nf1 mutation  into  neural
stem/progenitor  cells  during  development,  we  crossed  the
hGFAP-cre transgene to Nf1ﬂox/- and Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mice (Zhu et al.,
2001).  Resultant  double  transgenic  Nf1ﬂox/-;hGFAP-cre+ and
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;hGFAP-cre+ 
phenotypically
indistinguishable,  termed  Nf1hGFAPKO.  The  Nf1hGFAPKO mice
were  born  in  appropriate  Mendelian  ratios  although  they
exhibited  growth  retardation  as  early  as  P8  (see  Fig.  S1A  in
the  supplementary  material). 
the  weight
differential between control littermates and Nf1hGFAPKO mice

In  maturity, 

mice 

were 

DevelopmentDevelopment and disease

Mouse model for NF1-associated optic glioma

5579

approached 50% (see Fig. S1A in the supplementary material).
The mutant pups exhibited a series of abnormal neurological
behaviors (data not shown) and failed to thrive. As shown in
Fig. S1B (see supplementary material), the half-life for mutant
mice was ~26 weeks and all mutants perished by 47 weeks of
age.

In contrast to the diminished body weight, the Nf1hGFAPKO
mutant  brain  mass  was  slightly  larger  than  that  of  control
brains,  although  this  did  not  reach  statistical  signiﬁcance
(0.54±0.01 versus 0.52±0.02, P=0.43), except in the forebrain
where the size of mutant tissues was signiﬁcantly larger than
that of controls (see Fig. S1C in the supplementary material,
1.08±0.02 versus 0.94±0.02, P=0.0003).

Increased GFAP-positive astrocytes in adult
Nf1hGFAPKOmutant brains
To  determine  whether  Nf1hGFAPKO mutant  brains  have
developmental  or  cellular  defects,  we  performed  histological
analysis.  Although  the  mutant  cerebellum  has  conspicuous
developmental defects that may contribute to the neurological
abnormalities  observed  in  mutant  mice  (see  Fig.  S1C  in  the
supplementary material, data not shown), all other anatomical
regions  of  Nf1hGFAPKO brains  appear  relatively  normal,
including  neuronal  lamination  in  the  cerebral  cortex  and
hippocampus (see Fig. S2 in the supplementary material and
data  not  shown).  Immunohistochemical  analysis  with  an
antibody  against  GFAP  revealed  that  Nf1hGFAPKO mutant
brains exhibited astrogliosis (see Fig. S2 in the supplementary
material), a CNS pathology that is characterized by increased
expression  of  GFAP  coupled  with  hypertrophy  of  astrocytes,
including  enlarged  somata  and  thickened  processes  (Ridet  et

al.,  1997).  Staining  of  other  astrocytic  markers,  including
S100␤, further conﬁrmed that Nf1hGFAPKO mutant brains had
increased numbers of astrocytes (data not shown). In contrast
to our previous observation that neuronal loss of NF1 leads to
astrogliosis  restricted  to  the  gray  matter  (Zhu  et  al.,  2001),
Nf1hGFAPKO brains have extensive astrogliosis throughout both
the gray and white matter, including the corpus callosum and
anterior commissure (see Fig. S2I,J,M,N in the supplementary
material).  We  next  performed  BrdU  analysis 
label
proliferating  cells  and  TUNEL  analysis  to  detect  apoptotic
cells.  Both  analyses  failed  to  detect  signiﬁcant  differences
between adult mutant and control brains (Fig. 1A and data not
shown). Thus, the excess number of GFAP-positive astrocytes
present  in  adult  Nf1hGFAPKO mutant  gray  and  white  matter
probably  results  from  early  events  that  affect  proliferation,
apoptosis, differentiation or any combination of these factors.

to 

Increased proliferating glial progenitor cells during
development
To  examine  the  status  of  glial  progenitors  in  Nf1hGFAPKO
mutant  brains,  we  selected  postnatal  day  8  (P8)  for  analysis.
At P8, neurogenesis is largely complete but glial development
and  proliferation  is  still  active  (Bayer  and  Altman,  1991;
Jacobson, 1991; Qian et al., 2000). P8 also coincides with the
ﬁrst detectable morphological differences between mutant and
wild-type pups (see Fig. S1A in the supplementary material).
The results of BrdU incorporation and immunohistochemical
studies  indicated  that  during  development,  mutant  brains
contain  excess  proliferating  cells  (Fig.  1B,C)  that  express  a
neural stem/progenitor cell marker, nestin (Fig. 2A,B), and an
early glial progenitor cell marker, brain lipid binding protein

Fig. 1. Comparison of the number
of BrdU-positive cells in adult and
developing control and mutant
brains. (A) The number of BrdU-
positive cells in the cerebral cortex
(Ctx), thalamus (Th) and
cerebellum (Cb) of adult mutant
brains (n=6) was not signiﬁcantly
different from those in adult
control brains (n=6). The data
plotted are mean±s.e.m. Cerebral
cortex, P=0.42; thalamus, P=0.46;
cerebellum, P=0.57. (B) The
number of BrdU-positive cells in
developing mutant brains (n=5)
was signiﬁcantly increased relative
to those in controls (n=3). Cerebral
cortex, P=0.001; thalamus,
P=0.007. **P<0.01. (C) Sections
from the P8 control cerebral cortex
(a,c) and thalamus (e,g), and the
P8 mutant cortex (b,d) and
thalamus (f,h) were stained with an
anti-BrdU antibody. In contrast to
the control P8 brains, which have
low proliferation, the mutant
brains contain signiﬁcantly more
BrdU-positive cells. Scale bars:
100 ␮m.

Development5580

Development 132 (24)

Research article

(BLBP)  (Fig.  2C,D)  (Feng  et  al.,  1994;  Kurtz  et  al.,  1994).
Consistent with this, the majority of proliferating cells in both
control (Fig. 2E,G) and mutant brains at P8 (Fig. 2F,H) do not
express mature astrocyte markers, such as GFAP. We observed
no difference in apoptosis between mutant and control brains
that could contribute to the increased numbers of proliferating
glial progenitors at this stage (data not shown).

To  determine  whether  glial  progenitor  cells  in  P8  brains
express  the  Cre  transgene  and  hence  are  NF1  deﬁcient,  we
performed immunohistochemical analysis. In both P8 control
and mutant brains, most GFAP-positive astrocytes express the
Cre transgene (Fig. 3; Fig. 4A), which is consistent with the
previous observations in the adult brain (Malatesta et al., 2003;
Zhu  et  al.,  2005;  Zhuo  et  al.,  2001).  However,  not  all  of  the
Cre-positive  cells  expressed  GFAP  (Fig.  3A,  parts  a-d;  3B,
parts  a-d).  Although  these  Cre-positive/GFAP-negative  cells
co-exist  with 
astrocytes
throughout the brain, they represent the major cell type in the

Cre-positive/GFAP-positive 

thalamus (Fig. 3A) and in the periphery of the cerebellar white
matter  (Fig.  3B),  where  we  determined  that  most  of  these
GFAP-negative  cells  express  both  Cre  and  BLBP  (Fig.  3A,
parts  e,f;  3B,  parts  e,f).  These  data  indicate  that  the  Cre
transgene  is  expressed  in  the  BLBP-positive  glial  progenitor
cells in both P8 control and mutant brains. Thus, we conclude
that  NF1  deﬁciency  as  a  consequence  of  Cre-mediated
recombination leads to increased numbers of proliferating glial
progenitor cells in P8 brains.

Nf1–/– glial progenitor cells differentiate
We  also  determined  an  increased  number  of  GFAP-positive
astrocytes in P8 mutant brains (Fig. 2F,H; Fig. 3A, part b; Fig.
3B, part b; Fig. 4A, parts b,d) as compared with controls (Fig.
2E,G; Fig. 3A, part a; Fig. 3B, part a; Fig. 4A, parts a,c). To
verify that the GFAP-expressing astrocytes in mutant brains are
NF1 deﬁcient, we used a Cre antibody to label Nf1–/– cells. As
shown  in  Fig.  4A,  most  of  the  GFAP-expressing  cells  in
Nf1hGFAPKO brains,  including  the  cerebral  cortex
(Fig. 4A, part b) and the hippocampal dentate gyrus
(DG)  (Fig.  4A,  parts  d,f),  co-express  Cre  and
exhibit  similar  morphology  to  those  astrocytes  in
control  cortex  (Fig.  4A,  part  a)  and  dentate  gyrus
(Fig. 4A, parts c,e). Furthermore, similar to normal
counterparts (Fig. 4B, parts a,c), mutant astrocytes
express  GFAP  but  not  nestin  in  most  areas  of  P8
brains (Fig. 4B, parts b,d). A small number of cells
expressing both GFAP and nestin were observed in
both  P8  control  and  mutant  dentate  gyrus  (arrows
in  Fig.  4B,  parts  e,f)  and  the  subventricular  zone,
which  are  probably  neural  stem/progenitor  cells
that  persist  into  adulthood  (Alvarez-Buylla  et  al.,
2001). Thus, loss of NF1 promotes the proliferation
of glial progenitor cells that retain the capacity to
differentiate  into  GFAP-expressing  astrocytes.  We
conclude that the tumor suppressor gene, NF1, is a
negative  regulator  of  the  proliferation  for  glial
progenitor cells but not for mature astrocytes.

A subset of Nf1–/– astrocytes express
nestin in the adult brain
In normal adult brains, nestin immunoreactivity is
mainly restricted to the well-characterized sites of
stem  cell  residence:  the  subgranular  layer  of  the
dentate gyrus (DG; Fig. 5A) and the subventricular

Fig. 2. Proliferating cells in P8 control and mutant brains
express progenitor cell markers, not a mature astrocyte
marker. Sections from P8 control and Nf1hGFAPKO
mutant brains were subjected to double-labeling
immunoﬂuorescence with anti-Ki67 (red) and anti-nestin
(green) (A,B), with anti-BrdU (red) and anti-BLBP
(green) (C,D), and with anti-BrdU (red) and anti-GFAP
(green) (E,F). BrdU staining in the external granule cells
in the P8 cerebella serves an internal positive control for
this study (E,F). (G,H) Higher magniﬁcation of sections
in E,F, showing that only a small number of BrdU-
positive cells in the mutant brain but not in the control
brain expressed GFAP (arrows in H). (A-D) Sections
from the thalamus. (E-F) Sections from the brainstem.
IV, the fourth ventricle. Scale bars: 100 ␮m.

DevelopmentDevelopment and disease

Mouse model for NF1-associated optic glioma

5581

Fig. 3. hGFAP-cre is expressed in glial progenitor cells during postnatal development. (A) Sections from the thalamus of P8 control (a,c,e) and
mutant (CKO) brains (b,d,f) were subjected to double-labeling immunoﬂuorescence with anti-Cre (red) and anti-GFAP (green) (a-d), and anti-
Cre (red) and anti-BLBP (green) (e,f). (B) Sections from the cerebellar white matter of P8 control (a,c,e) and mutant brains (b,d,f) were
subjected to double-labeling immunoﬂuorescence with anti-Cre/anti-GFAP (a-d) and anti-Cre/anti-BLBP (e,f). The mutant cerebellar white
matter has signiﬁcantly more GFAP-positive cells than control (marked by broken lines in a-d). Most of the Cre-positive/GFAP-negative glial
progenitor cells are distributed in the periphery of the cerebellar white matter (outside the broken lines). Arrows indicate glial progenitor cells
expressing Cre and BLBP, but not GFAP. Genotypes: control mice, Nf1ﬂox/+;hGFAP-cre+; mutant mice, Nf1ﬂox/-;hGFAP-cre+ or
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;hGFAP-cre+. Scale bars: 100 ␮m.

zone  of  the  lateral  ventricle  (LV;  Fig.  5C)  (Gage,  2000).  In
brains of a subset of aged Nf1hGFAPKO mutant mice analyzed
(8/14),  nestin-positive  cells  were  identiﬁed  throughout  the
brain  parenchyma,  including  the  hippocampus  (outside  the
subgranular layer, arrows in Fig. 5B) and cortex (Fig. 5D). All
the nestin-positive cells had morphological features of mature
astrocytes  and  co-expressed  GFAP  (Fig.  5B,D,H,  inset),
suggesting  that  these  nestin/GFAP-positive  cells  represent
abnormal  astrocytes  and  that  absence  of  NF1  results  in
abnormal co-expression of early and mature glial markers. In
addition,  consistent  with  NF1  inactivation,  glial  cells  in
Nf1hGFAPKO mutant  brains  have  elevated  levels  of  activated
MAPK  (Fig.  5E,F).  As  the  aberrant  expression  of  nestin  in
Nf1hGFAPKO mutant  brains  was  only  observed  in  a  subset  of
aged (Fig. 5G,H), but not in P8 (Fig. 4B) or young adult (P30,
data not shown) mutant mice, we suggest that NF1 may play
a  role  in  maintenance  of  the  differentiated  state  of  mature
astrocytes in the adult brain.

We monitored a cohort of 45 Nf1hGFAPKO mutant mice, 10
of which survived more than 8 months. Detailed histological
analysis  of  mutant  brains  (cerebral  cortex,  hippocampus,
thalamus, hypothalamus and cerebellum) revealed no evidence
of tumor formation. Thus, despite the induced early progenitor
hyperproliferation  during  development,  loss  of  NF1  alone  is
not sufficient to cause astrocytoma formation in the brain. This

is consistent with the fact that while individuals with NF1 are
reported  to  have  a  variety  of  brain  abnormalities,  including
increased reactive astrogliosis (Nordlund et al., 1995), only a
small percentage of these individuals develop astrocytomas in
the brain (Listernick et al., 1999; Rubin and Gutmann, 2005).

Tumorigenic potential: a model for optic glioma
Approximately 15-20% of children with NF1 develop benign
gliomas  along  the  optic  pathway  with  characteristics  of
pilocytic  astrocytoma  (Listernick  et  al.,  1999).  Using  the
Rosa26-lacZ reporter  mouse  strain  (Soriano,  1999),  we
identiﬁed that hGFAP-cre-mediated recombination occurred in
the optic nerve and the retina (Fig. 6A,B). The density of lacZ-
positive  cells  appeared  highest  in  the  area  of  the  optic  nerve
immediately  adjacent  to  the  retina  (Fig.  6A-D).  Double
labeling with antibodies against lacZ and GFAP revealed that
the  majority  of  lacZ-positive  cells  in  the  optic  nerve  were
GFAP-expressing  astrocytes 
(Fig.  6C,D).  Furthermore,
hGFAP-cre-mediated  recombination  in  the  optic  nerve  was
conﬁrmed by PCR analysis (Fig. 6E) (Zhu et al., 2002; Zhu et
al.,  2005).  We  next  examined 
the  optic  nerves  from
Nf1hGFAPKO mutant  mice  along  with  control  littermates.  Of
optic nerves from twenty nine mutant mice analyzed, 18 were
signiﬁcantly enlarged in diameter (Fig. 6F-H; Fig. 7A,B) and
reminiscent of similarly prepared optic nerves from individuals

Development5582

Development 132 (24)

Research article

Fig. 4. Nf1–/– glial progenitor cells undergo astrocytic differentiation. (A) Sections from P8 control (a,c,e) and Nf1hGFAPKO mutant (b,d,f) brains
were subjected to double-labeling immunoﬂuorescence with anti-Cre (red) and anti-GFAP (green). (a,b) Sections from the control and mutant
cerebral cortex (CC); (c-f) low (c,d) and high (e,f) magniﬁcation of sections from control and mutant hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG). Most of
the GFAP-positive cells also express the Cre transgene. (B) Sections from P8 control (a,c,e) and Nf1hGFAPKO mutant (b,d,f) brains were
subjected to double-labeling immunoﬂuorescence with anti-nestin (red) and anti-GFAP (green). (a,b) Sections from the corpus callosum;
(c,d) sections from the brainstem; (e,f) sections from the dentate gyrus. Most of the GFAP-positive astrocytes in both control and mutant P8
brains do not express nestin, except in the dentate gyrus (arrows in e,f), where a small number of cells express both GFAP and nestin. There are
low levels of nestin expression in the endothelial cells. Genotypes: control mice, Nf1ﬂox/+;hGFAP-cre+; mutant mice, Nf1ﬂox/-;hGFAP-cre+ or
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;hGFAP-cre+. Scale bars: 100 ␮m.

with  NF1  with  optic  gliomas  (Kleihues  and  Cavenee,  2000).
Histological analysis revealed evidence of disorganization and
increased cellularity throughout the optic nerves from all of the
29 mutant mice (Fig. 7C,D). The dysplastic nature of the cells
in the mutant optic nerves is illustrated by double labeling with
nestin  and  GFAP  (Fig.  7E-H).  We  found  that  mature  optic
nerve astrocytes retain low levels of nestin expression (Frisen
et  al.,  1995).  Furthermore,  consistent  with  the  pattern  of
hGFAP-cre-mediated recombination in the optic pathway, the
most pronounced changes were found in the area immediately
adjacent  to  the  retina  (Fig.  7I,J),  which  contained  dense
clusters  of 
randomly  oriented  glial  nuclei.  Detailed
pathological analysis revealed that six out of 29 mutant mice
(6/29) developed conspicuous neoplastic lesions (Fig. 8A-C).
In  contrast  to  normal  nerves,  which  are  comprised  of  well-
organized  astrocytes  expressing  both  nestin  and  GFAP  (Fig.
8D),  neoplastic  cells  are  completely  disorganized  and
downregulate nestin expression (Fig. 8E,F). Although the optic
nerve lesions observed in this tumor model lack some common
features of pilocytic astrocytomas, such as Rosenthal ﬁbers and
granular  bodies,  these  lesions  display  pathological  features
similar  to  human  tumors,  which  include  the  location  in  the
anterior  optic  nerve,  coarse  ﬁbrillary  appearance  and  nuclear

pleiomorphism with clustered atypical tumor nuclei (also see
Fig. 9K,M).

BrdU analysis showed that mutant optic nerves contain ﬁve-
to ten-fold increases in proliferating cells (Fig. 9A). In all cases,
proliferating cells in both adult control (Fig. 9B,D) and mutant
nerves (Fig. 9C,E) did not express GFAP, indicating that, as in
the developing brain, loss of NF1 promotes the proliferation of
progenitor cells in the optic nerve. By contrast, BrdU-positive
cells  in  the  optic  nerve  express  nestin  (arrows  in  Fig.  9F,G).
These  observations  suggest  that  Nf1hGFAPKO mutant  optic
nerves  contain  increased  numbers  of  glial  progenitor  cells.
When  compared  with  adult  control  proximal  (Fig.  9H,J)  and
distal  (Fig.  9L)  optic  nerves  that  had  few  or  no  BLBP-
expressing  cells,  adult  mutant  nerves  contained  numerous
BLBP-positive cells that exhibited nuclear atypia indicative of
neoplastic  transformation  (Fig.  9I,  arrows  in  Fig.  9K,M).  In
addition, we also used an independent glial progenitor marker,
Pax2 (Mi and Barres, 1999), to conﬁrm that mutant optic nerves
had increased numbers of glial progenitor cells (Fig. 9N,O).

We  conﬁrmed  that  the  pathology  observed  in  the  optic
nerves  results  from  loss  of  NF1  by  immunohistochemical
analysis  with  a  Cre  antibody  (data  not  shown).  Consistently,
mutant glial cells have high MAPK activity (Fig. 10A-D) with

DevelopmentDevelopment and disease

Mouse model for NF1-associated optic glioma

5583

Fig. 5. A subset of Nf1–/– astrocytes in the adult brain express nestin.
Sections from adult control (A) and mutant (B) dentate gyrus (DG),
as well as control (C) and mutant (D) cerebral cortex were subjected
to double-labeling ﬂuorescence with anti-nestin (red) and anti-GFAP
(green). LV, lateral ventricle. Reactive astrocytes expressing both
GFAP and nestin were observed only in the mutant brain (arrows in
B,D). Immunohistochemical analysis with anti-P-erk of the control
(E) and mutant (F) dentate gyrus. A population of nestin-positive
reactive astrocytes (arrows in H, see inset for high magniﬁcation)
was identiﬁed only in a subset of aged mutant brains, but not in
control or mutant mice at young age (G). Scale bars: 100 ␮m.

a  subset  of  mutant  glial  cells  showing  activated  MAPK  but
lacking GFAP. These results suggest that both glial progenitor
cells (Fig. 10F, arrowheads) and astrocytes (Fig. 10F, arrows)
in  mutant  optic  nerves  had  activated  MAPK.  These
observations suggest that activation of Ras/MAPK pathway as
a  consequence  of  NF1  inactivation  may  underlie  hyperplasia
and glioma formation in the mutant optic nerve.

To  examine  whether  NF1  heterozygosity  in  surrounding
cells  contributes  to  the  development  of  optic  glioma,  we
crossed Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mice into a different GFAP-cre* transgenic
strain  (Bajenaru  et  al.,  2002)  that  targets  Cre-mediated
recombination only in astrocytes of the retina (see Fig. S3A,B
in the supplementary material). When crossed to the Rosa26-
lacZ reporter  strain,  the  GFAP-cre*  activity  showed  co-
expression  with  astrocytic  markers  (GFAP),  but  not  with
neuronal  markers  in  retina  (NeuN; see  Fig.  S3E,F  in  the
supplementary material). In some regions of the brain, GFAP-
cre*-mediated  recombination  occurred  in  both  glia  and
neurons (see Fig. S3C,D in the supplementary material) (Fraser
et al., 2004). Detailed analysis of the optic nerve in these aged
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;GFAP-cre*+ mutant mice (12 months old) revealed
no  evidence  of  hyperplasia  compared  with  that  observed  for
Nf1hGFAPKO.  These  results  support  the  notion  that  the

Fig. 6. Cre-mediated recombination
leads to enlarged optic nerves. X-gal
staining of the proximal optic nerve
immediately adjacent to the retina (A)
and distal optic nerve near the chiasm
(asterisk) (B). Optic nerves were
dissected from 2-month-old mice with
the genotype of hGFAP-cre+; Rosa26-
lacZ/+ (n=3). (C,D) Adjacent sections to
A,B were subjected to double-labeling
immunoﬂuorescence with anti-lacZ (red)
and anti-GFAP (green). Most of the
lacZ-positive cells are GFAP-expressing
astrocytes. (E) hGFAP-cre-mediated
recombination in the optic nerve was
revealed by PCR analysis. Upper panel:
a PCR assay identifying the ﬂoxed NF1
allele (⫻1) and recombined ﬂoxed allele
(⌬) indicated that a signiﬁcant number
of the ﬂoxed NF1 alleles in the optic
nerve (ON), cerebral cortex (Ctx) and
hippocampus (Hp) of the
Nf1ﬂox/+;hGFAP-cre+ mice transformed into the recombined alleles. Bottom panel: a PCR assay that identiﬁes the wild type (+) and the ﬂoxed
(⫻1) NF1 allele conﬁrmed the genotype of the tissues analyzed. (F) A representative of control (left) and mutant (right) eyes with the optic
nerves and chiasm (arrowheads). High-magniﬁcation of view of control (G) and mutant (H) optic nerves with chiasms (asterisk). The mutant
nerve has a conspicuous enlargement (indicated by broken lines and arrowheads). Scale bars: 100 ␮m in A-D; 1 mm in F-H.

Development5584

Development 132 (24)

heterozygous state of surrounding cells may contribute to NF1
nullizygous glial hyperplasia and neoplasia in the optic nerve
(Bajenaru et al., 2003).

Fig. 7. Nf1hGFAPKO optic nerves are hyperplastic. Sections from
control (A,C) and mutant (B,D) distal optic nerves and chiasms
(asterisk) were stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin. Arrows in A,B
indicate the enlarged area of the nerves shown in C,D, respectively.
Adjacent sections from control (E,G) and mutant (F,H) optic nerves
were stained with anti-nestin (red) and anti-GFAP (green). Mutant
optic nerves are enlarged (B), hyperplastic (D) and disorganized
(F,H). Sections from control (I) and mutant (J) proximal optic nerves
were stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin. The most pronounced
hypercellularity was observed in the proximal optic nerves (J). Scale
bars: 100 ␮m.

Research article

Discussion
Through  analysis  of  neural-speciﬁc  NF1  knockout  mice,  we
demonstrate  that  the  NF1  tumor  suppressor  gene  has  pivotal
roles  in  the  appropriate  development  of  the  CNS  glial  cell
lineage  and  that  sustained  increased  proliferation  in  glial
progenitor  cells  may  underlie  tumor  formation  in  the  optic
nerve.

NF1 and proliferation of glial progenitor cells
Consistent with the role of NF1 as a tumor suppressor gene,
recent  studies  have  demonstrated  that  loss  of  NF1  function
confers a growth advantage to a variety of cell types in vitro,
including  neural  stem/progenitor  cells  in  the  embryonic
forebrain  (Dasgupta  and  Gutmann,  2005),  oligodendrocyte
precursor cells from the embryonic spinal cord (Bennett et al.,
2003),  Schwann  cells  (Kim  et  al.,  1997)  and  ﬁbroblasts
(Rosenbaum  et  al.,  1995),  etc.  However,  because  of  early
embryonic lethality of NF1 homozygous mutants, insights into
the  function  of  NF1  during  late  developmental  stages  and
adulthood  remain  limited  (Bajenaru  et  al.,  2003;  Bajenaru  et
al.,  2002;  Zhu  et  al.,  2002;  Zhu  et  al.,  2001).  For  example,
despite the fact that several lines of evidence point to the Nf1
gene  as  a  negative  regulator  of  astrocyte  proliferation
(Bajenaru  et  al.,  2002),  the  in  vivo  role  of  the  Nf1 gene  in
mature  astrocytes  has  not  been  fully  addressed.  Our  studies
indicate that NF1-deﬁcient mature astrocytes in the adult brain
do not show a signiﬁcant increase in proliferation. Instead, we
show  signiﬁcantly  increased  proliferation  during  postnatal
CNS development. These proliferating cells express progenitor
cell markers found in both multipotent neural stem/progenitor
cells and glial progenitor cells (Anthony et al., 2004; Feng et
al., 1994; Frisen et al., 1995; Kurtz et al., 1994; Lendahl et al.,
1990). We conclude that these proliferative cells most probably
represent  glial  progenitor  cells,  as  neurogenesis  is  largely
complete and gliogenesis persists in the P8 brain (Bayer and
Altman,  1991;  Jacobson,  1991;  Qian  et  al.,  2000).  Thus,  our
studies demonstrate that the Nf1 gene is a negative regulator of
proliferation in glial progenitor cells and provide evidence that
the NF1-associated pathology observed in the adult brain could
result from developmental defects.

NF1 in differentiation of the astrocyte lineage
Increased  numbers  of  NF1-deﬁcient,  GFAP-positive  mature
astrocytes  were  observed  in  both  developing  and  adult
Nf1hGFAPKO mutant brains. Because hGFAP-cre is expressed in
a majority of astrocyte precursors, radial glia in the embryonic
brain (Malatesta et al., 2003) and glial progenitor cells in the
postnatal brain (this study), it is reasonable to assume that the
majority  of  mutant  astrocytes  arise  from  NF1  deﬁcient
progenitor  cells.  Thus,  in  vivo,  NF1  is  dispensable  for
astrocytic  differentiation.  As  no  increased  proliferation  or
reduced  apoptosis  was  observed  in  NF1-deﬁcient  mature
astrocytes in both P8 and adult brains, the increased numbers
of  GFAP-positive  astrocytes  in  adult  mutant  brains  probably
result  from  excess  generation  of  glial  progenitor  cells,  as
observed  during  development.  In  brains  of  a  subset  of  aged
Nf1hGFAPKO mutant mice, we identiﬁed an unusual population
of  cells 
that  express  both  nestin  and  GFAP.  These
nestin/GFAP-positive cells morphologically resemble reactive
astrocytes that are hypertrophic with thickened and increased
processes  (Ridet  et  al.,  1997),  which  are  observed  in  both

DevelopmentDevelopment and disease

Mouse model for NF1-associated optic glioma

5585

Fig. 8. Nf1hGFAPKO mice develop optic pathway gliomas. Two independent optic gliomas (B,C) are shown with Hematoxylin and Eosin staining
and compared with the control (A). Adjacent sections from control (D) and mutant nerves with gliomas (E,F) were stained with anti-nestin
(red) and anti-GFAP (green). Unlike the well-organized normal astrocytes that express both nestin and GFAP in control (D), most of the cells in
optic gliomas express only GFAP (E,F, arrowheads). Scale bars: 100 ␮m.

human and mouse NF1-deﬁcient brains (Gutmann et al., 1999;
Nordlund et al., 1995; Rizvi et al., 1999; Zhu et al., 2001). As
these  nestin/GFAP-positive  cells  were  not  observed  in  the
brains of developing (P8) or young adult (P30) mutant mice,
these  observations  suggest  that  NF1  may  be  required  for  the
maintenance of the astrocytic differentiation state or possibly
preventing  mature  astrocytes  from  undergoing  abnormal
differentiation. Previously, we have reported that neuronal loss
of  NF1  results  in  activation  of  MAPK  in  neurons  but  not  in
astrocytes,  leading  to  reactive  astrogliosis  in  a  non-cell
autonomous  fashion  (Zhu  et  al.,  2001).  Despite  exhibiting
morphological similarities, the reactive astrocytes observed in
neuronal-speciﬁc  NF1  (Nf1SynIKO)  mutant  brains,  do  not
express  nestin  (Zhu  et  al.,  2001).  Therefore,  the  aberrant
expression of this CNS progenitor cell marker (nestin) could
result in part from intrinsic loss of NF1 within astrocytes or its
progenitor  cells.  This  is  consistent  with  the  observation  that
astrocytes  in  Nf1hGFAPKO brains  have  elevated  levels  of
activated MAPK, while reactive astrocytes in Nf1SynIKO brains
do not (Zhu et al., 2001).

NF1, a tumor suppressor gene in optic nerve glial
progenitor cells
The  present  results  and  previous  reports  indicate  that  loss  of
NF1  alone  is  insufficient  to  induce  astrocytoma  in  the  brain
(Bajenaru et al., 2003; Bajenaru et al., 2002; Zhu et al., 2005).
By contrast, hGFAP-cre-mediated NF1 inactivation results in
fully  penetrant  glial  cell  hyperplasia  and  ~20%  incidence  of
gliomas  in  the  optic  nerves.  One  likely  reason  for  this  optic
nerve-speciﬁc  neoplasia  is  that  increased  proliferation  in  the
mutant  brain  is  limited  to  development,  while  mutant  optic
nerves  have  sustained  increased  proliferation  into  adulthood.
Our  data  indicate  that  the  proliferating  cells  in  mutant  optic

nerves express glial progenitor cell markers including nestin,
BLBP  and  Pax2.  These  progenitor-like  cells  display  nuclear
atypia,  a  characteristic  feature  of  neoplastic  cells,  and  have
increased 
these
observations  suggest  that  NF1  deﬁciency  regulates  glial
progenitor cell proliferation, which is likely to underlie optic
glioma formation in this model.

levels  of  activated  MAPK.  Together, 

A model for optic pathway glioma
Histologically,  pilocytic  astrocytomas  may  contain  a
surprisingly  wide  range  of  patterns  (Kleihues  and  Cavenee,
2000).  In  addition  to  some  of  the  more  common  features,
including recognizable bipolar cytoplasmic processes, brightly
eosinophilic  Rosenthal  ﬁbers  and  hyaline  granular  bodies,
pilocytic  astrocytomas  may  also  contain  areas  of  substantial
nuclear  pleomorphism,  oligodendroglioma-like  regions,  areas
of inﬁltrative growth and cells similar to those of diffuse WHO
grade II astrocytoma. In the case of lesions lacking Rosenthal
ﬁbers  and  hyaline  granular  bodies,  the  distinction  between
diffuse  and  pilocytic  astrocytomas  may  be  extremely  difficult
(Kleihues  and  Cavenee,  2000).  Thus,  within  the  accepted
variability  of  pilocytic  astrocytomas,  the  lesions  found  in  the
mutant  mice  are  consistent  with  early  stage  optic  pathway
gliomas. This phenotype is further consistent with the fact that
individuals  with  NF1  develop 
astrocytic  neoplasms
predominantly along the optic pathway (Listernick et al., 1999).
While  this  manuscript  was  in  preparation,  a  mouse  model
for NF1-associated optic pathway glioma was published using
the conditional NF1 ﬂox mouse strain described here together
with 
the
supplementary material) (Bajenaru et al., 2003). The pathology
described by Bajenaru et al. is less severe, reminiscent of that
described  as  hyperplasia  in  this  study  (Fig.  7).  In  addition,

the  GFAP-cre* 

in 

transgene 

(see  Fig.  S3 

Development5586

Development 132 (24)

Research article

Fig. 9. Nf1hGFAPKO hyperplastic nerves have increased proliferation and express glial progenitor cell markers. (A) The quantiﬁcation of BrdU-
positive cells in the adult control (CTR) and mutant (CKO) distal (DN) and proximal (PN) nerves. The data plotted are mean±s.e.m. (distal
nerve, CTR, n=4, CKO, n=5, **P<0.001; proximal nerve, CTR, n=3, CKO, n=6, **P<0.001). Sections from control (B,D) and mutant (C,E)
distal (B,C) and proximal (D,E) optic nerves were stained with anti-BrdU (red) and anti-GFAP (green). Sections from control (F) and mutant
(G) nerves were stained with anti-Ki67 (red) and anti-nestin (green). Arrows in B and C indicate proliferating cells that do not express GFAP.
Arrows in F and G indicate nestin-positive proliferating cells (inset in G provides higher magniﬁcation). Sections from control proximal (H,J),
mutant proximal (I,K), control distal (L) and mutant distal (M) optic nerves were stained with anti-BLBP. Arrow in J indicates a BLBP-positive
cells with normal nuclei in the normal nerve; arrows in K,M indicate BLBP-positive cells with atypical nuclei in the mutant nerve. Sections
from control (N) and mutant (O) optic nerves were stained with anti-Pax2. Scale bars: 100 ␮m.

Bajenaru et al.’s study describes hyperplastic optic nerves only
in  the  Nf1ﬂox/- genetic  conﬁguration  and  not  in  the  Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox
conﬁguration.  Our  Nf1hGFAPKO mice  exhibit  fully  penetrant
hyperplasia in either the ﬂox/- or the ﬂox/ﬂox conﬁgurations
and,  additionally,  20%  incidence  of  optic  pathway  gliomas.
Possible  explanations  for  the  discrepancy  between  these  two
studies include the timing of Cre transgene activation (E10.5
for hGFAP-cre versus E14.5 for GFAP-cre*), contributions of
NF1  deﬁcient  neighboring  cells 
tumor  micro-
environment  and  differences  in  genetic  background.  In  line
with  this  study,  it  is  tempting  to  speculate  that  the  timing  of
NF1  inactivation  in  the  glial  cell  lineage  during  optic  nerve
development may account in part for the heterogeneous nature
of  the  NF1-associated  optic  gliomas  (Listernick  et  al.,  1999;
Rubin  and  Gutmann,  2005).  Thus,  our  model  may  mimic  a
subset  of  individuals  with  NF1  who  have  severe  tumor
phenotypes  as  a  consequence  of  loss  of  NF1  in  a  progenitor

the 

in 

cell population, while the mouse strain developed by Bajenaru
et  al.  may  model  less  aggressive  lesions  owing  to  NF1
inactivation in more differentiated cells.

In this study, we compared Cre-mediated recombination in
both GFAP-cre strains and found that the GFAP-cre* transgene
is active only in the retinal surface layer where astrocytes are
located  (see  Fig.  S3  in  the  supplementary  material).  By
contrast, the hGFAP-cre activity is also observed in the inner
retinal layer (Fig. 6A). Interestingly, this layer contains another
retina-speciﬁc  glia,  called  Müller  cells.  This  cell  type  can
produce  and  secrete  various  kinds  of  trophic  factors  and
cytokines,  which  may  regulate  glia-glia  and  glia-neuron
network  under  pathological  conditions  (Harada  et  al.,  2002;
Harada et al., 2000). It is therefore possible that in the context
of NF1 loss, an enhanced paracrine interaction occurs between
Müller cells and glial progenitor cells in the optic nerve. This
would  account  for  the  robust  appearance  of  tumors  with  our

DevelopmentDevelopment and disease

Mouse model for NF1-associated optic glioma

5587

References
Alvarez-Buylla, A., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M. and Tramontin, A. D. (2001).
A uniﬁed hypothesis on the lineage of neural stem cells. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
2, 287-293.

Anthony, T. E., Klein, C., Fishell, G. and Heintz, N. (2004). Radial glia serve
as neuronal progenitors in all regions of the central nervous system. Neuron
41, 881-890.

Bajenaru, M. L., Zhu, Y., Hedrick, N. M., Donahoe, J., Parada, L. F. and
Gutmann,  D.  H.
the
neuroﬁbromatosis 1 gene (NF1) is insufficient for astrocytoma formation.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 22, 5100-5113.

(2002).  Astrocyte-speciﬁc 

inactivation  of 

Bajenaru,  M.  L.,  Hernandez,  M.  R.,  Perry,  A.,  Zhu,  Y.,  Parada,  L.  F.,
Garbow, J. R. and Gutmann, D. H. (2003). Optic nerve glioma in mice
requires  astrocyte  Nf1  gene  inactivation  and  Nf1  brain  heterozygosity.
Cancer Res. 63, 8573-8577.

Ballester, R., Marchuk, D., Boguski, M., Saulino, A., Letcher, R., Wigler,
M. and Collins, F. (1990). The NF1 locus encodes a protein functionally
related to mammalian GAP and yeast IRA proteins. Cell 63, 851-859.

Bayer,  S.  A.  and  Altman,  J. (1991).  Neocortical  Development.  New  York:

Raven Press.

Bennett, M. R., Rizvi, T. A., Karyala, S., McKinnon, R. D. and Ratner, N.
(2003). Aberrant growth and differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitors
in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 mutants. J. Neurosci. 23, 7207-7217.

Brannan, C. I., Perkins, A. S., Vogel, K. S., Ratner, N., Nordlund, M. L.,
Reid,  S.  W.,  Buchberg,  A.  M.,  Jenkins,  N.  A.,  Parada,  L.  F.  and
Copeland, N. G. (1994). Targeted disruption of the neuroﬁbromatosis type-
1  gene  leads  to  developmental  abnormalities  in  heart  and  various  neural
crest-derived tissues. Genes Dev. 8, 1019-1029.

Dasgupta, B. and Gutmann, D. H. (2005). Neuroﬁbromin regulates neural
stem cell proliferation, survival, and astroglial differentiation in vitro and in
vivo. J. Neurosci. 25, 5584-5594.

Daston,  M.  M.  and  Ratner,  N. (1992).  Neuroﬁbromin,  a  predominantly
neuronal GTPase activating protein in the adult, is ubiquitously expressed
during development. Dev. Dyn. 195, 216-226.

Daston, M. M., Scrable, H., Nordlund, M., Sturbaum, A. K., Nissen, L. M.
and Ratner, N. (1992). The protein product of the neuroﬁbromatosis type
1  gene  is  expressed  at  highest  abundance  in  neurons,  Schwann  cells,  and
oligodendrocytes. Neuron 8, 415-428.

Feng, L., Hatten, M. E. and Heintz, N. (1994). Brain lipid-binding protein
(BLBP):  a  novel  signaling  system  in  the  developing  mammalian  CNS.
Neuron 12, 895-908.

Fraser, M. M., Zhu, X., Kwon, C. H., Uhlmann, E. J., Gutmann, D. H. and
Baker, S. J. (2004). Pten loss causes hypertrophy and increased proliferation
of astrocytes in vivo. Cancer Res. 64, 7773-7779.

Frisen, J., Johansson, C. B., Torok, C., Risling, M. and Lendahl, U. (1995).
Rapid,  widespread,  and  longlasting  induction  of  nestin  contributes  to  the
generation of glial scar tissue after CNS injury. J. Cell Biol. 131, 453-464.
Gage, F. H. (2000). Mammalian neural stem cells. Science 287, 1433-1438.
Gutmann,  D.  H.,  Loehr,  A.,  Zhang,  Y.,  Kim,  J.,  Henkemeyer,  M.  and
Cashen, A. (1999). Haploinsufficiency for the neuroﬁbromatosis 1 (NF1)
tumor suppressor results in increased astrocyte proliferation. Oncogene 18,
4450-4459.

Gutmann,  D.  H.,  Donahoe,  J.,  Brown,  T.,  James,  C.  D.  and  Perry,  A.
(2000).  Loss  of  neuroﬁbromatosis  1  (NF1)  gene  expression  in  NF1-
associated pilocytic astrocytomas. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 26, 361-
367.

Gutmann,  D.  H.,  Hedrick,  N.  M.,  Li,  J.,  Nagarajan,  R.,  Perry,  A.  and
Watson,  M.  A. (2002).  Comparative  gene  expression  proﬁle  analysis  of
neuroﬁbromatosis 1-associated and sporadic pilocytic astrocytomas. Cancer
Res. 62, 2085-2091.

Harada,  T.,  Harada,  C.,  Nakayama,  N.,  Okuyama,  S.,  Yoshida,  K.,
Kohsaka,  S.,  Matsuda,  H.  and  Wada,  K. (2000).  Modiﬁcation  of  glial-
neuronal  cell  interactions  prevents  photoreceptor  apoptosis  during  light-
induced retinal degeneration. Neuron 26, 533-541.

Harada,  T.,  Harada,  C.,  Kohsaka,  S.,  Wada,  E.,  Yoshida,  K.,  Ohno,  S.,
Mamada, H., Tanaka, K., Parada, L. F. and Wada, K. (2002). Microglia-
Muller glia cell interactions control neurotrophic factor production during
light-induced retinal degeneration. J. Neurosci. 22, 9228-9236.

Holland, E. C. (2001). Gliomagenesis: genetic alterations and mouse models.

Nat. Rev. Genet. 2, 120-129.

Huynh,  D.  P.,  Nechiporuk,  T.  and  Pulst,  S.  M. (1994).  Differential
expression and tissue distribution of type I and type II neuroﬁbromins during
mouse fetal development. Dev. Biol. 161, 538-551.

Jacks, T., Remington, L., Williams, B. O., Schmitt, E. M., Halachmi, S.,

Fig. 10. Glial cells in mutant optic nerves have elevated levels of
activated MAPK. Sections of the proximal optic nerves from control
mice (A,C) and mutant mice (B,D) were stained with anti-P-erk. The
arrow in D indicates the tumor cells with activated MAPK. Sections
from control (E) and mutant (F) optic nerves were subjected to triple
labeling with anti-P-erk (red), anti-GFAP (green) and DAPI (blue).
DAPI was used to label the nuclei. In contrast to the control nerves
where little or no cells had activated MAPK (E), mutant nerves
contained numerous P-erk positive cells, some of which co-expressed
GFAP (F, arrows) and some of which failed to express GFAP (F,
arrowheads). Scale bars: 100 ␮m. 

Nf1hGFAPKO  model  that  has  NF1-null  surrounding  cells  (e.g.
Müller glia) compared with a partial hyperplastic response in
the Nf1ﬂox/-;GFAP*-cre+ transgene where neighboring cells are
heterozygous for NF1.

We thank P. Houston, A. DeShaw, S. McKinnon, W. Song and A.
Wang  for  technical  assistance;  members  of  the  Parada  and  Zhu
laboratories  for  support;  Dr  N.  Heintz  for  BLBP  antibody;  Dr  G.
Dressler for Pax2 antibody; and Dr S. Weiss for critically reading the
manuscript.  This  work  is  supported  by  grants  from  the  National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, the American Cancer
Society  and  Department  of  Defense  (L.F.P.);  from  the  National
Institutes of Health and DOD to D.H.G.; and by a NIH postdoctoral
award 
to  M.L.B.  Y.Z.  acknowledges  support  from  National
Neuroﬁbromatosis  Foundation  (Young  Investigator  Award),  the
Biological Sciences Scholars Program and the Comprehensive Cancer
Center of the University of Michigan Medical School.

Supplementary material
Supplementary material for this article is available at
http://dev.biologists.org/cgi/content/full/132/24/5577/DC1

Development5588

Development 132 (24)

Research article

Xu, G. F., Lin, B., Tanaka, K., Dunn, D., Wood, D., Gesteland, R., White,
R.,  Weiss,  R.  and  Tamanoi,  F. (1990).  The  catalytic  domain  of  the
neuroﬁbromatosis  type  1  gene  product  stimulates  ras  GTPase  and
complements ira mutants of S. cerevisiae. Cell 63, 835-841.

Zhu,  Y.  and  Parada,  L.  F. (2002).  The  molecular  and  genetic  basis  of

neurological tumours. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2, 616-626.

Zhu, Y., Richardson, J. A., Parada, L. F. and Graff, J. M. (1998). Smad3

mutant mice develop metastatic colorectal cancer. Cell 94, 703-714.

Zhu,  Y.,  Romero,  M.  I.,  Ghosh,  P.,  Ye,  Z.,  Charnay,  P.,  Rushing,  E.  J.,
Marth, J. D. and Parada, L. F. (2001). Ablation of NF1 function in neurons
induces abnormal development of cerebral cortex and reactive gliosis in the
brain. Genes Dev. 15, 859-876.

Zhu,  Y.,  Ghosh,  P.,  Charnay,  P.,  Burns,  D.  K.  and  Parada,  L.  F. (2002).
Neuroﬁbromas in NF1: Schwann cell origin and role of tumor environment.
Science 296, 920-922.

Zhu,  Y.,  Guignard,  F.,  Zhao,  D.,  Liu,  L.,  Burns,  D.  K.,  Mason,  R.  P.,
Messing,  A.  and  Parada,  L.  F. (2005).  Early  inactivation  of  p53  tumor
suppressor gene cooperating with NF1 loss induces malignant astrocytoma.
Cancer Cell 8, 119-130.

Zhuo,  L.,  Theis,  M.,  Alvarez-Maya,  I.,  Brenner,  M.,  Willecke,  K.  and
Messing, A. (2001). hGFAP-cre transgenic mice for manipulation of glial
and neuronal function in vivo. Genesis 31, 85-94.

Bronson, R. T. and Weinberg, R. A. (1994). Tumor spectrum analysis in
p53-mutant mice. Curr. Biol. 4, 1-7.

Jacobson, M. (1991). Developmental Neurobiology. New York: Plenum Press.
Kim, H. A., Ling, B. and Ratner, N. (1997). Nf1-deﬁcient mouse Schwann
cells  are  angiogenic  and  invasive  and  can  be  induced  to  hyperproliferate:
reversion of some phenotypes by an inhibitor of farnesyl protein transferase.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 17, 862-872.

Kleihues, P. and Cavenee, W. K. (2000). Pathology and Genetics of Tumors
of the Nervous System. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on
Cancer Press.

Kluwe, L., Hagel, C., Tatagiba, M., Thomas, S., Stavrou, D., Ostertag, H.,
von  Deimling,  A.  and  Mautner,  V.  F. (2001).  Loss  of  NF1  alleles
distinguish  sporadic  from  NF1-associated  pilocytic  astrocytomas.  J.
Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 60, 917-920.

Kurtz, A., Zimmer, A., Schnutgen, F., Bruning, G., Spener, F. and Muller,
T. (1994). The expression pattern of a novel gene encoding brain-fatty acid
binding  protein  correlates  with  neuronal  and  glial  cell  development.
Development 120, 2637-2649.

Lau,  N.,  Feldkamp,  M.  M.,  Roncari,  L.,  Loehr,  A.  H.,  Shannon,  P.,
Gutmann, D. H. and Guha, A. (2000). Loss of neuroﬁbromin is associated
with  activation  of  RAS/MAPK  and  PI3-K/AKT  signaling 
in  a
neuroﬁbromatosis 1 astrocytoma. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 59, 759-767.
Lendahl, U., Zimmerman, L. B. and McKay, R. D. (1990). CNS stem cells

express a new class of intermediate ﬁlament protein. Cell 60, 585-595.

Li, J., Perry, A., James, C. D. and Gutmann, D. H. (2001). Cancer-related
in  NF1-associated  pilocytic  astrocytomas.

gene  expression  proﬁles 
Neurology 56, 885-890.

Listernick, R., Louis, D. N., Packer, R. J. and Gutmann, D. H. (1997). Optic
pathway gliomas in children with neuroﬁbromatosis 1, consensus statement
from the NF1 Optic Pathway Glioma Task Force. Annu. Neurol. 41, 143-
149.

Listernick, R., Charrow, J. and Gutmann, D. H. (1999). Intracranial gliomas

in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Am. J. Med. Genet. 89, 38-44.

Maher, E. A., Furnari, F. B., Bachoo, R. M., Rowitch, D. H., Louis, D. N.,
Cavenee, W. K. and DePinho, R. A. (2001). Malignant glioma: genetics
and biology of a grave matter. Genes Dev. 15, 1311-1333.

Malatesta, P., Hartfuss, E. and Gotz, M. (2000). Isolation of radial glial cells
by ﬂuorescent-activated cell sorting reveals a neuronal lineage. Development
127, 5253-5263.

Malatesta, P., Hack, M. A., Hartfuss, E., Kettenmann, H., Klinkert, W.,
Kirchhoff,  F.  and  Gotz,  M. (2003).  Neuronal  or  glial  progeny:  regional
differences in radial glia fate. Neuron 37, 751-764.

Mi, H. and Barres, B. A. (1999). Puriﬁcation and characterization of astrocyte
precursor cells in the developing rat optic nerve. J. Neurosci. 19, 1049-1061.
Noctor,  S.  C.,  Flint,  A.  C.,  Weissman,  T.  A.,  Dammerman,  R.  S.  and
Kriegstein, A. R. (2001). Neurons derived from radial glial cells establish
radial units in neocortex. Nature 409, 714-720.

Nordlund,  M.  L.,  Rizvi,  T.  A.,  Brannan,  C.  I.  and  Ratner,  N. (1995).
Neuroﬁbromin  expression  and  astrogliosis  in  neuroﬁbromatosis  (type  1)
brains. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 54, 588-600.

Qian, X., Shen, Q., Goderie, S. K., He, W., Capela, A., Davis, A. A. and
Temple, S. (2000). Timing of CNS cell generation: a programmed sequence
of neuron and glial cell production from isolated murine cortical stem cells.
Neuron 28, 69-80.

Ridet, J. L., Malhotra, S. K., Privat, A. and Gage, F. H. (1997). Reactive
astrocytes:  cellular  and  molecular  cues  to  biological  function.  Trends
Neurosci. 20, 570-577.

Rizvi,  T.  A.,  Akunuru,  S.,  de  Courten-Myers,  G.,  Switzer,  R.  C.,  3rd,
Nordlund,  M.  L.  and  Ratner,  N. (1999).  Region-speciﬁc  astrogliosis  in
brains of mice heterozygous for mutations in the neuroﬁbromatosis type 1
(Nf1) tumor suppressor. Brain Res. 816, 111-123.

Rosenbaum, T., Boissy, Y. L., Kombrinck, K., Brannan, C. I., Jenkins, N.
A.,  Copeland,  N.  G.  and  Ratner,  N. (1995).  Neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient
ﬁbroblasts fail to form perineurium in vitro. Development 121, 3583-3592.
Rubin, J. B. and Gutmann, D. H. (2005). Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 – a model

for nervous system tumour formation? Nat. Rev. Cancer 5, 557-564.

Soriano,  P. (1999).  Generalized  lacZ  expression  with  the  ROSA26  Cre

reporter strain. Nat. Genet. 21, 70-71.

Temple, S. (2001). The development of neural stem cells. Nature 414, 112-

117.

Viskochil,  D.  H. (1999).  The  structure  and  function  of  the  NF1  gene:
molecular  pathology.  In  Neuroﬁbromatosis:  Phenotype,  Natural  History,
and Pathogenesis (ed. J. M. Friedman, D. H. Gutmann, M. MacCollin and
V. M. Riccardi), pp. 119-141. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

Development