Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 55:12 (2014), pp 1314–1316

doi:10.1111/jcpp.12344

Editorial Perspective: The importance of considering
parent’s preferences when planning treatment for

their children – the case of childhood

obsessive-compulsive disorder

Adam B. Lewin, Joseph F. McGuire, Tanya K. Murphy, and Eric A. Storch
Departments of Pediatrics & Psychiatry, University of South Florida, St. Petersburg, FL, USA

The critical nature of assessing patient preferences,
values, and beliefs regarding treatment cannot be
overstated. Treatment preference and acceptability
are associated with improved outcomes, adherence,
alliance, and reduced dropouts (Swift & Callahan,
2009). Given that parents ultimately consent and
decide upon treatment for their children, assessment
of parental treatment and subsequent matching of
prescribed treatment is of particular importance for
pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) given
the availability of (and potential choice from) multiple
evidence-based treatments: exposure and response
prevention therapy (ERP), serotonin reuptake inhib-
itors (SRI) and their combination (COMB). Notably,
favorable parental treatment expectations are linked
to improved outcomes and adherence in youth with
depression (Stevens et al., 2009) and OCD (Lewin,
Peris, Bergman, McCracken, & Piacentini, 2011). The
only empirical study of patient preferences for the
treatment of OCD was in 89 treatment-seeking adults
(Patel & Simpson, 2010) reporting preference for
COMB (43%) or ERP (42%) over SRI (16%).

We examined parental treatment preference for
childhood OCD, approximating and expanding the
methodology employed by Patel and Simpson (2010).
Participants were parents of youth who called the
University of South Florida’s Child OCD Clinic (a
multispecialty clinic with multiple child psychia-
trists and psychologists) for an initial intake evalu-
ation during an 18-month period. Detailed phone
screens were conducted with 137 parents seeking
OCD treatment for their child, resulting in 101 youth
meeting diagnostic criteria for OCD who are the
basis for all subsequent discussion. Screenings were
conducted prior to the initial clinician appointment
to reduce potential bias of expert clinician recom-
mendation on parental preference. Diagnosis of OCD
was later veriﬁed via clinician assessment and
structured diagnostic interview. Participant charac-
teristics were
follows: 55% male, mean
age = 11.4 years (SD = 3.2; range 5–17), 66% OCD
treatment na€ıve, 89% Caucasian, and 47% on psy-
chiatric medication (32% on SSRI). Comorbidity
included the following: anxiety (34%), disruptive
behavior disorder (25%), mood disorder (13%), and
chronic tic disorder (21%).

as

Parent

treatment preference: To assess relative
preference, parents were provided a brief description
of treatment options, and were then asked to select
their preferred treatment (psychotherapy, pharma-
cotherapy, or combination). The preponderance of
parents (>99%) preferred treatments containing
ERP. Forced choice parental treatment preference
was as follows: ERP alone (68%), COMB (32%) and
SRI (1%). Severity of youth OCD symptoms did not
differ as a function of treatment preference. Parents
of youth currently prescribed that psychiatric med-
ication did not
exhibit differential preference
between ERP and COMB treatment, whereas parents
of medication na€ıve youth overwhelmingly preferred
ERP over COMB. Parents of younger children (ages
5–11; n = 48) exhibited a higher preference for ERP
(75%) compared to COMB treatment (25%), whereas
parents of adolescents (ages 12–17; n = 51) exhibited
less divergence in preference between ERP (61%) and
COMB treatment (39%). Notably, 89% parents of
youth under age 9 years indicated preference for
ERP only. Qualitatively, concern about side effects
and safety appear to contribute to parent preference
to a greater extent than positive factors regarding
behavioral
therapies. Parents were queried for
rational behind their preference. Opposition to med-
ication – rather than favorability of ERP – appeared
to drive ratings. A majority of parents (70%) reported
concerns regarding medication (concerns about side
effects, signiﬁcant safety concerns, concerns about
developmental effects, and fundamental opposition
to pharmacotherapy), whereas 24% identiﬁed favor-
able factors regarding ERP guiding their preference.
Treatment acceptability: Parents rated acceptabil-
ity of each treatment option on a ﬁve-point scale
ranging from ‘completely unacceptable’
to ‘com-
pletely acceptable.’ Parents’ treatment acceptability
ratings for ERP, SSRI, and COMB treatment told a
similar story. Large effects favored ERP relative to
SSRI (Cohen’s d = 1.79) and ERP relative to COMB
treatment (Cohen’s d = 1.12), while a medium effect
was present
favoring COMB relative to SSRI
(d = 0.55). Child medication status did not affect
parental treatment acceptability of ERP. However,
parents of youth prescribed psychiatric medication
reported higher acceptability for both SSRI and

© 2014 Association for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main St, Malden, MA 02148, USA

doi:10.1111/jcpp.12344

Editorial

1315

COMB treatment in contrast to parents of youth not
prescribed pharmacotherapy. Comorbidity did not
affect parent acceptability for ERP. However, the
presence of multiple comorbidities increased paren-
tal acceptability for medication and combination
therapies. Parents of youth with both comorbid
internalizing and externalizing disorders provided
relatively higher acceptability of both COMB and
SSRI treatments (when compared to parents of youth
with OCD and no comorbidity). Regardless of com-
orbidity or child medication status, the overall order
of parent acceptability remained unchanged: par-
ents identiﬁed ERP to be most acceptable, followed
by COMB, and ﬁnally SSRI. Notably, parental
acceptability did not differ with respect to child
demographic factors, parental treatment history, or
child OCD treatment history.

Factors inﬂuencing parent decision for treatment:
Most parents (58%) identiﬁed exploring treatment
options via the Internet. Other common resources
included medical providers (35%), mental health
providers (42%),
family members
(25%), and books/academic articles (30%).

friends (23%),

Parent-reported barriers to treatment: Over half of
parents (51%)
reported that distance was an
obstacle, with other common barriers including
limited ERP clinician availability (32%), treatment
cost (25%) and school/work impediments (21%).
These barriers are important to consider in con-
junction with the overwhelming preference for
treatments involving ERP. Experts in ERP for
childhood OCD are few and are unfortunately
inaccessible to many families given the barriers
endorsed above. Improving the dissemination and
availability of ERP trained therapists for child OCD
is compelling given strong efﬁcacy data, practice
recommendations, and overwhelming parental pref-
erence in spite of signiﬁcant barriers. Innovative
methods such as video/telemedicine-based treat-
ments, shortened or condensed protocols, and
stepped-care approaches may facilitate overcoming
traditional barriers to care.

Overall, this study reiﬁed robust parental prefer-
ence for OCD treatments that contain ERP. Findings
are consistent with a study of parent preference for
child non-OCD anxiety treatment (Brown, Deacon,
Abramowitz, Dammann, & Whiteside, 2007)
in
which 92.7% of parents reported preference for
either psychotherapy or COMB. Results also parallel
ﬁndings in adults (Patel & Simpson, 2010) in which
85% preferred treatments containing ERP compared
to 16% preferring pharmacotherapy. However,
whereas among adult respondents, Patel and Simp-
son (2010) found a slight majority preference (51%)
for COMB, only 22% of parents in our study
preferred COMB.

Despite the present ﬁndings suggesting higher
parent preferences for behavior therapy over medi-
cation, prescription rates of psychotropic medication
for youth are rising. Off-label prescribing in youth

© 2014 Association for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.

(e.g. antipsychotics among patients without psy-
chotic symptoms, polypharmacy, and medicating
very young children) has all risen in recent years.
These pharmacoepidemiological trends are not only
concerning from an efﬁcacy and safety standpoint,
but are at odds with family preferences.

In childhood OCD (Lewin et al., 2011) and other
psychiatric illnesses, parent/patient expectations
and attitudes towards treatment impact outcomes
and adherence. It is critical that providers assess
patient attitudes towards treatment and preferences
when there are choices available. Notably, providers
are poor predictors of patient preference without a
direct inquiry (Benbassat, Pilpel, & Tidhar, 1998)
and their accuracy generally does not improve with
professional experience or with longer-term patient–
clinician relationships (Druley et al., 1993). A key
role of the clinician is to ensure that the patient
understands the available treatment options, asso-
ciated empirical support, and risks and beneﬁts of
potential treatment options (Haynes, McDonald, &
Garg, 2002). Family accommodation, insight and
motivation are other important factors to assess in
the context of family attitudes and preferences (see,
for example, Lewin et al., 2010). Understanding
parental attitudes towards pharmacotherapy may
be particularly relevant – parents of youth with
depression reported lower acceptability of antide-
pressants despite perceiving them to be more effec-
tive than psychotherapy (Stevens et al., 2009). The
present data suggest efforts are needed to educate
parents on beneﬁts of pharmacotherapy for OCD in
the face of low acceptability of this evidence-based
approach.

Acknowledgements
This study was conducted as part of work supported by
grants awarded by the NIH and the University of South
Florida Internal Grants Program. A.B.L.
receives
research support from the International OCD Founda-
tion, honorarium from Springer Publishers and Chil-
dren’s Tumor Foundation, has received travel support
from Rogers Memorial Hospital, and consults for Pro-
phase, LLC. T.K.M. receives research support from
Massachusetts General Hospital, F. Hoffmann-La
Roche Ltd., Pﬁzer Inc., Sunovion Pharmaceuticals
Inc., AstraZeneca Neuroscience iMED, Shire Pharma-
ceuticals, Otsuka Pharmaceuticals, NIH, serves on the
Scientiﬁc Advisory Board for IOCDF, and travel support
from the Tourette Syndrome Association and Arizona
Psychiatric Association. E.A.S receives research sup-
port from NIH and AHRQ, salary and travel support
from Rogers Memorial Hospital, serves on the Scientiﬁc
Advisory Board for IOCDF, honorarium from Springer
Publishers, Wiley, and APA Press, and consults for
Prophase, LLC. J.F.M. has declared that he has no
competing or potential conﬂicts of interest. This Edito-
rial Perspective was submitted to the journal as unso-
licited original work and has been subject to internal
peer review. The authors thank Ms. Brittney Dane for
assistance in preparation of the manuscript.

1316

Editorial

J Child Psychol Psychiatr 2014; 55(12): 1314–6

Correspondence
Adam B. Lewin, University of South Florida, 880 6th
Street South, St. Petersburg, FL, 33701, USA; Email:
alewin@health.usf.edu

References
Benbassat, J., Pilpel, D., & Tidhar, M.

(1998). Patients’
preferences for participation in clinical decision making: a
review of published surveys. Behavioral Medicine, 24, 81–88.
Brown, A.M., Deacon, B.J., Abramowitz, J.S., Dammann, J., &
Whiteside, S.P. (2007). Parents’ perceptions of pharmacological
and cognitive-behavioral treatments for childhood anxiety
disorders. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45, 819–828.

Druley, J.A., Ditto, P.H., Moore, K.A., Danks, J.H., Townsend,
A., & Smucker, W.D. (1993). Physicians’ predictions of elderly
outpatients’ preferences for life-sustaining treatment. The
Journal of Family Practice, 37, 469–475.

Haynes, R.B., McDonald, H.P., & Garg, A.X. (2002). Helping
patients follow prescribed treatment: clinical applications.
JAMA, 288, 2880–2883.

Lewin, A.B., Bergman, R.L., Peris, T.S., Chang, S., McCracken,
J.T., & Piacentini, J. (2010). Correlates of insight among
youth with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 51, 603–611.

Lewin, A.B., Peris, T., Bergman, R.L., McCracken, J., &
Piacentini, J. (2011). The role of treatment expectancy in
youth receiving exposure-based CBT for obsessive com-
pulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 49, 536–
543.

Patel, S.R., & Simpson, H.B. (2010). Patient preferences for
obsessive-compulsive disorder treatment. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 71, 1434–1439.

Stevens, J., Wang, W., Fan, L., Edwards, M.C., Campo, J.V., &
Gardner, W. (2009). Parental attitudes toward children’s use
of antidepressants and psychotherapy. Journal of Child and
Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 19, 289–296.

Swift, J.K., & Callahan, J.L. (2009). The impact of client
treatment preferences on outcome: a meta-analysis. Journal
of Clinical Psychology, 65, 368–381.

Accepted for publication: 16 June 2014
Published online: 27 October 2014

© 2014 Association for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.

Copyright of Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry is the property of Wiley-Blackwell
and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without
the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or
email articles for individual use.

