P E R S P E C T I V E S

I N N OVAT I O N

The Connectivity Map: a new 
tool for biomedical research

Justin Lamb 

Abstract | The ultimate objective of biomedical research is to connect human 
diseases with the genes that underlie them and drugs that treat them. But this 
remains a daunting task, and even the most inspired researchers still have to resort 
to laborious screens of genetic or chemical libraries. What if at least some parts 
of this screening process could be systematized and centralized? And hits found 
and hypotheses generated with something resembling an internet search engine? 
These are the questions the Connectivity Map project set out to answer.

With the benefit of hindsight, the great 
successes of biomedicine can be viewed as 
the simple act of connecting a disease with 
a disease-modifying gene product and a 
chemical modulator of that protein. From 
folklore (fever–aspirin–cyclooxygenase1) to 
rationality (chronic myeloid leukaemia–BCR-
ABL–imatinib2) to design (hypertension–
β-adrenergic receptors–propranolol3), and 
regardless of the order in which the dots are 
joined, the same principle holds. Whatever 
the specific research focus, populating this 
‘connectivity map’ (FIG. 1) is the core business 
of biomedicine.

The problem is that it is very difficult to 
make these disease–gene–drug connections. 
The fundamental challenge is that clinical 
medicine, molecular genetics and chemistry 
are very different disciplines. Physicians talk 
about the clinical presentation of a patient, 
biologists about the phenotype of a fibroblast 
from a knockout mouse, and chemists about 
the binding of a small molecule to purified 
proteins. What is needed is to translate 
diseases, gene function and drug action into 
the same language. This is, we believe, now 
possible through the common vocabulary 
of genome-wide expression profiling. Once 
disparate biologies have been represented in 
this common global analytical space (FIG. 2), 
finding connections is a relatively simple 
numbers problem.

With this basic notion we set out to 

develop a generic solution for the identifi-
cation of functional connections between 
drugs, genes and diseases with the aspira-
tion of revolutionizing the approach to, 
and thereby accelerating the pace of, bio-
medical discovery. The results of our pilot 
study were published recently4, together 
with two papers that show how this new 
approach can be applied to real-world 

problems in cancer research. In the first 
case, we were able to identify the mecha-
nism of action of two poorly characterized 
natural products found to have a desirable 
inhibitory activity against androgen-recep-
tor (AR) signalling5. And in the second, we 
found a drug capable of reversing gluco-
corticoid resistance in acute lymphoblastic 
leukaemia (ALL) cells6.

Our solution is based on the creation 

of a large reference catalogue of gene-
expression data from cultured human cells 
perturbed with many chemicals and genetic 
reagents (which we collectively refer to as 
‘perturbagens’). The general notion that a 
compendium of gene-expression profiles 
could be used for discovery was first proven 
by Hughes et al7. With a large collection 
of genome-wide expression data from 
yeast deletion mutants and drug-treated 
wild-type yeast cells, they showed that 
functions could be assigned to previously 
uncharacterized genes, and the targets of 
small molecules identified. But what sets the 
Connectivity Map resource apart from the 
gene-expression compendia that have come 
before (BOX 1) are the choices we made in an 
attempt to make it useful and approachable 
for the bench researcher.

Design principles
Four principles guided the Connectivity 
Map project. These are detailed below.

Centralize, systematize and compromise. 
An increasing appreciation of chemical 
genetics and the resulting desire to find 
bioactive ‘tool’ compounds to probe and 
annotate biologies of interest8, together 
with the advent of RNA interference 
(RNAi) and the availability of genome-
wide ablation libraries, has made the 

emergent theme in academic biology the 
same as it has been in industrial pharma-
ceutical discovery for decades: screening. 
The same libraries of chemicals and genetic 
constructs are screened over and over 
again, just with a different assay each time. 
The burden of screening ever-expanding 
chemical and genetic libraries against 
many individual readouts in serial and dif-
fuse fashion is enormous, not just in terms 
of replication of the infrastructure and the 
perturbagen collections, but also the time 
invested by individual researchers on this 
extremely tedious yet highly demanding 
task. Therefore, a public reference cata-
logue of the global effects of all bioactive 
small molecules and genetic manipulations 
captured in the universal language of gene-
expression profiling is now one of the most 
useful resources we can imagine.

However, gene-expression profiling 

remains an expensive pursuit, and is still 
highly susceptible to operator and facility-
dependent idiosyncrasies. Linking together 
expression data from different centres, let 
alone different technologies, is frankly an 
unnecessary complication. The develop-
ment of high-throughput high-density pro-
filing platforms — such as the Affymetrix 
High Throughput Array (HTA), which 
enables automated amplification, labelling, 
hybridization and scanning of 96 samples 
in parallel a day — minimizes variability 
at the same time as providing substantial 
economies of scale. This technology, in 
a centralized production environment, 
therefore seems to be the best solution for 
the generation of the reference data. On 
the other hand, even this much firepower 
is insufficient to enable the analysis of 
every one of the estimated 200 different 
cell types exposed to every known per-
turbagen at every possible concentration 
for every possible duration. Compromises 
are therefore required. We selected a small 
number of established cell lines, chose 
a single exposure time and used one or 
occasionally a handful of doses in our pilot 
study4. As expected, being off by one log of 
concentration turned a strong signal into 
a barely detectable one, as had been shown 
before9. And, for example, one needs a cell 
that expresses peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor-γ (PPARγ) to see the 
effects of PPARγ agonists. But many effects 
were not unduly sensitive to cellular con-
text or concentration, and even the bigger 
issue of the potential mismatch between 
in vitro responses and in vivo biology was 
not as pronounced as one might have 
imagined. So we are comfortable with the 

54 | JANUARY 2007 | VOLUME 7 

 www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  Psychosis

HTR2A

Clozapine

Psychosis

DRD2

Erectile 
dysfunction

PDE5

PDE6

Compound X

Steroid-resistant 
leukaemia
BRCA1

SIX1

Obesity

Sildenafil

Visual
disturbance

BCR-ABL

Chronic 
myeloid
leukaemia

Imatinib

KIT

PTGS

Gastrointestinal
stromal tumour

Montelukast

Asthma

CYSLTR1

Rosiglitazone

Type II
diabetes

PPARγ

?

Indometacin

Rheumatoid
arthritis

Figure 1 | A connectivity map. Functional relationships between a drug (yellow), a gene (green) 
and a disease (pink) constitute the nodes in this map. The connections between BCR-ABL, imatinib 
and chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) provide the pristine example: the BCR-ABL fusion oncopro-
tein causes CML; imatinib inhibits BCR-ABL; imatinib thereby reverses CML2. However, most nodes 
feature disease-modifying rather than disease-causing proteins: cyclooxygenases (also known as 
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthases; PTGS) do not cause rheumatoid arthritis, but indometacin, 
as an inhibitor of these enzymes, does provide an effective therapy for the condition57. Similarly, 
thiazolidinedione derivatives such as rosiglitazone treat type II diabetes through the activation of 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ)58, the LTD4 cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 
(CYSLTR1) antagonist montelukast is used as an asthma therapy59, and the inhibition of phosphodi-
esterase 5 (PDE5) by sildenafil treats erectile dysfunction60. Connections between nodes are preva-
lent, reflecting wide-spread compound promiscuity. This can be within a protein class (imatinib also 
inhibits the KIT receptor tyrosine kinase and sildenafil inhibits PDE6), representing either therapeu-
tic or off-targets and additional indications or side effects (gastrointestinal stromal tumour61 and 
visual disturbance62, respectively), or between entirely unrelated proteins (indometacin also binds 
and activates PPARγ 63). Effects on many targets might also underlie a single indication: the antipsy-
chotic effects of clozapine are mediated by affinity for the L5-hydroxytryptamine (serotinin) receptor 
2A (HTR2A), dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2) and probably many other receptors33. Note that this 
particular map is populated with connections discovered by traditional approaches, and therefore 
represents the concerted efforts of many thousands of researchers over many years. The aim of the 
Connectivity Map project is to provide a systematic solution for the discovery of the type of functional 
connections between drugs, genes and diseases shown here. Many ‘orphan’ diseases, genes and 
drugs still exist; a few of these are shown in the centre of this map. 

compromises that were made, especially 
because the cost of ‘screening’ our data — 
literally a few minutes at the computer with 
no experimental overhead — makes finding 
a hit worth the price of many misses.

Empower the user. The problem with 
traditional gene-expression compendia 
(BOX 1) is that they are not much use if they 
do not contain the biological condition you 
are interested in. You could try to convince 
the curator to include your perturbagen of 
interest in his or her collection, but even 
then, it is unlikely that their production 

condition (such as cell line, treatment 
duration or concentration) is what you 
would have chosen. Furthermore, perhaps 
someone else has done the perfect experi-
ment already or used a set of particularly 
rare clinical specimens, analysed the data 
and published only a list of differentially 
expressed genes. Or you might already 
have expression profiles from your own 
finely-tuned experiment. You would like 
the option to use these hard-won data. And 
although it is a universal language, there are 
many dialects (of content and technology) 
of gene-expression data.

P E R S P E C T I V E S

We addressed these problems with a 

bipartite format of internal reference and 
external query data. Internal reference 
data are genome-wide expression profiles 
— made with our preferred technology 
and produced systematically — whereas 
external query data is provided by users 
in the form of a gene-expression signature 
of their biological state of interest (BOX 2). 
Queries can therefore be derived from 
any transcriptional profiling platform, 
because being composed of a relatively 
small number of genes with just a sign for 
their direction of change they can easily be 
mapped directly against the reference data. 
This enables the integration of legacy data 
and even experiments from non-human 
species. But more importantly, rather than 
being beholden to the curators of the ref-
erence collection, individual investigators 
can construct their queries remotely, exer-
cising their specific biological expertise. 
Therefore, our approach divests respon-
sibility for how the platform is ultimately 
used to the research community.

Actionable intelligence. With the obvious 
exception of the sequencing of the human 
and model organism genomes, genomics 
has generally not significantly affected the 
way bench research in biomedicine is con-
ducted, and the bounty of new drug targets 
that the pharmaceutical industry thought 
could be found through these approaches 
have not materialized10. We have all been 
seduced by the undoubted power of gene-
expression profiling. But the infatuation 
quickly fades when confronted with a long 
list of differentially-expressed genes, many 
of which are unfamiliar. Of course, the 
problem is that these — like the barcodes 
on groceries — are simply not interpret-
able by humans, and do not, therefore, 
help in the design of a real experiment. 
Our resource aims to be something like 
the scanner at the checkout, decoding lists 
of genes into the language of chemistry, 
and thereby providing hypotheses that 
are meaningful and actionable within the 
context of a traditional research project 
(FIG. 3). The two published Connectivity 
Map ‘success stories’, which exemplify two 
very different applications of our tool in 
cancer research5,6, illustrate this point.
Motivated by the importance of AR 

signalling in prostate cancer, and specifi-
cally, the paucity of effective therapeutic 
approaches to hormone-refractory 
disease11, Hieronymus et al.5 used an 
innovative gene-expression-based high-
throughput small-molecule screening 

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 

 VOLUME 7 | JANUARY 2007 | 55

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  P E R S P E C T I V E S

method (BOX 3) in an attempt to discover 
new inhibitors of AR-mediated tran-
scription. However, having successfully 
identified celastrol and gedunin — two 
uncharacterized natural products — they 
were confronted by the all-too-common 
problem of figuring out the molecular 
basis for their activity. A gene-expres-
sion signature of the effects of these 
compounds was generated and used to 
query the Connectivity Map database. 
This analysis showed a strong connec-
tion between celastrol and gedunin and 
various well-known heat shock protein 90 
(HSP90) inhibitors, immediately suggest-
ing the hypothesis that these compounds 
were acting through this molecular 
chaperone. Subsequent wet laboratory 
experiments showed that this was indeed 
the case, defining a new family of AR 
modulators and a new structural solution 
to the targeting of HSP90 (REF. 5).

Wei et al.6 were struggling to solve 

the serious clinical problem of resistance 
to the synthetic glucocorticoid dexam-
ethasone in ALL. They had produced 
gene-expression profiles from a carefully 
annotated collection of 29 primary patient 
samples, representing both glucocorticoid 
sensitivity and resistance. But, as is often 
the case, the list of differentially-expressed 
genes was unenlightening. However, que-
rying the Connectivity Map database with 
this gene-expression signature showed a 
strong connection between glucocorticoid 
sensitivity and the mammalian target of 

rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor sirolimus, 
a US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)-approved immunosuppressant. 
This suggested that this compound 
might, therefore, reverse dexamethasone 
resistance. Indeed, testing this hypothesis 
showed that dexamethasone and sirolimus 
together decreased the viability of an 
otherwise dexamethasone-resistant cell 
line so well that a clinical trial of this new 
combination therapy in ALL now seems 
warranted6. This then represents an exam-
ple of how our tool can begin to expand 
the connectivity map shown in FIG. 1.

Box 1 | Gene-expression compendia

The first large-scale gene-expression compendium was generated by Hughes et al.7, and contained 
data from 276 yeast deletion mutants, 11 conditional alleles and wild-type cells treated with 13 
drugs (data available from Rosetta Inpharmatics). The Global Cancer Map38 — populated by data 
from 218 human tumour samples, spanning 14 histological classes and 90 normal human tissues — 
was the original expression catalogue of organic states. This was followed by collections of 
expression profiles from large numbers of normal human and mouse tissues, perhaps most notably 
the Gene Expression Atlas39,40. In addition to catalogues of induced and organic states, a third type 
of large-scale expression database is exemplified by a collection of profiles from the livers of 111 
mice from a cross of two inbred strains that has been used in several highly innovative integrative 
genomic analyses to identify key drivers of complex disease traits41–43.

Several commercial gene-expression databases exist. Iconix’s DrugMatrix contains data for the 

effects of systemic administration of hundreds of drugs on many rat tissues 44, and Gene Logic’s 
BioExpress has thousands of profiles from normal, diseased and drug-treated human and animal 
tissues and cell lines. These seem to have use for the prediction of toxic liabilities and elucidation 
of the mechanisms of action of new chemical entities, and also for the repurposing of failed 
clinical candidates.

ArrayExpress45,46 and Gene Expression Omnibus47,48 (GEO) are not compendia in the strictest 
sense, as they contain data from many different experiments and technologies, and so are best 
described as repositories. The problem of unifying data of this sort into a super-compendium has 
not yet been solved. A notable exception to this, albeit in a focused sample space, is the Oncomine 
Cancer Profiling Database49. This contains thousands of individual gene-expression profiles from 
over 200 published cancer-expression datasets, but these data are pre-normalized, and complex 
meta-analyses across its entire content can be conducted using provided tools.

Diseases

Genes

Drugs

Genome-wide mRNA-expression profiles

Figure 2 | A universal functional bioassay. As all of the transcripts are now known, and robust 
technologies for their simultaneous measurement are available, it is possible to capture objective 
high-dimensional depictions of all induced or organic biological conditions in a common global 
analytical space, and thereby readily appreciate similarities between them.

Accessibility. The availability of the data 
and data-mining tools, how easy they are 
to use and compatibility of the output 
with external resources are all issues of 
accessibility. The first is easily solved with 
a publicly-accessible website from where 
we serve all the Connectivity Map data, 
meta-data (such as perturbagen name, 
concentration, cell line and batch) and 
analytical tools through a simple, intui-
tive user interface (FIG. 4). Useability is a 
thornier issue. Flexibility is the guiding 
principle for most gene-expression analysis 
packages. For example, our local solu-
tion — GenePattern12 —provides dozens 
of algorithms, each with lots of tunable 
parameters. However, for many research-
ers, this author included, there are often 
just too many choices. Our objective, 
therefore, is to keep all of the computation 
in the background and provide a single 
analysis tool with no ‘knobs’ whatsoever; 
queries are executed from our website in 
real-time with a single click. We are under 
no illusions that the current methods are 
necessarily the best or the only way to find 
connections, or even that finding connec-
tions is the only application for our data. 
Consequently, the raw data are also freely 
available for download by anyone with the 
inclination to explore alternatives. But our 
primary aim is to deliver testable hypoth-
eses even to those without any special skills 
in gene-expression data analysis.

If a query executed at our website 

indicates that the effects of your favourite 
small molecule are connected with those 
of ‘compound X’, you would like to learn 
something more about it: what else is 

56 | JANUARY 2007 | VOLUME 7 

 www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  it known to do? What is its chemical 
structure? Where can I buy some? There 
are many excellent public chemical annota-
tion resources, and we do not attempt to 
replicate these, preferring to link out to 
them instead. Indeed, a fully integrated 
network of structure, activity, annotation 
and supplier databases — of which our 
resource would be just one node — should 
be an ultimate community objective. 
To perhaps start this ball rolling, the 
Connectivity Map has arranged for direct 
links to ChemBank13,14 for structures and 
synonyms, and displays ATC (Anatomical 
Therapeutic Chemical) classifications 
— the hierarchical, human-readable alpha-
numeric codes that are assigned to thou-
sands of drug substances through a WHO 
(World Health Organization) initiative 
— for functional annotation. And to enable 
access to the actual chemical matter itself, 
vendor names and catalogue numbers 
are provided for all perturbagens in our 
dataset. However, an essential prerequisite 
for seamless cross-referencing between 
resources is standardized nomenclature. 
Many small molecules are known by doz-
ens of different names (such as systematic, 
IUPAC (International Union of Pure and 
Applied Chemistry), trivial, USAN (United 
States Adopted Name), proprietary, and so 
on), often resulting in great confusion. The 
Connectivity Map has therefore exclusively 
adopted recommended international 
non-proprietary names (rINN), and we 
urge others to do the same. These names 
are provided as a unifying community 
resource by the WHO, and are chosen not 
only to be distinctive but also to convey 
information about function and similarity. 
For example, one can deduce that lumira-
coxib is both a COX inhibitor and similar 
to celecoxib and rofecoxib from rINN 
alone, something that can not be done with 
their proprietary names (Prexige, Celebrex 
and Vioxx, respectively).

Limitations and uncertainties
The Connectivity Map approach itself, as 
well as our current implementation of it, are 
not without limitations. Some of the short-
comings are obvious, some less so, and there 
are a few that might best be characterized as 
‘known unknowns’. Some discussion of the 
most important of these is warranted.

Cells that grow on plastic in a labora-

tory are very different from tissues in 
a whole organism. Our reliance on cell 
cultures means that effects modulated 
by specific microenvironments or that 
involve more than one cell type are simply 

P E R S P E C T I V E S

Box 2 | Gene-expression signatures

A gene-expression signature is, put simply, the list of genes differentially expressed in any 
biological distinction. However, the cardinal feature of a gene-expression signature is that it 
provides a rich representation of biology with a small number of genes, and this demands a more 
exacting definition: a list of genes rationally distilled from an unbiased global scan of gene-
expression changes observed across a carefully selected sample set designed by an expert in the 
biology in question.

The notion of signatures came from early work on cancer classification, at a time when whether 

or not gene-expression profiles contained any useful information was still an open question. 
Golub et al.50 profiled 38 bone-marrow samples — 27 from patients with acute lymphoblastic 
leukaemia (ALL) and 11 with acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), as defined by established clinical 
criteria (the carefully selected sample set) — and asked if these data could be used to predict the 
class of another 34 leukaemia samples. Using a scoring scheme based on the 50 genes most 
strongly statistically correlated with the ALL/AML distinction (the rational distillation) they 
showed that indeed they could, and the gene-expression signature was born.

Deriving signatures from perturbational experiments comes with the problems of selecting 
appropriate controls, doses and treatment durations. However, these have also been found to 
be useful. For example, we used a 21-gene signature derived from a cell line that ectopically 
expressed an oncogene to validate this in vitro model by showing enrichment of its signature in 
profiles from human cancer samples that naturally overexpressed this gene51. This paper also 
introduced a rank-based scoring metric — later refined into Gene Set Enrichment Analysis52 — 
that enabled the use of signatures for which the component genes were flagged only as 
upregulated or downregulated rather than with the magnitude of their differential expression. 
These even simpler non-parametric gene sets are now commonly used. However, it is worth 
noting that one brand of commercial gene-expression signature (Drug Signatures) does use 
weighting factors53.

inaccessible. This is perhaps the most 
fundamental limitation of our approach, 
as much of physiology and pharmacology 
is non-cell-autonomous. One example 
from the realm of cancer therapeutics is 
the aromatase inhibitors. Although they 
ultimately affect breast epithelial cells, 
they do so by blocking oestrogen synthe-
sis in the stroma15. Another limitation is 
that the collection of cells we use does not 
express every protein, even in aggregate. 
So to continue the breast cancer theme, 
our methods would never appreciate the 
actions of the selective oestrogen-recep-
tor modulators (SERMs) unless cells 
that express the oestrogen receptor (ER) 
were included in our panel. Further, 
if more subtle, the action of a pure ER 
antagonist (such as fulvestrant) could 
only be detected in those cells grown in 
the presence of the corresponding ago-
nist. Indeed, we have shown exactly this4. 
What is not quite so obvious is the extent 
to which cells from one tissue differ from 
cells from another, or how established cell 
lines differ from primary cells, at least in 
their responses to perturbagens that affect 
ubiquitous cellular processes. The experi-
ence so far with therapeutically-relevant 
biologies of this type, such as histone 
modification, molecular chaperones and 
mTOR signalling, is that they are remark-
ably similar4. The downside of this is that 
gratuitous expansion of the dataset in the 

cell dimension is unlikely to efficiently 
deliver access to very much more biology. 
But it remains to be seen if judicious cell line 
choices will produce high concentrations 
of valuable idiosyncratic and nonredundant 
responses.

How best to interpret the result of a 
Connectivity Map query is still an open 
question. We have provided several 
graphical and statistical tools in our 
web interface to assist the user (such as, 
‘barview’ visualizer, combined scores and 
permuted P values), but we do not yet 
have enough experience to know with 
certainty what constitutes a ‘good’ score, 
the number of instances of a particular 
perturbagen that are required to have 
confidence in a connection, or how sta-
tistical significance relates to biological 
significance. Part of the problem is that the 
answers to these questions are inextricably 
linked to the query itself. For example, a 
gene-expression signature produced from 
the treatment of cultured cells with a small 
molecule is different from one derived 
from a comparison of diseased and normal 
tissues. By definition, the first signature 
can be modulated in its entirety by the 
action of a chemical, whereas there is no 
reason to suppose a priori that the second 
example is druggable, either in whole or 
in part, not to mention the background 
noise that occurs in signatures from tissue 
specimens. On the other hand, the value 

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 

 VOLUME 7 | JANUARY 2007 | 57

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  P E R S P E C T I V E S

of finding a potential therapy for a human 
disease is much higher than the value of 
annotating an existing small molecule. The 
difficulty and expense involved in testing 
a particular hypothesis is also relevant. 
Consequently, the criteria for determining 
what constitutes a ‘hit’ might be different 
depending on the query. Unfortunately, 
only repeated use and more experiments 
can refine the process.

Perhaps the biggest shortcoming of the 
current Connectivity Map resource is the 
complexity of the core dataset. Both the 
number and diversity of the perturbagens 
in our collection is extremely low, meaning 
that the fraction of all possible induced 
cellular states represented is probably quite 
small. Fortunately, this is something we can 
address immediately. Our top priority is to 
aggressively pursue the expansion of our 
resource in the perturbagen dimension.

Future content
Our pilot Connectivity Map resource4 
contains gene-expression profiles from 
a total of 453 individual treatments of 4 
human cell lines with 164 discrete bioac-
tive small molecules, that we call build 01. 
Emboldened by the apparent value of 
this small dataset, we are now generating 
profiles for the next public release. But 
there is a large gap between where we are 
now and the ultimate objective of a dataset 
approaching saturation of all chemical and 
genetic perturbagens, and prioritization 
(and constant evaluation of the benefits of 
continuing) is essential.

Our initial focus is the approximately 
1,500 small-molecule drugs ever licensed 
for human use by the FDA. The proven 
safety and tolerability of these compounds 
greatly shortens the path to their clinical 
evaluation for any new indication found. 
This, taken together with the high 

Box 3 | Signature screening

The concept of signature screening was introduced by Stegmaier et al.54, who realized that if a 
gene-expression signature (BOX 2) really was the proxy for a phenotype of interest, it could be used 
to find small molecules that effect that phenotype without knowledge of a validated drug target. In 
the first example of what has become known as GE-HTS (gene-expression-based high-throughput 
screening) they derived a five-gene signature of leukaemia differentiation from a careful 
microarray analysis of primary cells from patients and unaffected individuals, and screened a 
library of 1,739 bioactive small molecules for compounds that induced the expression of the 
signature genes in a leukaemia cell line. Their results subsequently led these workers to propose a 
clinical trial of a new leukaemia therapy55, impressively proving the principle. This success 
prompted the development of a technology capable of measuring the levels of up to 100 
transcripts in thousands of samples at low cost and high throughput56. And this, in turn, has both 
enabled GE-HTS with larger signatures and larger libraries5, and provided a practical solution for 
gene-expression signature-based clinical tests (Benjamin L. Ebert, personal communication). The 
Connectivity Map can be thought of as a resource for signature screening in silico.

58 | JANUARY 2007 | VOLUME 7 

 www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

O

O

O

O
O

O

O

O

O

O O

O

O

Unannotated chemical

cmap hypothesis

Experimental verification

New inhibitors

a

O

b

Disease state

cmap hypothesis

Experimental verification

Clinical evaluation

Figure 3 | The Connectivity Map is a tool for the bench researcher. The paths to showing that (a) 
an uncharacterized small molecule is a heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) inhibitor5 and (b) sirolimus 
can reverse glucocorticoid resistance in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia6 (see text for details) illus-
trate that the Connectivity Map (cmap) resource is best used in the context of a traditional research 
project. Indeed, its ultimate value relies on detailed experimental validation and follow-up.

frequency with which these agents are 
shown to have additional desirable activi-
ties (see for example REFS 16–18, as well 
as our own example with sirolimus6 (see 
above)) explains why many academic 
programs19 and even some commercial 
entities20 seek to maximize the opportuni-
ties for so-called drug repurposing by 
screening exclusively in this space.

The Connectivity Map dataset will be 
extended to include genetic perturbagens. 
We will continue the focus on content 
with value for therapeutics discovery and 
use RNAi21 to individually ablate each of 
the 600 of the approximately 3,000 human 
proteins that are predicted to bind drug-
like small molecules22,23 expressed in our 
panel of cell lines. Should one of these 

perturbagens be connected with a disease 
signature, there is a reasonable likelihood 
that a small-molecule lead compound 
either already exists or could be rationally 
designed. Of course, the equivalence of 
ablation with pharmacological modulation 
is still an open question, and a lead is far 
from a drug. But the protein products of 
the druggable genome22 also constitute 
the entire universe of small-molecule 
off-targets. Connectivity Map queries 
with signatures of new potential drugs 
could therefore provide comprehensive 
selectivity assessments either as a strategy 
for flagging potential side effects or the 
identification of desirable polypharmacology 
profiles (FIG. 1).

Knowledge discovery is sometimes just 
as important as drug discovery. Bioactive 
small molecules that do not possess the 
exacting physicochemical characteristics 
(or toxicity profile) to imbue them with at 
least the potential to become medicines 
are nevertheless of great value as ‘chemical 
tools’ in the context of the Connectivity 
Map, as is shown by the connection we 
found between uncharacterized natural 
products and several HSP90 inhibitors 
(see above)5, and we will continue to add 
these so-called non-drug bioactives to our 
dataset. However, it is probably impos-
sible, and certainly impractical, to find a 
small molecule to modulate every protein 
encoded in the human genome24. Indeed, 
a recent global analysis of conventional 

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  P E R S P E C T I V E S

screening data for nearly five million 
nonredundant structures collected over 25 
years in both industry and academia found 
that the total number of human proteins 
for which chemical tools have been discov-
ered so far is just 836 (REF. 25). This leaves 
‘biological tools’ as the only practical way 
to gain access to all corners of biological 
space24. We will, therefore, exploit genome-
wide open-reading frame (ORF)26 and 
short hairpin RNA (shRNA)27 collections 
to extend the Connectivity Map dataset 
to ectopic expression and ablation of all 
human genes. Of course, there are special 
challenges to producing high-quality gene-
expression profiles with RNAi; including 
the absence of appropriate null controls, 
off-target effects28 and the induction of the 
interferon response29,30. Our favoured solu-
tion is knockdown followed by wild-type 
reconstitution, and although more compli-
cated, this also provides a generic approach 
to studying mutant alleles. Reconstitution 
with disease-associated, constitutively-
active or interaction-defective (such as 
mutant proteins capable of physical interac-
tion with only a subset of their usual bind-
ing partners)31,32 alleles represent what we 
call ‘sub-atomic’ perturbagens, and using 
genetic tools of this sort we hope that the 
Connectivity Map will ultimately contain 
data for all of biological space at a granularity 
less than that of individual proteins.

Complexity simplified
Biological complexity and, in a desire 
to understand it, systems biology have 
become hot topics of late. Our closing 
remarks therefore highlight one reason 
why the complexity of drug action and 
human disease processes is now considered 
so important, and how the Connectivity 
Map offers a pragmatic ‘complexity-ready’ 
solution available today.

Despite a steady increase in the number 
of new targets with potent chemical matter 
reported each year, the rate at which drugs 
with a new target reach the market has 
remained much the same22,25. One sobering 
interpretation is that the prevailing model 
in which a complex disease can be reversed 
by modulating the activity of a single 
protein is now played out. More extreme 
still, given that more than a third of com-
pounds in a representative collection of 
more than quarter of a million bioactive 
small molecules were found to have more 
than one target25, is the idea that even the 
successful pharmaceuticals we already have 
are perhaps so because of unappreciated 
polypharmacology.

Figure 4 | The Connectivity Map web interface. A page from the Connectivity Map web site 
showing the results from a typical query. 

This is not so radical. For example, 

clozapine — arguably the most successful 
antipsychotic drug of all time — has high 
affinity for more than a dozen biogenic 
amine receptors, and the therapeutic rel-
evance of this target promiscuity is shown 
by the failure of the agents developed to 
ligate only a subset of these proteins to 
deliver substantially better clinical perform-
ance33. Impinging on a single pathological 
process at many discrete points presumably 
provides a broader response profile and 
some multiplication of, or capacitance in, 
efficacy34. There is also a grander rendering 
of this notion: biology has evolved in such a 
way that a great many interdependencies are 
effectively hard wired. The consequence of 
this, despite the fact that there is an almost 
infinite universe of possible molecular 
circumstances, is that only relatively few of 
these are ‘allowed’; all the others will rapidly 
revert to the nearest stable one. This is 
homeostasis at work. But clearly, there are 
many viable and stable disease states (such 
as cancer). Therefore, attempts to defeat 
these by breaking one thread within this web 
of interdependency with a single targeted 
intervention are probably futile. What is 
really needed is to switch the entire state to a 
more favourable one. And for this, a coher-
ent set of effects on many targets is probably 
necessary. But however one chooses to look 
at it, the exploitation of promiscuity is an 
emerging theme for drug discovery35.

The problem that arises then is that the 

conventional target-based biochemical 
assay is unable to appreciate the syner-
gistic or even emergent effects of simul-
taneously affecting multiple proteins. A 
comprehensive network view of disease 
processes might ultimately enable the 
nodes, which when coordinately targeted 
will effect the desired outcome, to be 
predicted in silico36, and structural biology 
and chemoinformatics might combine for 
the rational design of the corresponding 
selectively promiscuous small-molecule 
modulators37, but both are still some 
way off. The immediate solution for 
polypharmacology drug discovery is, we 
believe, gene-expression-based screening 
approaches like the Connectivity Map. 
These are indifferent to the identity and 
number of proteins initially ligated by a 
small molecule (as they are to the precipi-
tating lesions of a disease), being based 
instead on matching high-dimensional 
representations of the resultant biological 
states. These approaches are therefore 
ideally suited to the identification of the 
‘state-switching’ perturbagens alluded to 
earlier, regardless of which of the myriad 
different possible combinatorial solutions 
they present. That being said, the number 
of compounds one would need to screen 
to find one is probably still very large. 
Therefore, the next challenge for the 
Connectivity Map is to increase throughput 

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 

 VOLUME 7 | JANUARY 2007 | 59

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  P E R S P E C T I V E S

and reduce unit cost to the extent neces-
sary to enable the comprehensive profil-
ing of true industrial-scale libraries of 
drug-like small molecules.

Justin Lamb is at the Broad Institute of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard 
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA. 
e-mail: justin@broad.mit.edu

doi:10.1038/nrc2044

1.   Vane, J. R. & Botting, R. M. The mechanism of 
action of aspirin. Thromb. Res. 110, 255–258 
(2003).

2.   Druker, B. J. et al. Efficacy and safety of a specific 
inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic 
myeloid leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 344, 
1031–1037 (2001).

3.   Black, J. Drugs from emasculated hormones: the 

principle of syntopic antagonism. Science 245, 
486–493 (1989).

4.   Lamb, J. et al. The Connectivity Map: using gene-
expression signatures to connect small molecules, 
genes, and disease. Science 313, 1929–1935 
(2006).

5.   Hieronymus, H. et al. Gene expression signature-

based chemical genomic prediction identifies novel 
class of HSP90 pathway modulators. Cancer Cell 10, 
321–330 (2006).

6.   Wei, G. et al. Gene expression-based chemical 

genomics identifies rapamycin as a modulator of 
MCL-1 and glucocorticoid resistance. Cancer Cell 10, 
331–342 (2006).

7.   Hughes, T. R. et al. Functional discovery via a 
compendium of expression profiles. Cell 102, 
109–126 (2000).

8.   Austin, C. P. The completed human genome: 

implications for chemical biology. Curr. Opin. Chem. 
Biol. 7, 511–515 (2003).

9.   Cornwell, P. D., De Souza, A. T. & Ulrich, R. G. 

Profiling of hepatic gene expression in rats treated 
with fibric acid analogs. Mutat. Res. 549, 131–145 
(2004).

10.   Lindsay, M. A. Target discovery. Nature Rev. Drug 

Discov. 2, 831–838 (2003).

11.   Feldman, B. J. & Feldman, D. The development of 

androgen-independent prostate cancer. Nature Rev. 
Cancer 1, 34–45 (2001).

12.   Reich, M. et al. GenePattern 2. 0. Nature Genet. 38, 

500–501 (2006).

13.   Strausberg, R. L. & Schreiber, S. L. From knowing to 

controlling: a path from genomics to drugs using 
small molecule probes. Science 300, 294–295 
(2003).

14.   Tolliday, N. et al. Small molecules, big players: 

the National Cancer Institute’s initiative for 
chemical genetics. Cancer Res. 66, 8935–8942 
(2006).

15.   Smith, I. E. & Dowsett, M. Aromatase inhibitors in 
breast cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 348, 2431–2442 
(2003).

16.   Rogers, J. T. et al. Alzheimer’s disease drug discovery 

targeted to the APP mRNA 5′untranslated region. 
J. Mol. Neurosci. 19, 77–82 (2002).

17.   Stavrovskaya, I. G. et al. Clinically approved 

heterocyclics act on a mitochondrial target and 
reduce stroke-induced pathology. J. Exp. Med. 200, 
211–222 (2004).

18.   Rothstein, J. D. et al. β-lactam antibiotics offer 

neuroprotection by increasing glutamate transporter 
expression. Nature 433, 73–77 (2005).
19.   Miller, T. M. & Cleveland, D. W. Treating 

neurodegenerative diseases with antibiotics. Science 
307, 361–362 (2005).

20.   Borisy, A. A. et al. Systematic discovery of 

multicomponent therapeutics. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 100, 7977–7982 (2003).

21.   Elbashir, S. M. et al. Duplexes of 21-nucleotide 

RNAs mediate RNA interference in cultured 
mammalian cells. Nature 411, 494–498 (2001).

22.   Hopkins, A. L. & Groom, C. R. The druggable 

genome. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 1, 727–730 
(2002).

23.   Orth, A. P., Batalov, S., Perrone, M. & Chanda, S. K. 

The promise of genomics to identify novel 
therapeutic targets. Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 8, 
587–596 (2004).

24.   Lipinski, C. & Hopkins, A. Navigating chemical space 

50.   Golub, T. R. et al. Molecular classification of cancer: 

for biology and medicine. Nature 432, 855–861 
(2004).

25.   Paolini, G. V., Shapland, R. H., van Hoorn, W. P., 
Mason, J. S. & Hopkins, A. L. Global mapping of 
pharmacological space. Nature Biotechnol. 24, 
805–815 (2006).

26.   Rual, J. F. et al. Human ORFeome version 1. 1: 

a platform for reverse proteomics. Genome Res. 14, 
2128–2135 (2004).

class discovery and class prediction by gene expression 
monitoring. Science 286, 531–537 (1999).

51.   Lamb, J. et al. A mechanism of cyclin D1 action 

encoded in the patterns of gene expression in 
human cancer. Cell 114, 323–334 (2003).

52.   Subramanian, A. et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: 

a knowledge-based approach for interpreting 
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 102, 15545–15550 (2005).

27.   Root, D. E., Hacohen, N., Hahn, W. C., Lander, E. S. 

53.   Natsoulis, G. et al. Classification of a large 

& Sabatini, D. M. Genome-scale loss-of-function 
screening with a lentiviral RNAi library. Nature 
Methods 3, 715–719 (2006).

28.   Jackson, A. L. et al. Expression profiling reveals off-
target gene regulation by RNAi. Nature Biotechnol. 
21, 635–637 (2003).

29.   Bridge, A. J., Pebernard, S., Ducraux, A., Nicoulaz, 
A. L. & Iggo, R. Induction of an interferon response 
by RNAi vectors in mammalian cells. Nature Genet. 
34, 263–264 (2003).

30.   Sledz, C. A., Holko, M., de Veer, M. J., Silverman, R. 

H. & Williams, B. R. Activation of the interferon 
system by short-interfering RNAs. Nature Cell Biol. 
5, 834–839 (2003).

31.   Vidal, M., Brachmann, R. K., Fattaey, A., Harlow, E. 
& Boeke, J. D. Reverse two-hybrid and one-hybrid 
systems to detect dissociation of protein-protein and 
DNA-protein interactions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 93, 
10315–10320 (1996).

32.   Milstein, S. & Vidal, M. Perturbing interactions. 

Nature Methods 2, 412–414 (2005).

33.   Roth, B. L., Sheffler, D. J. & Kroeze, W. K. Magic 

shotguns versus magic bullets: selectively non-
selective drugs for mood disorders and 
schizophrenia. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 3, 353–
359 (2004).

34.   Keith, C. T., Borisy, A. A. & Stockwell, B. R. 

Multicomponent therapeutics for networked 
systems. Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 4, 71–78 (2005).
35.   Frantz, S. Drug discovery: playing dirty. Nature 437, 

942–943 (2005).

36.   Rual, J. F. et al. Towards a proteome-scale map of 

the human protein-protein interaction network. 
Nature 437, 1173–1178 (2005).

37.   Hopkins, A. L., Mason, J. S. & Overington, J. P. Can 
we rationally design promiscuous drugs? Curr. Opin. 
Struct. Biol. 16, 127–136 (2006).

38.   Ramaswamy, S. et al. Multiclass cancer diagnosis 

using tumor gene expression signatures. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 98, 15149–15154 (2001).

39.   Su, A. I. et al. Large-scale analysis of the human and 
mouse transcriptomes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 
4465–4470 (2002).

40.   Su, A. I. et al. A gene atlas of the mouse and human 

protein-encoding transcriptomes. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 101, 6062–6067 (2004).

41.   Schadt, E. E. et al. Genetics of gene expression 

surveyed in maize, mouse and man. Nature 422, 
297–302 (2003).

42.   Mehrabian, M. et al. Integrating genotypic and 

expression data in a segregating mouse population 
to identify 5-lipoxygenase as a susceptibility gene for 
obesity and bone traits. Nature Genet. 37, 
1224–1233 (2005).

43.   Schadt, E. E. et al. An integrative genomics 

approach to infer causal associations between gene 
expression and disease. Nature Genet. 37, 
710–717 (2005).

44.   Ganter, B. et al. Development of a large-scale 

chemogenomics database to improve drug candidate 
selection and to understand mechanisms of chemical 
toxicity and action. J. Biotechnol. 119, 219–244 
(2005).

45.   Brazma, A. et al. ArrayExpress-a public repository 

for microarray gene expression data at the EBI. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 68–71 (2003).

46.   Parkinson, H. et al. ArrayExpress-a public 

repository for microarray gene expression data at 
the EBI. Nucleic Acids Res. 33, D553–D555 
(2005).

47.   Edgar, R., Domrachev, M. & Lash, A. E. Gene 

Expression Omnibus: NCBI gene expression and 
hybridization array data repository. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 30, 207–210 (2002).

48.   Barrett, T. et al. NCBI GEO: mining millions of 

expression profiles-database and tools. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 33, D562–D566 (2005).

49.   Rhodes, D. R. et al. ONCOMINE: a cancer 

microarray database and integrated data-mining 
platform. Neoplasia 6, 1–6 (2004).

microarray data set: algorithm comparison and 
analysis of drug signatures. Genome Res. 15, 
724–736 (2005).

54.   Stegmaier, K. et al. Gene expression-based high-

throughput screening (GE-HTS) and application to 
leukemia differentiation. Nature Genet. 36, 257–263 
(2004).

55.   Stegmaier, K. et al. Gefitinib induces myeloid 

differentiation of acute myeloid leukemia. Blood 
106, 2841–2848 (2005).

56.   Peck, D. et al. A method for high-throughput gene 

expression signature analysis. Genome Biol. 7, R61 
(2006).

57.   Burke, A., Smyth, E. & FitzGerald, G. A. in 

Goodman and Gilman’s the pharmacological basis 
of therapeutics (ed. Brunton, L. L.) 671–715 
(McGraw-Hill, New York, 2006).

58.   Lehmann, J. M. et al. An antidiabetic thiazolidinedione 

is a high affinity ligand for peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor gamma (PPARγ). J. Biol. Chem. 
270, 12953–12956 (1995).

59.   Reiss, T. F. et al. Effects of montelukast (MK-0476), 
a new potent cysteinyl leukotriene (LTD4) receptor 
antagonist, in patients with chronic asthma. J. 
Allergy Clin. Immunol. 98, 528–534 (1996).

60.   Boolell, M. et al. Sildenafil: an orally active type 5 
cyclic GMP-specific phosphodiesterase inhibitor for 
the treatment of penile erectile dysfunction. Int. J. 
Impot. Res. 8, 47–52 (1996).

61.   Heinrich, M. C. et al. Kinase mutations and imatinib 
response in patients with metastatic gastrointestinal 
stromal tumor. J. Clin. Oncol. 21, 4342–4349 
(2003).

62.   Marmor, M. F. & Kessler, R. Sildenafil (Viagra) and 

ophthalmology. Surv. Opthamol. 44, 153–162 
(1999).

63.   Lehmann, J. M., Lenhard, J. M., Oliver, B. B., 

Ringold, G. M. & Kliewer, S. A. Peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptors α and γ are activated 
by indomethacin and other non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 3406–3410 
(1997).

Acknowledgements
Thanks to T. Golub, the Connectivity Map team and mem-
bers of the Broad Institute Cancer and Chemical Biology 
Programs.

Competing interests statement
The author declares no competing financial interests.

DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.
fcgi?db=gene
AR | HSP90 | mTOR

FURTHER INFORMATION
ArrayExpress: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/
BioExpress: http://www.genelogic.com
ChemBank: http://chembank.broad.harvard.edu/
Connectivity Map web site: http://www.broad.mit.edu/
cmap
DrugMatrix: http://www.iconixpharm.com
Gene Expression Atlas: http://symatlas.gnf.org
Gene Expression Omnibus: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
geo/
GenePattern web site: http://www.broad.mit.edu/cancer/
software/genepattern/
Global Cancer Map: http://www.broad.mit.edu/cgi-bin/
cancer/datasets.cgi
Oncomine Cancer Profiling Database: http://www.
oncomine.org
Rosetta Inpharmatics: http://www.rii.com/
publications/2000/cell_hughes.html
WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics 
Methodology: http://www.whocc.no/atcddd/
WHO MedNet: http://mednet.who.int/
Access to this interactive links box is free online.

60 | JANUARY 2007 | VOLUME 7 

 www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  