Cancer Cell

Perspective

Dragging Ras Back in the Ring

Andrew G. Stephen,1 Dominic Esposito,1 Rachel K. Bagni,1 and Frank McCormick1,2,*
1Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, P.O. Box B, Frederick, MD 21702, USA
2UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, Room 371, 1450 3rd Street, P.O. Box 589001, San Francisco, CA 94158-9001, USA
*Correspondence: mccormic@cc.ucsf.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2014.02.017

Ras proteins play a major role in human cancers but have not yielded to therapeutic attack. Ras-driven can-
cers are among the most difﬁcult to treat and often excluded from therapies. The Ras proteins have been
termed ‘‘undruggable,’’ based on failures from an era in which understanding of signaling transduction, feed-
back loops, redundancy, tumor heterogeneity, and Ras’ oncogenic role was poor. Structures of Ras onco-
proteins bound to their effectors or regulators are unsolved, and it is unknown precisely how Ras proteins
activate their downstream targets. These knowledge gaps have impaired development of therapeutic strate-
gies. A better understanding of Ras biology and biochemistry, coupled with new ways of targeting undrug-
gable proteins, is likely to lead to new ways of defeating Ras-driven cancers.

Fifty years have passed since the transforming power of Ras
genes was ﬁrst recognized. Harvey sarcoma virus, Kirsten sar-
coma virus, and Rasheed sarcoma virus contain Ras genes (so
named for their role in forming rat sarcomas; reviewed in Barba-
cid, 1987; Karnoub and Weinberg, 2008). These retroviruses
initiated tumors efﬁciently and, using temperature-sensitive mu-
tants, were shown to be necessary for tumor maintenance (Shih
et al., 1979). They formed part of a fascinating collection of
retroviruses that was assembled in the 1970s, each able to trans-
form cells in culture and in avian and rodent models. These ex-
periments were, essentially, unbiased screens for genes that
cause cancer; the nature of the proteins that the genes encoded
was completely unknown. Remarkably, the majority of these
viruses encoded proteins that were later identiﬁed as compo-
nents of
the tyrosine kinase-Ras signaling pathway (Vogt,
2012), even though the biochemical nature of these proteins
was unknown, and tyrosine kinase activity had not been discov-
ered (Eckhart et al., 1979). Of the hundreds of mutant proteins
now known to contribute to cancer that could have been identi-
ﬁed in these assays, including those involved in DNA repair,
cellular metabolism, RNA splicing, and the other hallmarks of
cancer (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011), those in the tyrosine
kinase-Ras pathway stand out as the major drivers and have
been the richest source of targets of successful cancer therapies
(Abl, epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR], Her2/neu, B-Raf,
Kit, ALK, etc.). These successes can therefore be attributed to
the central, dominant role of this pathway in cancer, as well as
the fortuitous abundance of druggable targets.

However, speciﬁc therapies have not been developed for
mutant Ras proteins themselves or for the cancers that they
drive. Worse yet, tumors driven by Ras genes are excluded
from treatment with other targeted therapies. Early efforts to
block Ras cancers by preventing Ras farnesylation, once
thought to be an essential posttranslational modiﬁcation for
Ras activity, were thwarted by the unexpected presence of a
backup system (geranylgeranyltransferase) that restored activity
of K-Ras and N-Ras after farnesyltransferase treatment. Like-
wise, efforts to kill Ras cancers by blocking one of Ras’ major
downstream effectors, Raf kinase (Figure 1), ran into the unex-
pected discovery that, in Ras-transformed cells, Raf inhibitors

272 Cancer Cell 25, March 17, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

activate the pathway rather than inhibit it (see below and discus-
sion in Holderﬁeld et al., 2013 and Lito et al., 2013). MAP kinase
kinase (MEK) inhibitors and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)
inhibitors have not yet shown signiﬁcant clinical activity in Ras
cancers, for reasons relating to feedback loops and poor thera-
peutic windows, among other issues discussed below.

A convergence of urgent unmet clinical needs and advances in
drug discovery has energized new efforts to target Ras cancers
within academic centers and in the biopharmaceutical industry.
To catalyze these renewed efforts, the National Cancer Institute
recently launched a national Ras program at Frederick National
Laboratory for Cancer (see http://RasCentral.org), whose goal
is to ﬁll critical knowledge gaps that are essential to target Ras
cancers effectively and to engage the research community
toward solving the Ras problem. Here, we will discuss some of
these knowledge gaps, as well as recent advances and the chal-
lenges that lie ahead.

Ras Mutations in Cancer
Ras genes were the ﬁrst oncogenes identiﬁed in human cancer
cells. In a series of classic experiments, the groups of Weinberg,
Cooper, Barbacid, and Wigler independently identiﬁed the trans-
forming genes from T24/EJ bladder carcinoma cells as H-Ras
(Der et al., 1982; Parada et al., 1982; Santos et al., 1982; Tapar-
owsky et al., 1982). More than 30 years later, Ras genes are well
established as the most frequently mutated oncogenes in human
cancer (Table 1), though H-Ras itself is rarely one of them.
Although these numbers are, by now, painfully familiar, they
underscore major gaps in our knowledge of Ras biology. Most
obviously, we do not understand why K-Ras mutation is much
more frequent in human cancer than N-Ras or H-Ras, even
though each of these is a powerful transforming gene in model
systems, and all forms are expressed widely in adult tissues
and in tumors.

A simple explanation for the high frequency of K-Ras muta-
tions, relative to H-Ras and N-Ras, is that the K-Ras protein
has unique properties that favor oncogenesis. At ﬁrst sight, this
seems unlikely because the Ras proteins are highly conserved,
especially in their effector-binding regions where they are actu-
ally identical. However, K-Ras, but not N-Ras or H-Ras, confers

Cancer Cell

Perspective

Figure 1. Simpliﬁed View of the Ras
Pathway
Ras proteins are converted from their GDP state to
their GTP state by GEFs, in response to upstream
signals (Bos et al., 2007). GAPs convert Ras-GTP
back to Ras-GDP. p120 GAP does this when re-
cruited to activated RTKs. The signal that directs
NF1 (neuroﬁbromin)/SPRED to inactivate Ras is
not known. Several other GAPs are capable of
downregulating Ras (Bos et al., 2007). Ras-GTP
binds and activates multiple downstream effec-
tors. The group of proteins shown on the left in-
cludes potential effectors whose signiﬁcance is
less well understood relative to RalGDS, Raf
kinases, and PI3Ks (Gysin et al., 2011). Protein
families are represented as single proteins to
simplify the schematic; in addition, feedback loops
are not included.

stem-like properties on certain cell types (Quinlan and Settle-
man, 2009). K-Ras-4B, the most highly expressed splice variant
of K-Ras, binds calmodulin; H-Ras and N- Ras do not (Villalonga
et al., 2001). We believe that this unique property of K-Ras-4B
confers stem-like properties to cells expressing oncogenic
K-Ras-4B proteins (M. Wang and F.M., unpublished data).

Analysis of human syndromes caused by germline mutations
in H-Ras or K-Ras supports the idea that K-Ras is a stronger
oncogene. Unexpectedly, humans can tolerate germline-acti-
vating mutations in H-Ras—the same activating mutations that
drive somatic mutations. Costello syndrome, which is character-
ized by germline H-Ras mutations, is associated with a broad
spectrum of developmental abnormalities and a high risk for
rhabdomyosarcomas and neuroblastomas (reviewed in Rauen,
2013). It is puzzling that these individuals do not succumb
to malignancies associated with sporadic H-Ras mutations
(Table 1). Although fully activating alleles of H-Ras can be toler-
ated, fully activated alleles of K-Ras may not. Variant alleles of
K-Ras that account for a small fraction of Noonan’s syndrome
and cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome are weakly activated rela-
tive to their sporadic oncogenic counterparts (Schubbert et al.,
2007).

Further support for the idea that K-Ras has functions distinct
from H-Ras and N-Ras comes from analyses of the roles of
Ras genes in development. Mice that lack K-Ras die during
embryogenesis, whereas mice lacking H-Ras and/or N-Ras are
viable (Johnson et al., 1997). However, replacing K-Ras with
H-Ras at the K-Ras genomic locus allows mice to develop, sug-
gesting that differential regulation of K-Ras and H-Ras gene
expression determines their relative importance in development
rather than the properties of the proteins themselves (Potenza
et al., 2005). Furthermore, Balmain and colleagues discovered
that these H-Ras knock-in mice develop tumors in response to
carcinogens at normal frequencies, except that they are now
driven by H-Ras instead of K-Ras (To et al., 2008). These data
argue strongly that the locus is critical and that the speciﬁc
Ras paralog encoded at that locus does not affect the frequency
at which tumors arise. Equally important, they ﬁnd that K-Ras-
4A, not K-Ras-4B, is necessary for lung tumor initiation, although

K-Ras-4B is much more highly expressed
during progression. This supports the
idea that K-Ras-4B is the more important
target in established tumors but raises the concern that K-Ras-
4A may have an important role in minor stem-like populations
of established tumors. These ﬁndings point toward an urgent
need to validate K-Ras-4A and K-Ras-4B as drug targets, a
major issue that has not yet been addressed.

Different frequencies of K-Ras, N-Ras, and H-Ras mutations
in human tumors may also reﬂect differences in gene expression
resulting from differential codon usage; rare codons limit K-Ras
expression and thus allow more efﬁcient oncogenesis by pre-
venting oncogene-induced senescence (Lampson et al., 2013).
In addition, different rates of DNA repair have been reported
for the K-Ras gene relative to N-Ras and H-Ras (Feng et al.,
2002).

The underlying reasons for different frequencies of speciﬁc
activating mutations are not well understood either. Some of
these differences reﬂect different mutagenic insults to the
genome; the G12C mutation, for example, is a hallmark of expo-
sure to tobacco smoke and, accordingly, is the most common
mutation in K-Ras in lung cancer (reviewed in Prior et al., 2012;
Table 2). Other differences in frequency may reﬂect different bio-
logical properties of mutant proteins. For example, G12C and
G12V K-Ras mutations in lung adenocarcinoma preferentially
activate the RalGDS pathway, whereas G12D prefers the Raf/
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and PI3K pathways
(Ihle et al., 2012). In addition, mutations at codon 61 have a
more profound effect on intrinsic GTPase when these Ras
proteins are bound to Raf kinase. This may drive a stronger
signal through this effector pathway and account for higher fre-
quency of N-Ras position 61 mutations in melanoma, a disease
frequently driven by hyperactivation of Raf kinase through B-Raf
mutations (Buhrman et al., 2010).

From a clinical viewpoint, lung adenocarcinomas driven by
K-Ras mutations at G12C and G12V have a worse outcome
than G12D, possibly because these mutations engage different
downstream effectors as described above (Figure 1; Ihle et al.,
2012). As MEK and PI3K inhibitors are tested in the clinic, it will
be important to ask whether Ras alleles respond differently to
these treatments. Patients suffering from cancers driven by
any of these Ras mutations are excluded from treatment with

Cancer Cell 25, March 17, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 273

Cancer Cell

Perspective

Table 2. Incidence of KRAS Mutations in Three Human Cancers

Colorectal

Lung

Pancreas

All KRAS G12C G12D G12V G13D

60,000

5,700 25,000 15,700 13,600

45,600

23,000

9,200 11,900

1,500

32,200

1,000 19,500 11,500

200

Total new cases/year 137,800

29,700 53,700 39,100 15,300

Shown are the numbers of new cancer cases per year in the United States
that contain the most frequent KRAS mutant alleles. Data are based on
estimated new case incidence values from the National Cancer Institute
and primary tumor mutation frequency data from COSMIC v.67.

noma, 8%–10% lung adenocarcinoma, and at single-digit fre-
quency in most other cancers (E.A. Collisson, personal commu-
nication). Neuroﬁbromin must now be considered as a major
tumor suppressor, along with p53 and phosphatase and tensin
homolog, in human cancers.

Loss of neuroﬁbromin is usually mutually exclusive with Ras
mutation and receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) activation, suggest-
ing that these genetic events represent different ways of acti-
vating similar pathways. However, the precise consequences
of losing neuroﬁbromin are not entirely clear. Levels of Ras-
GTP are high in cells lacking neuroﬁbromin, but which forms of
hyperactive wild-type Ras proteins are most important to the
malignant phenotype is a more difﬁcult question. Perhaps
elevated H-Ras, N-Ras, K-Ras-4A, and K-Ras-4B all contribute
to some extent. However, neuroﬁbromin is also a GAP for
R-Ras proteins, and hyperactivation of these proteins can also
contribute to the malignant phenotype because R-Ras proteins
activate p110a, p110g, and p110d isoforms of PI3Ks (Marte
et al., 1997; Huang et al., 2004).

Recently, Legius and colleagues (Brems et al., 2007) discov-
ered mutations in the Sprouty-related protein, SPRED1, in a
form of neuroﬁbromatosis type I (NF1) in which the neuroﬁbromin
gene is wild-type. This disease is now called Legius syndrome
(Brems et al., 2007). SPRED1 has a well-established pedigree
as a negative regulator of the Raf/MAPK pathway, though the
mechanism has been unclear. However, the fact that loss of neu-
roﬁbromin is, to a signiﬁcant extent, phenocopied by loss of
SPRED1, supports the idea that NF1 is a disease of hyperactive
Ras and that the major function of neuroﬁbromin is to turn Ras
off. The neuroﬁbromin protein itself is over 2,800 amino acids
in length, and the GAP domain only accounts for about 300
amino acids, raising the possibility that neuroﬁbromin has other
functions that are not directly related to negative regulation of
Ras. Most attempts to identify additional functions have failed,
however, and it seems most likely that neuroﬁbromin senses
an unidentiﬁed cellular metabolite and downregulates Ras
accordingly, just as p120 Ras-GAP senses phosphotyrosine res-
idues, and downregulates Ras when it binds to these residues on
activated receptors in the plasma membrane (reviewed in Bos
et al., 2007). Whatever neuroﬁbromin senses (if this model is
correct) is likely to be conserved between S. cerevisiae and hu-
mans because the S. cerevisiae IRA1 and IRA2 proteins look very
much like neuroﬁbromin. Unfortunately, the complete lack of any
recognizable domains or motifs outside the GAP domain and a
SEC14 domain has not helped in identifying what these proteins
recognize.

Table 1. Frequency of Ras Isoform Mutations in Selected Human
Cancers

Primary Tissue

KRAS (%) HRAS (%) NRAS (%)

Total (%)

Pancreas

Colon

Small intestine

Biliary tract

Endometrium

Lung

Skin (melanoma)

Cervix

Urinary tract

71

35

35

26

17

19

1

8

5

0

1

0

0

<1

<1

1

9

10

<1

6

<1

2

5

1

18

2

1

71

42

35

28

22

20

20

19

16

Data were compiled from the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer
(COSMIC) version 67. All human cancers that had total Ras mutation fre-
quencies above 15% are listed.

cetuximab (colorectal cancer) or erlotinib (lung adenocarcinoma)
because these treatments are ineffective for cancers with these
Ras mutations and may even increase rates of progression.
Likewise, malignant melanomas with mutant N-Ras are ex-
cluded from treatment with vemurafenib. However, surprisingly,
K-Ras-G13D-bearing colorectal cancers may show clinical
beneﬁt when treated with cetuximab. This result challenges our
understanding of how these Ras mutations actually function in
clinical situations (De Roock et al., 2010).

Even the prototypic oncogenes of Harvey and Kirsten sar-
coma viruses are not fully understood; each has a codon 12 mu-
tation, but each also carries a mutation of alanine 59 to threonine,
which becomes phosphorylated by guanosine triphosphate
(GTP). This must have helped Scolnick and colleagues (Shih
et al., 1979) identify Ras’ crucial guanosine diphosphate (GDP)/
GTP properties; without covalent phosphorylation, association
with these nucleotides would have been very hard to detect.
However, how phosphorylation at threonine 59 contributes to
Ras’ potent oncogenicity is unclear. This A59T mutation inhibits
Ras-Raf interaction (Shirouzu et al., 1994) and is extremely rare
in human cancer. These anecdotes simply remind us that after
50 years, we still have a lot to learn about the biological and
biochemical functions of Ras proteins.

Although K-Ras has emerged as by far the major Ras gene
mutated in human cancer, it is surprising that other activating
mutations in other members of the Ras superfamily, such as
R-Ras or Rap proteins, occur very rarely. This is surprising
because these proteins share identical or near-identical
effector-binding regions. However, only H-Ras, N-Ras, and
K-Ras are capable of binding and activating Raf kinases, and
this unique property may well account for their predominance
as human oncogenes. In contrast, the closely related R-Ras pro-
teins bind and activate PI3Ks but are rarely mutated in human
cancer (Rodriguez-Viciana et al., 2004).

Activating mutations in Ras genes, coupled with a long history
of Ras biology, implicate these mutant Ras proteins as major
drivers in many cancers. Loss of the Ras GTPase-activating
protein (GAP) neuroﬁbromin inculpates hyperactive wild-type
Ras proteins as drivers in many more cancers. Somatic loss of
neuroﬁbromin expression by mutation, deletion, or by other
means occurs in about 14% glioblastoma, 13%–14% mela-

274 Cancer Cell 25, March 17, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

Perspective

Figure 2. Structure Showing Small Molecule-Directed Electrophilic
Attack of K-Ras-G12C
K-Ras-G12C (Protein Data Bank 4LUC_A) is displayed in surface represen-
tation. The cocrystallized ligands, GDP and N-(1-[(2,4-dichlorophenoxy)acetyl]
piperidin- 4-yl)-4-sulfanylbutanamide, are shown in stick mode. The location of
calcium ion is shown as a green ball. Switch 1 (28–38) and switch 2 (57–63) are
highlighted by orange and red colors, respectively. Key ligand-interacting
residue (C12, V9, V7, F78, I100, M72, Q99, and R68) positions are colored
green. Position of C12 residue is shown in ball and stick (green). Note that
residues 58 and 60 are part of both switch 2 and the key ligand-interacting
group (shown in blue).

By comparing proteins that bind to wild-type SPRED1 versus
mutants from Legius syndrome, we found that neuroﬁbromin
binds directly to SPRED proteins, via their EVH1 domains, and
that SPRED proteins bring neuroﬁbromin to the plasma mem-
brane (Stowe et al., 2012). SPRED proteins also bind to c-Kit,
and perhaps to other RTKs, suggesting that neuroﬁbromin regu-
lates Ras locally in response to speciﬁc receptor signaling, rather
than simply suppressing Ras throughout the plasma membrane.
In this case, loss of neuroﬁbromin may lead to local activation of
Ras that is coupled to speciﬁc receptors, suggesting that inhib-
itors of these receptors might reverse the effects of neuroﬁbro-
min loss. The recent Cancer Genome Atlas analysis of mutations
in lung cancer revealed an intriguing overlap between neuroﬁ-
bromin loss and Met ampliﬁcation, suggesting a functional
connection that merits further investigation (E.A. Collisson, per-
sonal communication).

Validation of Ras as a Target
Ras oncogenes can certainly initiate cancer in model organisms
and probably do so in humans. However, their role in maintaining
tumors is less clear. There is signiﬁcant evidence that supports
K-Ras as a continued candidate for direct therapeutic targeting,
dating back to the classic studies of temperature-sensitive mu-
tants of Ras, by Scolnick, Lowy, and colleagues and including
microinjection studies with antibodies that block Ras activity
(Kung et al., 1986) or block speciﬁc mutant alleles of Ras (Fera-
misco et al., 1985). Ablation of K-Ras in mouse models of lung
adenocarcinoma (Fisher et al., 2001) or pancreas cancer (Ying
et al., 2012) led to dramatic tumor regression, just as ablation
of H-Ras leads to tumor regression in mouse models of mela-
noma (Chin et al., 1999). On the other hand, K-Ras knockdown

in human cell lines resulted in a spectrum of responses, revealing
a range of K-Ras dependencies (Singh et al., 2009). Assessment
of Ras dependency in 3D culture systems suggests that this
assay system is a more stringent measure of Ras dependency.
These studies raise the question of what is the most relevant
system to measure this essential parameter and, in general, re-
sponses to candidate therapeutics targeting K-Ras. Further-
more, the degree to which Ras genes are knocked down may
be critical. Genetic ablation is obviously different than small
interfering RNA- or small hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated knock-
down. It is also clear that knocking down activated Ras can
lead to hyperactivation of upstream pathways, such as EGFR
signaling (Young et al., 2013). Presumably, these pathways are
suppressed in cells with activated Ras and rebound when the
suppressor is removed. Although this rebound effect may not
be sufﬁcient to sustain a malignant phenotype, it may offset pro-
apoptotic effects associated with oncogene inactivation.

Do K-Ras Therapies Have to Be Allele Speciﬁc?
The most speciﬁc way to block oncogenic Ras would be to target
the activating substitution itself. The ﬁrst example was recently
published by Shokat and colleagues, who identiﬁed electrophilic
compounds that react covalently with cysteine-12 in G12C
mutant K-Ras (Ostrem et al., 2013). These compounds interact
selectively with the GDP form of K-Ras-G12C protein (Figure 2)
and bind at a pocket near switch 2 that had not been apparent
from analysis of crystal structures. A similar approach led to
the identiﬁcation of a GDP analog that covalently and speciﬁcally
binds G12C and renders this oncogenic protein inactive (Lim
et al., 2014). Perhaps other compounds could be identiﬁed that
interact speciﬁcally with the G12D and G13D mutant forms using
similar strategies. These brilliant experiments remind us that
these proteins are in dynamic and ﬂexible states that might
present more opportunities for small molecule attack than was
previously realized. Indeed, it is well established that Ras-GTP
exists in two states, only one of which is active and each with
distinct binding properties for effectors, GAPs, and nucleotide
(Geyer et al., 1996; Liao et al., 2008).

The idea of targeting the GDP-bound form of an oncogenic
mutant seems counterintuitive because we often think of onco-
genic mutants as being locked in their GTP-bound states,
signaling persistently downstream. However, codon 12 mutants
retain measurable intrinsic GTPase activity, even though they are
all refractory to GAP-mediated GTPase stimulation. Although
GTP hydrolysis rates are slow, the GDP off rates are also slow,
and indeed, oncogenic mutants often exist with similar levels
of GTP and GDP: if intrinsic GTPase and GDP off rates were
identical, Ras proteins would be 50% GTP bound and 50%
GDP bound. This presents an opportunity for targeting the
GDP-bound state and trapping it in the off state and so prevent-
ing recharging with GTP.

As an alternative to targeting speciﬁc Ras mutants, such as
G12C, compounds could be developed that target individual
Ras isoforms but do not discriminate between wild-type and
mutant Ras proteins. This could be achieved by targeting spe-
ciﬁc hypervariable regions at the C terminus where the Ras pro-
teins differ most widely (Figure 3). The C-terminal hypervariable
region of K-Ras-4B is very different from the hypervariable
regions of other Ras proteins and is involved in the speciﬁc

Cancer Cell 25, March 17, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 275

Cancer Cell

Perspective

Whether oncogenic Ras proteins are regulated at all by Sos
and other GEFs has been surprisingly difﬁcult to determine deﬁn-
itively, partly because there are many types of GEFs in mamma-
lian cells. Furthermore, GEFs such as Sos have allosteric sites for
Ras binding as well as sites for GDP/GTP exchange, and it is
hard to measure GTP loading on individual Ras isoforms in cells.
However, it is clear that mutant Ras proteins are not 100% GTP
bound, and GEFs could increase the fraction of Ras-GTP to
some extent. However, targeting Sos or other GEFs for treating
mutant Ras cancers does not appear an attractive proposition.
Oncogenic mutants may or may not depend on GEFs, to some
degree, but wild-type Ras proteins most certainly do. For
these reasons, recent efforts to target mutant Ras that led
to compounds that bind at the Sos-binding site may seem
disappointing (Maurer et al., 2012; Sun et al., 2012). However,
the compounds that these groups discovered could be excel-
lent starting points toward the discovery of compounds that
have selectivity for mutant forms of K-Ras or block effector
interactions.

Restoring GTP Hydrolysis
Mutations at codons 12, 13, and 61 inhibit GAP-mediated GTP
hydrolysis. As a result, mutant Ras proteins accumulate with
elevated GTP-bound proportion. Trahey and McCormick
discovered GAP while seeking to explain how relatively small
changes in intrinsic GTPase between wild-type and mutant
Ras proteins accounted for profound differences in transforming
activity (Trahey and McCormick, 1987). Intrinsic rates of GTP hy-
drolysis are ﬁve orders of magnitude slower than rates catalyzed
by GAPs and therefore do not contribute signiﬁcantly to steady-
state levels of Ras-GTP. However, once Ras proteins bind effec-
tors, GAPs can no longer interact, and intrinsic GTPase may
become important in determining how long Ras and its effectors
remain engaged.
Indeed, effector binding may well affect
intrinsic GTPase activity of Ras as it does for heterotrimeric G
proteins. If indeed intrinsic GTPase limits signal output, perhaps
assays for compounds that stimulate intrinsic GTPase of Ras
effector complexes may merit consideration. Mattos and col-
leagues recently showed that the Ras-binding domain of Raf
(the RBD) has a profound effect on suppressing intrinsic hydro-
lysis rates of Ras Q61 mutants, but not wild-type Ras or G12V
mutants (Buhrman et al., 2010). They propose that suppression
of intrinsic GTPase stabilizes Ras-Raf complexes and increases
signal output to the MAPK pathway selectively; this accounts for
the preference of Q61 mutants over G12 mutants in melanoma, a
disease that is clearly Raf-MAPK driven (Buhrman et al., 2010).
In the 1980s, several groups, including those at Cetus and
Hoffmann La Roche, screened for compounds that restore
GTP hydrolysis to mutant Ras, in the presence or absence of
GAP. These screens failed to ﬁnd compounds that increased
GTPase rates. Furthermore, as structures of Ras proteins
emerged, mostly from Wittinghofer’s group, it became clear
that codon 12 substitutions presented a steric block to GAP-
mediated GTP hydrolysis that could not be overcome by a small
molecule. These studies were mostly based on G12V mutations
because these were the most widely used at that time. Whether
the same conclusion can be applied to other mutations such as
G12D or G13D remains to be seen because structures of these
proteins bound to GAP have not been solved.

Figure 3. Schematic Representation of the Ras Isoforms
The structures of the G domain of H-Ras, N-Ras, and K-Ras have been solved
and are virtually identical, but the structure of processed hypervariable
regions has not been solved and is therefore depicted as a linear sequence.
Lipid modiﬁcations with farnesyl (purple) and palmitoyl (orange) chains are
shown.

interaction of K-Ras-4B with calmodulin (Lopez-Alcala´ et al.,
2008). Because K-Ras-4B seems to be the major form of
K-Ras in established tumors, these speciﬁc biochemical proper-
ties may afford unique opportunities for therapeutic attack.
Mouse models suggest that such compounds would be well
tolerated because animals lacking any single isoform of Ras
are viable (A. Balmain, personal communication).

Targeting GDP/GTP Binding and Exchange
Ras proteins bind GDP and GTP with picomolar afﬁnity. It is
generally accepted that oncogenic Ras proteins cannot be
attacked with nucleotide analogs because high GTP concentra-
tions make competition impossible. The high afﬁnity for GTP is
also considered a barrier, though it is easy to imagine that ana-
logs could be developed with equally high afﬁnity. This approach
to targeting Ras has therefore been abandoned. However, Ras
proteins in their GTP state exist in complexes with effectors
(Raf kinases, RalGDS, PI3K, other Ras-binding proteins), as
well as regulators (GAPs and guanine nucleotide exchange fac-
tors [GEFs]). The effects of most of these proteins on nucleotide
binding have not been measured. GEFs, of course, greatly
reduce the afﬁnity for nucleotides, allowing GDP to be released
rapidly and replaced by GTP. Although oncogenic mutants do
not need GEFs to put them in the active state, they are still sen-
sitive to GEF-mediated exchange and cycle through a complex
state in which nucleotide-free Ras protein is bound to the GEF;
this may provide a potential opportunity for a mutant-speciﬁc
nucleotide analog to bind. In support of this, we noted many
years ago that antibodies directed against speciﬁc codon 12 mu-
tants were effective at reversing transformation in cells, as cited
above, yet these antibodies do not bind to nucleotide-loaded
Ras (Clark et al., 1985). We therefore speculate that oncogenic
Ras exists in a nucleotide-free state frequently enough to make
it vulnerable to attack.

276 Cancer Cell 25, March 17, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

Perspective

The approach of restoring GTP hydrolysis to mutant proteins
received a brief infusion of hope when Scheffzek and colleagues
showed that G12V H-Ras could indeed hydrolyze a GTP analog
diaminobenzophenone-phosphoroamidate-GTP in which the
aromatic amino group mimics the catalytic effects of GAP’s
arginine ﬁnger (Ahmadian et al., 1999). A small molecule that
provided this local charge might therefore trick mutant Ras
into GTP hydrolysis. At ﬁrst sight, the GTD-/GTP-binding site
of Ras does not offer any room for such a molecule to bind.
However,
these issues deserve rethinking—perhaps G12D
offers more possibilities for this kind of attack than G12V, for
example.

Targeting Ras Posttranslational Modiﬁcation Pathways
Ras proteins are processed in several steps (reviewed in Gysin
et al., 2011), including farnesylation, proteolytic cleavage at the
C terminus by RCE1, and carboxymethylation by isoprenylcys-
teine carboxyl methyltransferase (ICMT). K-Ras-4A, H-Ras,
and N-Ras are further processed by palmitoylation (Figure 3).
These reactions are not only essential for plasma membrane
localization but also for Raf kinase activation. The failure of farne-
syltransferase inhibitors has been well documented. By sheer
bad luck, the forms of Ras that play the major roles in human
cancer, K-Ras and N-Ras, can be geranylgeranylated when far-
nesyltransferase is inhibited, allowing newly synthesized Ras
proteins to be inserted correctly in the membrane and to function
normally. H-Ras, on the other hand, is not geranylgeranylated,
suggesting that tumors driven by mutant H-Ras, such as bladder
cancer or thyroid cancer, might be susceptible to farnesyltrans-
ferase inhibition. Targeting RCE1 or ICMT has also been evalu-
ated, though the consequences of blocking these enzymes are
difﬁcult to predict or understand. For example, inhibition of either
enzyme can actually lead to increased Ras-mediated tumorigen-
esis (Court et al., 2013; Wahlstrom et al., 2007).

Palmitoylation and depalmitoylation of H-Ras, K-Ras-4A, and
N-Ras proteins provide dynamic aspects to membrane localiza-
tion and may present therapeutic opportunities for these pro-
teins. Recent work demonstrated that acyl protein thioesterase
1 (APT1), which is responsible for Ras depalmitoylation, could
be targeted by palmostatin B to selectively inhibit the growth
of N-Ras mutant leukemia cells (Xu et al., 2012). In contrast,
K-Ras-4B localization seemed relatively static and stable: spe-
ciﬁc localization of K-Ras-4B to plasma membranes is based
on electrostatic interactions between lysine residues in the hy-
pervariable region and phospholipids in the membrane. How-
ever, another therapeutic opportunity has been presented by
the discovery that PDE6d acts as a solubilizing factor that
modulates Ras proteins by sustaining their dynamic distribution
in cellular membranes. A small molecule was identiﬁed that pre-
vents association of K-Ras-4B, and other proteins, with PDEd
and so delocalizes these proteins and inhibits downstream
signaling (Zimmermann et al., 2013). Little is still known about
the trafﬁcking of Ras to and from the membrane, and there are
likely to be additional factors or chaperones involved in the
movement of the proteins that could serve as targets for small
molecules. In a related study, K-Ras-4B was shown to undergo
retrograde trafﬁcking from the plasma membrane to endomem-
branes. This may serve as an additional pathway to speciﬁcally
disrupt for therapeutic beneﬁt (Bivona et al., 2006).

In addition to these processing events, several recent papers
have highlighted other posttranslational modiﬁcations of K-Ras
that could serve as therapeutic targets. Mono-ubiquitination at
Lys147 has been shown to enhance GTP loading and effector-
binding afﬁnity of K-Ras (Sasaki et al., 2011), suggesting that
targeting of ubiquitin pathway enzymes might have an effect
on K-Ras activity. Acetylation of Lys104 was shown to decrease
GEF-induced nucleotide exchange, leading to reduced transfor-
mation efﬁciency in cells, and the deacetylases SIRT2 and
HDAC6 were shown to regulate the level of acetylation of
K-Ras (Yang et al., 2013), suggesting that inhibitors of these
enzymes might have an effect on the oncogenic potential of
mutant K-Ras tumors. Finally, nitrosylation of Cys118 in H-Ras
has been shown to activate Ras by enhancing nucleotide disso-
ciation, leading to higher levels of GTP-bound protein. The eNos
protein was identiﬁed as a strong enhancer of nitrosylation and
therefore could also be a therapeutic target to attack mutant
Ras (Lim et al., 2008).

Downstream Pathways and Drug Targets
When it became clear that targeting mutant Ras proteins directly
was technically impossible with the tools available at that time,
the search for drugs that block Ras activity moved downstream.
In the early 1990s, the MAPK pathway and the PI3K pathway
were known to be downstream of Ras (Figure 1). In 1993, four
groups showed that Ras binds directly to Raf kinase (Moodie
et al., 1993; Van Aelst et al., 1993; Warne et al., 1993; Zhang
et al., 1993), and later, activation of Raf kinase by Ras was
achieved in vitro (Stokoe and McCormick, 1997). This was unex-
pectedly difﬁcult; for one thing, Raf activation by Ras required
fully processed Ras in a lipid environment, and direct binding
of unprocessed Ras failed to activate the kinase. Furthermore,
autophosphorylation rapidly shut down Raf kinase in vitro; we
had to preincubate processed Ras with Raf in the absence of
ATP before measuring Raf kinase activity. This autophosphory-
lation accounts, at least in part, for paradoxical activation of
Raf kinase by Raf inhibitors, a phenomenon that was discovered
16 years later (reviewed in Holderﬁeld et al., 2013). These issues
complicate the development of in vitro assays for compounds
that prevent Ras-dependent activation of Raf kinase, an obvious
system for therapeutic intervention. Direct blocking of Ras-Raf
binding with small molecules does not appear to be a promising
approach because the binding surface (two antiparallel b
strands) offers no foothold in which a compound could bind.
However, for example, preventing binding using peptides or by
indirect allosteric approaches has been considered (see Wu
et al., 2013).

The drug discovery group at Onyx Pharmaceuticals began
screening for Raf kinase inhibitors in 1992 after it was able pro-
duce active c-Raf kinase in baculovirus (by coinfection with
v-Src) and to reconstitute the MAPK pathway in vitro (Macdonald
et al., 1993). It was then assumed that in cancer cells with mutant
Ras, the Raf/MAPK pathway would be hyperactive and that
drugs that inhibit Raf would be effective ways of treating Ras
mutant cancers. It was also assumed that MEK and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) inhibitors would have the same
effect. In hindsight, most of the assumptions were incorrect:
the Raf/MAPK pathway is not often hyperactive in human cancer
cells with mutant Ras, as measured by steady-state levels of

Cancer Cell 25, March 17, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 277

Cancer Cell

Perspective

The third direct effector arm of Ras signaling that plays a major
role in human cancer is the RalGDS (Ral guanine nucleotide
dissociation stimulator) pathway (Figure 1). Perhaps the best
evidence of the importance of this effector pathway comes
from demonstration that mice null for RalGDS have reduced
skin carcinogen-induced tumor incidence, size, and progression
to malignancy compared to wild-type mice (Gonza´ lez-Garcı´a
et al., 2005). These data, and many others (Martin et al., 2011;
Kashatus, 2013), support a role for RalGDS both in vitro and
in vivo as an important effector pathway utilized by oncogenic
Ras to drive tumorigenesis that could potentially be exploited
for therapeutic intervention, although the absence of somatic
mutations in this effector pathway makes its precise role less
clear than the Raf/MAPK and PI3K pathways. On the other
hand, Ral signaling is upstream of NF-kB and TBK1, both of
which have been implicated as essential genes downstream of
K-Ras (Neel et al., 2011; Kashatus, 2013).

further implicating the importance of

Other potential Ras effectors that could be important in cancer
and therefore a source of potential therapeutic targets include
phospholipase CE and Tiam1, a GEF that stimulates the activa-
tion of Rac (Figure 1). Rac1 is necessary for K-Ras tumor initia-
tion,
this pathway in
K-Ras tumorigenesis, though not yet providing obvious thera-
peutic targets (Gysin et al., 2011). Likewise, cyclin D1, NF-kB,
and Myc are necessary for Ras tumorigenesis; further analysis
of the role of these pathways may lead to new therapeutic in-
sights. For example, Puyol et al. (2010) recently demonstrated
that germline or conditional deletion of Cdk4 led to senescence
in lung cells expressing activated K-Ras. Furthermore, treatment
with a Cdk4 inhibitor reduced the growth of K-Ras-driven tu-
mors. Finally, unbiased shRNA screens have revealed potential
targets for K-Ras cancers. These include STK33, TBK1, and
GATA-2. So far, STK33 inhibition does not appear to be a useful
approach to K-Ras cancers (Weiwer et al., 2012). TBK1 inhibitors
are still being investigated: this target is of particular interest
because it
the well-validated RalGDS pathway.
GATA2 is also of considerable interest; genetic ablation leads
to tumor regression in mouse models of adenocarcinoma of
the lung, and whereas this transcription factor may appear to
be the least druggable of targets, its role in regulating the protea-
some suggested therapeutic approaches that appear very
promising (Kumar et al., 2012).

is part of

Future Prospects
In this Review, we have summarized some of the challenges of
targeting Ras cancers. Despite the tremendous progress that
has been made, we still have to learn a great deal about these
cancers before we can be conﬁdent that we can treat them effec-
tively. Recent experience in targeting Raf and MEK has under-
scored how a pathway that appeared simple and linear is
extremely complex and poorly understood at the level of detail
required to shut it down effectively. Nobody expected that Raf
inhibitors would activate Raf kinase in Ras-transformed cells,
for example, or that inhibition of downstream kinases like MEK
would lead to activation of upstream signaling. We need a
much deeper analysis of the molecular mechanisms underlying
Ras regulation and effector engagement before we can expect
to interfere with these mechanisms effectively. It seems to us
more likely that these deeper insights will
lead to productive

phospho-MEK or phospho-ERK. Raf inhibitors lead to paradox-
ical activation of Raf kinase following exposure to Raf inhibitors,
especially in Ras mutant cancers (reviewed in Lito et al., 2013).
MEK and ERK inhibitors do not show paradoxical activation
but are generally ineffective on their own because they relieve
feedback inhibition on upstream kinases, leading to activation
of PI3K, among other effects (Mirzoeva et al., 2009; Corcoran
et al., 2012; Turke et al., 2012; Montero-Conde et al., 2013),
and because they lack a clear therapeutic window. MEK1/
MEK2 isoforms have a high degree of amino acid identity, sug-
gesting redundant roles in signaling. The same is true for
ERK1/ERK2. However, knocking out the gene encoding MEK1,
Map2k1 (Giroux et al., 1999), or the gene encoding ERK2,
Mapk1 (Hatano et al., 2003; Saba-El-Leil et al., 2003; Yao
et al., 2003), is embryonic lethal, indicating a requirement for
signaling from a particular isoform, at least in the context of
embryogenesis. Although Map2k2 / 
(MEK2 null) and Mapk3 / 
(ERK1 null) mice are viable,
in vivo ablation of MEK1 in a
Map2k2 / 
background (Scholl et al., 2007; Blasco et al.,
2011) or ERK2 in a Mapk3 / 
background (Chan et al., 2013) re-
sults in apoptosis and lethality in adult mice. This may suggest a
limited therapeutic window for any pan inhibitor of these kinases,
and the clinical toxicity of potential drugs in this target class
bears this out.

The Onyx/Bayer screen for c-Raf inhibitors led to the discov-
ery and development of sorafenib. However,
it was disap-
pointing when sorafenib failed to show clinical beneﬁt in early
clinical trials against Ras mutant cancers, and this lack of
response was difﬁcult to understand because sorafenib does
indeed inhibit Raf kinase. Despite this, sorafenib and ﬂuoro-
sorafenib (regorafenib) have since been approved for the treat-
ment of renal cell carcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, thyroid
cancer, colorectal cancer, and gastrointestinal stromal cancer.
In hepatocellular carcinoma, biomarker analysis in Phase II clin-
ical trials showed a clear correlation between levels of phospho-
ERK and clinical response, suggesting that inhibition of Raf
kinase is responsible for part of the clinical beneﬁt (Abou-Alfa
et al., 2006), but in the other indications, it appears likely that in-
hibition of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 or other
kinases is responsible. Hopefully, a clearer picture will emerge
through analysis of exceptional responders or through decipher-
ing mechanisms of drug resistance.

Inhibitors of PI3K pathway have not yet fared much better in
the clinic, also because of feedback mechanisms that activate
upstream signaling, as well as poor therapeutic index. However,
the relative failure of these downstream approaches does not
mean that they are not critical to Ras oncogenesis. Indeed, abla-
tion of c-Raf (but not B-Raf) in mice inhibits development and de-
lays progression of Ras-driven tumors in a lung adenocarcinoma
model (Blasco et al., 2011). However, in an in vivo pancreatic
cancer mouse model, B-Raf was shown to be required for tumor
progression (Sobczak et al., 2008). This suggests tissue-speciﬁc
signaling cascades and will require more investigation. Genetic
disruption of Ras binding to PI3K-a has a similar effect. We
can therefore assume that small molecules that can block down-
stream signaling without triggering feedback and with the cor-
rect speciﬁcity and biochemical properties may still be effective,
but more work needs to be done to develop such compounds
effectively.

278 Cancer Cell 25, March 17, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

Perspective

approaches for intervention than to the conclusion that Ras is
indeed undruggable. New technologies and insights and fresh
eyes are likely to solve this problem. We are also optimistic
that completely different approaches to treating cancer will
contribute to eliminating Ras cancers, including new ways of
knocking down/out genes using RNAi and CRISPR technologies
and delivering these payloads to tumors (Davis et al., 2010), as
well as new ways of deploying the immune system. In this
respect, it is noteworthy that anti-CTLA-4 therapy appears to
be equally effective in treating melanoma driven by N-Ras or
B-Raf; therefore, Ras cancers may not be excluded from these
approaches as they have been from others. All of these consid-
erations lead us to be optimistic about future prospects of ﬁnally
delivering the knockout punch.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Thanks to Sarangan Ravichandran (Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer
Research) for help with Figure 2. F.M. wishes to thank his friends and col-
leagues in the Ras community, past and present members of his lab at
UCSF and at Frederick National Lab for Cancer Research for discussions,
data, and friendship, and for the NCI, Daiichi Sankyo, The Children’s Tumor
Foundation, the Pancreatic Cancer Action Network, Wellspring, and the
Lustgarten Foundation for support. This work has been funded in whole or
in part with federal
funds from the National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, under contract HHSN261200800001E. The content of
this publication does not necessarily reﬂect the views or policies of the
Department of Health and Human Services, nor does mention of trade
names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the
U.S. Government.

REFERENCES

Abou-Alfa, G.K., Schwartz, L., Ricci, S., Amadori, D., Santoro, A., Figer, A., De
Greve, J., Douillard, J.Y., Lathia, C., Schwartz, B., et al. (2006). Phase II study
of sorafenib in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Clin.
Oncol. 24, 4293–4300.

Ahmadian, M.R., Zor, T., Vogt, D., Kabsch, W., Selinger, Z., Wittinghofer, A.,
and Scheffzek, K. (1999). Guanosine triphosphatase stimulation of oncogenic
Ras mutants. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 7065–7070.

Barbacid, M. (1987). ras genes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 56, 779–827.

Bivona, T.G., Quatela, S.E., Bodemann, B.O., Ahearn, I.M., Soskis, M.J., Mor,
A., Miura, J., Wiener, H.H., Wright, L., Saba, S.G., et al. (2006). PKC regulates a
farnesyl-electrostatic switch on K-Ras that promotes its association with Bcl-
XL on mitochondria and induces apoptosis. Mol. Cell 21, 481–493.

Blasco, R.B., Francoz, S., Santamarı´a, D., Can˜ amero, M., Dubus, P., Charron,
J., Baccarini, M., and Barbacid, M. (2011). c-Raf, but not B-Raf, is essential for
development of K-Ras oncogene-driven non-small cell
lung carcinoma.
Cancer Cell 19, 652–663.

Clark, R., Wong, G., Arnheim, N., Nitecki, D., and McCormick, F. (1985). Anti-
bodies speciﬁc for amino acid 12 of the ras oncogene product inhibit GTP
binding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82, 5280–5284.

Corcoran, R.B., Ebi, H., Turke, A.B., Coffee, E.M., Nishino, M., Cogdill, A.P.,
Brown, R.D., Della Pelle, P., Dias-Santagata, D., Hung, K.E., et al. (2012).
EGFR-mediated re-activation of MAPK signaling contributes to insensitivity
of BRAF mutant colorectal cancers to RAF inhibition with vemurafenib. Cancer
Discov. 2, 227–235.

Court, H., Amoyel, M., Hackman, M., Lee, K.E., Xu, R., Miller, G., Bar-Sagi, D.,
Bach, E.A., Bergo¨ , M.O., and Philips, M.R. (2013). Isoprenylcysteine carboxyl-
methyltransferase deﬁciency exacerbates KRAS-driven pancreatic neoplasia
via Notch suppression. J. Clin. Invest. 123, 4681–4694.

Davis, M.E., Zuckerman, J.E., Choi, C.H., Seligson, D., Tolcher, A., Alabi, C.A.,
Yen, Y., Heidel, J.D., and Ribas, A. (2010). Evidence of RNAi in humans from
systemically administered siRNA via targeted nanoparticles. Nature 464,
1067–1070.

Der, C.J., Krontiris, T.G., and Cooper, G.M. (1982). Transforming genes of
human bladder and lung carcinoma cell lines are homologous to the ras genes
of Harvey and Kirsten sarcoma viruses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79, 3637–
3640.

De Roock, W., Jonker, D.J., Di Nicolantonio, F., Sartore-Bianchi, A., Tu, D.,
Siena, S., Lamba, S., Arena, S., Frattini, M., Piessevaux, H., et al. (2010).
Association of KRAS p.G13D mutation with outcome in patients with chemo-
therapy-refractory metastatic colorectal cancer treated with cetuximab. JAMA
304, 1812–1820.

Eckhart, W., Hutchinson, M.A., and Hunter, T. (1979). An activity phosphory-
lating tyrosine in polyoma T antigen immunoprecipitates. Cell 18, 925–933.

Feng, Z., Hu, W., Chen, J.X., Pao, A., Li, H., Rom, W., Hung, M.C., and Tang,
M.S. (2002). Preferential DNA damage and poor repair determine ras gene
mutational hotspot in human cancer. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 94, 1527–1536.

Feramisco, J.R., Clark, R., Wong, G., Arnheim, N., Milley, R., and McCormick,
F. (1985). Transient reversion of ras oncogene-induced cell transformation by
antibodies speciﬁc for amino acid 12 of ras protein. Nature 314, 639–642.

Fisher, G.H., Wellen, S.L., Klimstra, D., Lenczowski, J.M., Tichelaar, J.W.,
Lizak, M.J., Whitsett, J.A., Koretsky, A., and Varmus, H.E. (2001). Induction
and apoptotic regression of lung adenocarcinomas by regulation of a K-Ras
transgene in the presence and absence of tumor suppressor genes. Genes
Dev. 15, 3249–3262.

Geyer, M., Schweins, T., Herrmann, C., Prisner, T., Wittinghofer, A., and Kal-
bitzer, H.R. (1996). Conformational transitions in p21ras and in its complexes
with the effector protein Raf-RBD and the GTPase activating protein GAP.
Biochemistry 35, 10308–10320.

Giroux, S., Tremblay, M., Bernard, D., Cardin-Girard, J.F., Aubry, S., Larouche,
L., Rousseau, S., Huot, J., Landry, J., Jeannotte, L., and Charron, J. (1999).
Embryonic death of Mek1-deﬁcient mice reveals a role for this kinase in angio-
genesis in the labyrinthine region of the placenta. Curr. Biol. 9, 369–372.

Gonza´ lez-Garcı´a, A., Pritchard, C.A., Paterson, H.F., Mavria, G., Stamp, G.,
and Marshall, C.J. (2005). RalGDS is required for tumor formation in a model
of skin carcinogenesis. Cancer Cell 7, 219–226.

Bos, J.L., Rehmann, H., and Wittinghofer, A. (2007). GEFs and GAPs: critical
elements in the control of small G proteins. Cell 129, 865–877.

Gysin, S., Salt, M., Young, A., and McCormick, F. (2011). Therapeutic strate-
gies for targeting ras proteins. Genes Cancer 2, 359–372.

Brems, H., Chmara, M., Sahbatou, M., Denayer, E., Taniguchi, K., Kato, R.,
Somers, R., Messiaen, L., De Schepper, S., Fryns, J.P., et al. (2007). Germline
loss-of-function mutations in SPRED1 cause a neuroﬁbromatosis 1-like
phenotype. Nat. Genet. 39, 1120–1126.

Buhrman, G., Holzapfel, G., Fetics, S., and Mattos, C. (2010). Allosteric mod-
ulation of Ras positions Q61 for a direct role in catalysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 107, 4931–4936.

Chan, G., Gu, S., and Neel, B.G. (2013). Erk1 and Erk2 are required for main-
tenance of hematopoietic stem cells and adult hematopoiesis. Blood 121,
3594–3598.

Hanahan, D., and Weinberg, R.A. (2011). Hallmarks of cancer: the next gener-
ation. Cell 144, 646–674.

Hatano, N., Mori, Y., Oh-hora, M., Kosugi, A., Fujikawa, T., Nakai, N., Niwa, H.,
Miyazaki, J., Hamaoka, T., and Ogata, M. (2003). Essential role for ERK2
mitogen-activated protein kinase in placental development. Genes Cells 8,
847–856.

Holderﬁeld, M., Merritt, H., Chan, J., Wallroth, M., Tandeske, L., Zhai, H.,
Tellew, J., Hardy, S., Hekmat-Nejad, M., Stuart, D.D., et al. (2013). RAF inhib-
itors activate the MAPK pathway by relieving inhibitory autophosphorylation.
Cancer Cell 23, 594–602.

Chin, L., Tam, A., Pomerantz, J., Wong, M., Holash, J., Bardeesy, N., Shen, Q.,
O’Hagan, R., Pantginis, J., Zhou, H., et al. (1999). Essential role for oncogenic
Ras in tumour maintenance. Nature 400, 468–472.

Huang, Y., Rangwala, F., Fulkerson, P.C., Ling, B., Reed, E., Cox, A.D., Kam-
holz, J., and Ratner, N. (2004). Role of TC21/R-Ras2 in enhanced migration of
neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient Schwann cells. Oncogene 23, 368–378.

Cancer Cell 25, March 17, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 279

Cancer Cell

Perspective

Ihle, N.T., Byers, L.A., Kim, E.S., Saintigny, P., Lee, J.J., Blumenschein, G.R.,
Tsao, A., Liu, S., Larsen, J.E., Wang, J., et al. (2012). Effect of KRAS oncogene
substitutions on protein behavior:
implications for signaling and clinical
outcome. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 104, 228–239.

Johnson, L., Greenbaum, D., Cichowski, K., Mercer, K., Murphy, E., Schmitt,
E., Bronson, R.T., Umanoff, H., Edelmann, W., Kucherlapati, R., and Jacks,
T. (1997). K-ras is an essential gene in the mouse with partial functional overlap
with N-ras. Genes Dev. 11, 2468–2481.

Karnoub, A.E., and Weinberg, R.A. (2008). Ras oncogenes: split personalities.
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9, 517–531.

Kashatus, D.F. (2013). Ral GTPases in tumorigenesis: emerging from the
shadows. Exp. Cell Res. 319, 2337–2342.

Kumar, M.S., Hancock, D.C., Molina-Arcas, M., Steckel, M., East, P., Diefen-
bacher, M., Armenteros-Monterroso, E., Lassailly, F., Matthews, N., Nye, E.,
et al. (2012). The GATA2 transcriptional network is requisite for RAS onco-
gene-driven non-small cell lung cancer. Cell 149, 642–655.

Kung, H.F., Smith, M.R., Bekesi, E., Manne, V., and Stacey, D.W. (1986).
Reversal of transformed phenotype by monoclonal antibodies against Ha-
ras p21 proteins. Exp. Cell Res. 162, 363–371.

Lampson, B.L., Pershing, N.L., Prinz, J.A., Lacsina, J.R., Marzluff, W.F., Nic-
chitta, C.V., MacAlpine, D.M., and Counter, C.M. (2013). Rare codons regulate
KRas oncogenesis. Curr. Biol. 23, 70–75.

Liao, J., Shima, F., Araki, M., Ye, M., Muraoka, S., Sugimoto, T., Kawamura,
M., Yamamoto, N., Tamura, A., and Kataoka, T. (2008). Two conformational
states of Ras GTPase exhibit differential GTP-binding kinetics. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 369, 327–332.

Lim, K.H., Ancrile, B.B., Kashatus, D.F., and Counter, C.M. (2008). Tumour
maintenance is mediated by eNOS. Nature 452, 646–649.

Lim, S.M., Westover, K.D., Ficarro, S.B., Harrison, R.A., Choi, H.G., Pacold,
M.E., Carrasco, M., Hunter, J., Kim, N.D., Xie, T., et al. (2014). Therapeutic tar-
geting of oncogenic K-Ras by a covalent catalytic site inhibitor. Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. Engl. 53, 199–204.

Lito, P., Rosen, N., and Solit, D.B. (2013). Tumor adaptation and resistance to
RAF inhibitors. Nat. Med. 19, 1401–1409.

Neel, N.F., Martin, T.D., Stratford, J.K., Zand, T.P., Reiner, D.J., and Der, C.J.
(2011). The RalGEF-Ral effector signaling network: the road less traveled for
anti-Ras drug discovery. Genes Cancer 2, 275–287.

Ostrem, J.M., Peters, U., Sos, M.L., Wells, J.A., and Shokat, K.M. (2013).
K-Ras(G12C) inhibitors allosterically control GTP afﬁnity and effector interac-
tions. Nature 503, 548–551.

Parada, L.F., Tabin, C.J., Shih, C., and Weinberg, R.A. (1982). Human EJ
bladder carcinoma oncogene is homologue of Harvey sarcoma virus ras
gene. Nature 297, 474–478.

Potenza, N., Vecchione, C., Notte, A., De Rienzo, A., Rosica, A., Bauer, L.,
Affuso, A., De Felice, M., Russo, T., Poulet, R., et al. (2005). Replacement of
K-Ras with H-Ras supports normal embryonic development despite inducing
cardiovascular pathology in adult mice. EMBO Rep. 6, 432–437.

Prior, I.A., Lewis, P.D., and Mattos, C. (2012). A comprehensive survey of Ras
mutations in cancer. Cancer Res. 72, 2457–2467.

Puyol, M., Martı´n, A., Dubus, P., Mulero, F., Pizcueta, P., Khan, G., Guerra, C.,
Santamarı´a, D., and Barbacid, M. (2010). A synthetic lethal interaction between
K-Ras oncogenes and Cdk4 unveils a therapeutic strategy for non-small cell
lung carcinoma. Cancer Cell 18, 63–73.

Quinlan, M.P., and Settleman, J. (2009). Isoform-speciﬁc ras functions in
development and cancer. Future Oncol. 5, 105–116.

Rauen, K.A. (2013). The RASopathies. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 14,
355–369.

Rodriguez-Viciana, P., Sabatier, C., and McCormick, F. (2004). Signaling spec-
iﬁcity by Ras family GTPases is determined by the full spectrum of effectors
they regulate. Mol. Cell. Biol. 24, 4943–4954.

Saba-El-Leil, M.K., Vella, F.D., Vernay, B., Voisin, L., Chen, L., Labrecque, N.,
Ang, S.L., and Meloche, S. (2003). An essential function of the mitogen-acti-
vated protein kinase Erk2 in mouse trophoblast development. EMBO Rep. 4,
964–968.

Santos, E., Tronick, S.R., Aaronson, S.A., Pulciani, S., and Barbacid, M. (1982).
T24 human bladder carcinoma oncogene is an activated form of the normal
human homologue of BALB- and Harvey-MSV transforming genes. Nature
298, 343–347.

Lopez-Alcala´ , C., Alvarez-Moya, B., Villalonga, P., Calvo, M., Bachs, O., and
Agell, N. (2008). Identiﬁcation of essential
interacting elements in K-Ras/
calmodulin binding and its role in K-Ras localization. J. Biol. Chem. 283,
10621–10631.

Sasaki, A.T., Carracedo, A., Locasale, J.W., Anastasiou, D., Takeuchi, K., Ka-
houd, E.R., Haviv, S., Asara, J.M., Pandolﬁ, P.P., and Cantley, L.C. (2011).
Ubiquitination of K-Ras enhances activation and facilitates binding to select
downstream effectors. Sci. Signal. 4, ra13.

Macdonald, S.G., Crews, C.M., Wu, L., Driller, J., Clark, R., Erikson, R.L., and
McCormick, F. (1993). Reconstitution of the Raf-1-MEK-ERK signal transduc-
tion pathway in vitro. Mol. Cell. Biol. 13, 6615–6620.

Marte, B.M., Rodriguez-Viciana, P., Wennstrom, S., Warne, P.H., and Down-
ward, J. (1997). R-Ras can activate the phosphoinositide 3-kinase but not
the MAP kinase arm of the Ras effector pathways. Curr. Biol. 7, 63–70.

Martin, T.D., Samuel, J.C., Routh, E.D., Der, C.J., and Yeh, J.J. (2011). Activa-
tion and involvement of Ral GTPases in colorectal cancer. Cancer Res. 71,
206–215.

Maurer, T., Garrenton, L.S., Oh, A., Pitts, K., Anderson, D.J., Skelton, N.J.,
Fauber, B.P., Pan, B., Malek, S., Stokoe, D., et al. (2012). Small-molecule
ligands bind to a distinct pocket in Ras and inhibit SOS-mediated nucleotide
exchange activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 5299–5304.

Mirzoeva, O.K., Das, D., Heiser, L.M., Bhattacharya, S., Siwak, D., Gendel-
man, R., Bayani, N., Wang, N.J., Neve, R.M., Guan, Y., et al. (2009). Basal sub-
type and MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK)-phosphoinositide 3-kinase feedback
signaling determine susceptibility of breast cancer cells to MEK inhibition.
Cancer Res. 69, 565–572.

Montero-Conde, C., Ruiz-Llorente, S., Dominguez, J.M., Knauf, J.A., Viale, A.,
Sherman, E.J., Ryder, M., Ghossein, R.A., Rosen, N., and Fagin, J.A. (2013).
Relief of feedback inhibition of HER3 transcription by RAF and MEK inhibitors
attenuates their antitumor effects in BRAF-mutant thyroid carcinomas. Cancer
Discov. 3, 520–533.

Scholl, F.A., Dumesic, P.A., Barragan, D.I., Harada, K., Bissonauth, V., Char-
ron, J., and Khavari, P.A. (2007). Mek1/2 MAPK kinases are essential for
mammalian development, homeostasis, and Raf-induced hyperplasia. Dev.
Cell 12, 615–629.

Schubbert, S., Bollag, G., Lyubynska, N., Nguyen, H., Kratz, C.P., Zenker, M.,
Niemeyer, C.M., Molven, A., and Shannon, K. (2007). Biochemical and func-
tional characterization of germ line KRAS mutations. Mol. Cell. Biol. 27,
7765–7770.

Shih, T.Y., Weeks, M.O., Young, H.A., and Scolnick, E.M. (1979). p21 of Kirsten
murine sarcoma virus is thermolabile in a viral mutant temperature sensitive for
the maintenance of transformation. J. Virol. 31, 546.

Shirouzu, M., Koide, H., Fujita-Yoshigaki, J., Oshio, H., Toyama, Y., Yamasaki,
K., Fuhrman, S.A., Villafranca, E., Kaziro, Y., and Yokoyama, S. (1994). Muta-
tions that abolish the ability of Ha-Ras to associate with Raf-1. Oncogene 9,
2153–2157.

Singh, A., Greninger, P., Rhodes, D., Koopman, L., Violette, S., Bardeesy, N.,
and Settleman, J. (2009). A gene expression signature associated with ‘‘K-Ras
addiction’’ reveals regulators of EMT and tumor cell survival. Cancer Cell 15,
489–500.

Sobczak, I., Galabova-Kovacs, G., Sadzak, I., Kren, A., Christofori, G., and
Baccarini, M. (2008). B-Raf is required for ERK activation and tumor progres-
sion in a mouse model of pancreatic beta-cell carcinogenesis. Oncogene 27,
4779–4787.

Moodie, S.A., Willumsen, B.M., Weber, M.J., and Wolfman, A. (1993). Com-
plexes of Ras.GTP with Raf-1 and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase.
Science 260, 1658–1661.

Stokoe, D., and McCormick, F. (1997). Activation of c-Raf-1 by Ras and Src
through different mechanisms: activation in vivo and in vitro. EMBO J. 16,
2384–2396.

280 Cancer Cell 25, March 17, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

Perspective

Stowe, I.B., Mercado, E.L., Stowe, T.R., Bell, E.L., Oses-Prieto, J.A., Herna´ n-
dez, H., Burlingame, A.L., and McCormick, F. (2012). A shared molecular
mechanism underlies the human rasopathies Legius syndrome and
Neuroﬁbromatosis-1. Genes Dev. 26, 1421–1426.

Sun, Q., Burke, J.P., Phan, J., Burns, M.C., Olejniczak, E.T., Waterson, A.G.,
Lee, T., Rossanese, O.W., and Fesik, S.W. (2012). Discovery of small mole-
cules that bind to K-Ras and inhibit Sos-mediated activation. Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. Engl. 51, 6140–6143.

Taparowsky, E., Suard, Y., Fasano, O., Shimizu, K., Goldfarb, M., and Wigler,
M. (1982). Activation of the T24 bladder carcinoma transforming gene is linked
to a single amino acid change. Nature 300, 762–765.

To, M.D., Wong, C.E., Karnezis, A.N., Del Rosario, R., Di Lauro, R., and Bal-
main, A. (2008). Kras regulatory elements and exon 4A determine mutation
speciﬁcity in lung cancer. Nat. Genet. 40, 1240–1244.

Trahey, M., and McCormick, F. (1987). A cytoplasmic protein stimulates
normal N-ras p21 GTPase, but does not affect oncogenic mutants. Science
238, 542–545.

Turke, A.B., Song, Y., Costa, C., Cook, R., Arteaga, C.L., Asara, J.M., and
Engelman, J.A. (2012). MEK inhibition leads to PI3K/AKT activation by relieving
a negative feedback on ERBB receptors. Cancer Res. 72, 3228–3237.

Van Aelst, L., Barr, M., Marcus, S., Polverino, A., and Wigler, M. (1993). Com-
plex formation between RAS and RAF and other protein kinases. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 90, 6213–6217.

Villalonga, P., Lo´ pez-Alcala´ , C., Bosch, M., Chiloeches, A., Rocamora, N., Gil,
J., Marais, R., Marshall, C.J., Bachs, O., and Agell, N. (2001). Calmodulin binds
to K-Ras, but not to H- or N-Ras, and modulates its downstream signaling.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 21, 7345–7354.

Vogt, P.K. (2012). Retroviral oncogenes: a historical primer. Nat. Rev. Cancer
12, 639–648.

Warne, P.H., Viciana, P.R., and Downward, J. (1993). Direct interaction of Ras
and the amino-terminal region of Raf-1 in vitro. Nature 364, 352–355.

Weiwer, M., Spoonamore, J., Wei, J., Guichard, B., Ross, N.T., Masson, K.,
Silkworth, W., Dandapani, S., Palmer, M., Scherer, C.A., et al. (2012). A potent
and selective quinoxalinone-based STK33 inhibitor does not show synthetic
lethality in KRAS-dependent cells. ACS Med. Chem. Lett. 3, 1034–1038.

Wu, X., Upadhyaya, P., Villalona-Calero, M.A., Briesewitz, R., and Pei, D. (2013).
Inhibition of Ras-effector interaction by cyclic peptides. Medchemcomm 4,
378–382.

Xu, J., Hedberg, C., Dekker, F.J., Li, Q., Haigis, K.M., Hwang, E., Waldmann,
H., and Shannon, K. (2012). Inhibiting the palmitoylation/depalmitoylation
cycle selectively reduces the growth of hematopoietic cells expressing onco-
genic Nras. Blood 119, 1032–1035.

Yang, M.H., Laurent, G., Bause, A.S., Spang, R., German, N., Haigis, M.C., and
Haigis, K.M. (2013). HDAC6 and SIRT2 regulate the acetylation state and
oncogenic activity of mutant K-RAS. Mol. Cancer Res. 11, 1072–1077.

Yao, Y., Li, W., Wu, J., Germann, U.A., Su, M.S., Kuida, K., and Boucher, D.M.
(2003). Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 is necessary for mesoderm dif-
ferentiation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 12759–12764.

Ying, H., Kimmelman, A.C., Lyssiotis, C.A., Hua, S., Chu, G.C., Fletcher-
Sananikone, E., Locasale, J.W., Son, J., Zhang, H., Coloff, J.L., et al. (2012).
Oncogenic Kras maintains pancreatic tumors through regulation of anabolic
glucose metabolism. Cell 149, 656–670.

Young, A., Lou, D., and McCormick, F. (2013). Oncogenic and wild-type Ras
play divergent roles in the regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
signaling. Cancer Discov. 3, 112–123.

Zhang, X.F., Settleman, J., Kyriakis, J.M., Takeuchi-Suzuki, E., Elledge, S.J.,
Marshall, M.S., Bruder, J.T., Rapp, U.R., and Avruch, J. (1993). Normal and
oncogenic p21ras proteins bind to the amino-terminal regulatory domain of
c-Raf-1. Nature 364, 308–313.

Wahlstrom, A.M., Cutts, B.A., Karlsson, C., Andersson, K.M., Liu, M., Sjogren,
A.K., Swolin, B., Young, S.G., and Bergo, M.O. (2007). Rce1 deﬁciency accel-
erates the development of K-RAS-induced myeloproliferative disease. Blood
109, 763–768.

Zimmermann, G., Papke, B., Ismail, S., Vartak, N., Chandra, A., Hoffmann, M.,
Hahn, S.A., Triola, G., Wittinghofer, A., Bastiaens, P.I., and Waldmann, H.
(2013). Small molecule inhibition of the KRAS-PDEd interaction impairs onco-
genic KRAS signalling. Nature 497, 638–642.

Cancer Cell 25, March 17, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 281

