British Journal of Cancer (2008) 98, 256 – 262
& 2008 Cancer Research UK All rights reserved 0007 – 0920/08 $30.00

www.bjcancer.com

Minireview
Nf2/Merlin: a coordinator of receptor signalling and intercellular
contact





































M Curto1 and AI McClatchey*,1
1Massachusetts General Hospital Center for Cancer Research and Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 149 13th Street, Charlestown, MA
02129, USA

This review explores possible mechanisms by which the neurofibromatosis type-2 tumour suppressor Merlin regulates contact-
dependent inhibition of proliferation. Starting from an evolutionary perspective, the concurrent emergence of intercellular contacts
and proliferation control in multicellular organisms is first considered. Following a brief survey of the molecular and subcellular milieus
in which merlin performs its function, the importance of different cellular and biological contexts in defining the function of merlin is
discussed. Finally, an integrated model for merlin and the Ezrin, Radixin, and Moesin (ERM) proteins functioning in the regulation of
cellular interfaces is proposed.
British Journal of Cancer (2008) 98, 256 – 262. doi:10.1038/sj.bjc.6604002 www.bjcancer.com
Published online 30 October 2007
& 2008 Cancer Research UK

Keywords: Merlin; Ezrin; EGFR; contact-inhibition; adherens junctions; cytoskeleton

Indeed,

the specific alterations,

All cancers result from the cumulative acquisition of molecular
defects within a basic core of cellular functions that control
proliferation, apoptosis, and invasiveness (Hanahan and Weinberg,
2000). Regardless of
their combined
effects must also disable the mechanism of contact-dependent
inhibition of proliferation, namely the cell’s ability to prevent
activation of the proliferation machinery in response to contact
with neighbouring cells.
loss of contact-dependent
inhibition of proliferation is an absolute conditio sine qua non
for the development and progression of any solid tumour. This
phenomenon was first described in the early 1960s with the
observation that normal cultured diploid cells can reach a
maximum saturation density beyond which cell number and
DNA synthesis are unaffected by media replenishment (Levine
et al, 1965). This finding also introduced the idea that upon
adhering to each other, cells can enter and maintain a quiescent
state despite the unlimited availability of nutrients and growth-
promoting factors – a phenomenon that occurs in vivo in all adult
solid tissues. Conversely, the uncoupling of mitogenic signals from
the blockage imposed by cell:cell adhesion is a physiological event
during embryogenesis and tissue homoeostasis and regeneration.
Therefore, highly regulated molecular machinery must exist to
conditionally establish and resolve the link between intercellular
contacts and mitogenic signalling. Although still poorly under-
stood, the molecular mechanisms that coordinate intercellular
adhesion and cell proliferation are beginning to emerge (Brunton
et al, 2004). A detailed understanding of the molecular components

*Correspondence: Dr AI McClatchey;
E-mail: mcclatch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu
Received 30 May 2007; revised 16 August 2007; accepted 29 August
2007; published online 30 October 2007

and events that govern this phenomenon will be essential to
understanding and intercepting the process of tumourigenesis.

Mounting evidence indicates that the neurofibromatosis type-2
(NF2) tumour suppressor, Merlin (also known as schwannomin) is
a critical regulator of contact-dependent inhibition of prolifera-
tion. Mutations in the NF2 tumour suppressor gene underlie the
familial cancer syndrome NF2, which is characterised by the
development of tumours of the nervous system such as bilateral
vestibular schwannomas and meningiomas (Baser et al, 2002).
Biallelic NF2 inactivation also underlies the development of many
sporadic schwannomas and meningiomas, as well as malignant
mesothelioma, an essentially untreatable cancer. Despite the
restricted spectrum of
tumours associated with loss of NF2,
Merlin is a widely expressed protein and studies from several
model organisms have shown that Merlin plays an important role
in the function of many different cell types (McClatchey and
Giovannini, 2005). Although its molecular function has been
elusive, recent studies suggest that Merlin can coordinate the
establishment of
intercellular contacts with the concomitant
suppression of mitogenic signals at the membrane.

EVOLUTION

The transition from prokaryotes to early unicellular eukaryotes
was accompanied by the generation of a variety of membrane
subdomains including cortical membrane patches, protrusions and
‘landmarks’ utilised during locomotion, budding, or conjugation.
This increased complexity in cellular polarisation was likely
flexible membranes and a
facilitated by the acquisition of
primordial
together with the
emergence of small GTPases that enabled directional (exo- and
endocytic) membrane flow, and localised cytoskeleton assembly
(Jekely, 2003; Nelson, 2003). On the eve of multicellular life,

cytoskeleton (endoskeleton),

the most

unicellular polarity had evolved a sophisticated membrane
complexity with specialised subdomains of disparate forms and
functions such as cilia, flagella, cytostomata, and pseudopodia.
Unicellular choanoflagellates,
likely cenancestor of
metazoa, already utilised adhesion machineries for food capture
or colony formation, and transmembrane receptors that can
respond to environmental cues. In fact,
it has been recently
discovered that proteins (spectrin, cadherins, G protein-coupled
receptors) and interaction motifs (SH2, EGF) thought to be unique
to metazoa were already in place and cell proliferation was already
under the control of receptor and non-receptor tyrosine kinases
(King et al, 2003; King, 2004).

Unicellular organisms were capable of organizing their mem-
branes and pacing proliferation in response to extracellular
the transition to multicellularity necessitated the
signals, but
structural and functional coordination of
these membrane
subdomains at
the interface between cells. This might have
occurred via the molecular rewiring of existing adhesive and
transmembrane signalling apparata utilising intracellular proteins/
modules capable of orchestrating multiple interactions at the
plasma membrane. Such a function could have been carried out by
scaffolding proteins containing,
for example, PDZ and LIM
domains but these were already found in prokaryotes and likely
regulated polarity (Te Velthuis et al, 2007). The further increase in
membrane complexity inherent in the transition to multicellularity
was accompanied by the emergence of new protein domains,
including the four-point-one, ezrin, radixin, moesin
several
(FERM) domain.
Indeed, 14 orthologous groups of FERM
domain-containing proteins can be identified in worms, flies,
and mammals suggesting that a dramatic expansion of
this
superfamily occurred in the earliest metazoa (Bretscher et al,
2002). The trilobed FERM domain is generally thought to mediate
membrane association and can be tethered to a number of
different functional domains. In a subset of proteins, including
Merlin and the ERM proteins, the FERM domain is appended to
modules that link it to the cytoskeleton, and poise these proteins to
coordinate multiple signalling events at
the membrane with
specific architectural features of the cell. Thus, the FERM domains
appear to have evolved within an already polarised cellular context
to further organise membrane domains in response to the
requirements imposed by multicellularity.

Nutrient availability is the major regulator of proliferation in
unicellular organisms; under conditions of unlimited availability
proliferation appears to be the default. The complex morpho-
genetic processes and compartmentalised tissue functions that
evolved in metazoa necessitated the ability to inhibit cell
proliferation, effectively disengaging the proliferative machinery
from that which senses and responds to surrounding conditions
(Edgar, 2006). Among FERM domain-containing proteins, the
function of the tumour suppressor Merlin is most clearly linked to
the inhibition of cell proliferation. In fact, accumulating evidence
suggests that Merlin physically and functionally links cell:cell
communication with negative regulation of proliferation, a
conclusion drawn from molecular, cellular, and biological studies
(reviewed in McClatchey and Giovannini, 2005).

MOLECULAR-CELLULAR CONTEXT

Studies of the closely related ERM proteins have made important
contributions to our understanding of the molecular function of
merlin. The term ‘membrane:cytoskeleton linker’ used to describe
both Merlin and the ERM proteins highlights the bipartite
subcellular context in which they operate. A standard view of
ERM function depicts cycling between ‘active’ and ‘inactive’ states
and considers ‘activity’ to be the tethering of certain membrane
proteins to the cytoskeleton (Bretscher et al, 2002). Although
studies of Merlin yield many parallels, it is increasingly apparent

Merlin as a tumour suppressor
M Curto and AI McClatchey

257

that more sophisticated models of Merlin (and ERM) function
must be considered. More refined models would consider the
possibility that Merlin can exist in more than two states and can
bring together and regulate multiple partners.
Indeed, an
increasing number of proteins have been reported to physically
interact with Merlin and an increasing number of functional
activities have been ascribed to Merlin (McClatchey and
Giovannini, 2005). Collectively, these studies suggest a physical
and functional role for Merlin in regulating cell:cell adhesion,
transmembrane
signalling,
and in modulating actin cytoskeleton dynamics. Could Merlin do
all this?

signalling receptors, Rho-GTPase

The membrane

Most studies conclude that membrane association is necessary
for the growth-suppressing function of Merlin. Mutant versions of
Merlin that cannot localise to the membrane cannot inhibit cell
In addition, Merlin can associate with several
proliferation.
including both adhesion receptors and
membrane proteins,
membrane
receptors
cell proliferation and
differentiation.

regulate

that

 / 

In normal cells, Merlin is recruited to cadherin-containing
complexes at nascent cell:cell contacts and is regulated by cell:cell
adhesion. Conversely, primary Nf2
cells of several types do not
form stable adherens junctions (AJs) (Lallemand et al, 2003).
Merlin has also been reported to associate with other types of
adhesion receptors, including the cell:extracellular matrix receptor
CD44 and b1-integrin, perhaps reflecting alternative ways for
merlin to coordinate the receipt of
information from the
extracellular
environment with the proliferative machinery
(Morrison et al, 2001; Fernandez-Valle et al, 2002). Indeed, in
some cells the association of Merlin with CD44 has been shown to
be required for contact-dependent
inhibition of proliferation
(Morrison et al, 2001).

Recent studies suggest that Merlin directly controls the surface
availability and function of membrane receptors that regulate
proliferation and differentiation in both Drosophila and mamma-
lian cells (Figure 1). In the fly, loss of both Merlin and the related
tumour suppressor, Expanded, leads to increased surface levels
and altered distribution of certain membrane receptors including
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), Notch, Patched, and
Fat, suggesting that Merlin normally promotes the clearance of
receptors from the plasma membrane. This was shown to be
accompanied by increased signalling output for some receptors
(Maitra et al, 2006). In cultured mammalian cells, Merlin inhibits
the internalisation, effector complexing, and downstream signal-
ling of activated EGFR upon cell:cell contact, consistent with the
idea that Merlin normally sequesters EGFR into a non-signalling
plasma membrane compartment; as follows, proliferation and
EGFR activation are inhibited at high cell density in wild-type but
not Nf2
cells (Curto et al, 2007). Although these two studies
seem to reach differing views of how Merlin regulates membrane
receptor surface availability/function – in one case promoting
turnover and the other stabilising surface receptors – it is possible
that the primary function of Merlin in both cases is to retain
receptors in a certain membrane compartment and that
the
consequence of that is dependent upon species, cell context, cell
type or even the identity of the receptor itself. Alternatively, these
differences could reflect the concomitant loss of Expanded in the
fly studies (Maitra et al, 2006).

 / 

Increasing evidence suggests that Merlin mediates contact-
dependent inhibition of proliferation by both sensing cell:cell
contact and intercepting mitogenic signalling initiated at
the
plasma membrane. A simultaneous, contact-dependent complex-
ing of Merlin to both signalling and adhesion receptors would be a
simple strategy for accomplishing this (Figure 2). In mammalian
cells Merlin associates with EGFR in a contact-dependent manner;

& 2008 Cancer Research UK

British Journal of Cancer (2008) 98(2), 256 – 262

258

Merlin as a tumour suppressor
M Curto and AI McClatchey

A

B

Figure 1 Merlin differentially controls the membrane distribution of EGFR in mammalian vs insect cells. (A) Mosaic culture of wild-type mouse epithelial
cells surrounding a clone of Nf2-deficient cells marked with a green fluorescent protein-expressing adenovirus (green). Upon stimulation (30 min),
fluorescent EGF (Texas Red conjugated) is internalised and concentrated within intracellular vesicles in cells that do not express Merlin, but not in wild-type
cells (Curto et al, 2007). Bottom panel, Texas Red EGF. (B) Drosophila eye imaginal disc. Mutant clones containing mutations in both merlin and Expanded
are identified by the loss of Merlin staining (green). In these cells, the steady-state levels of EGFR are increased (Maitra et al, 2006) (figure kindly provided by
Sushmita Maitra and Richard Fehon, University of Chicago). Bottom panel, EGFR.

þ

þ

– H

in contrast

its immediate effectors,

this association requires the tandem PDZ domain-containing
adaptor Na
exchanger regulatory factor 1; ERM-binding
protein of 50 kDa (NHE-RF1/EBP50; hereafter referred to as NHE-
RF1), which can associate with both Merlin and EGFR (Lazar et al,
2004; Curto et al, 2007). In fact, NHE-RF1 can also associate
with the ERM proteins and, either directly or indirectly with a
variety of receptors,
including ErbB2 and the platelet-derived
growth factor receptor (PDGFR) (James et al, 2004; Rangwala et al,
2005). The latter is particularly notable given the recent report
that Merlin can also negatively regulate signalling downstream of
PDGFR (Morrison et al, 2007); this study, which did not examine
NHE-RF1, concluded that Merlin interfered with PDGFR signalling
downstream of
to the
aforementioned studies of Merlin:EGFR. Notably, however,
NHE-RF1 has been reported to associate with internal PDZ
binding sites in the EGFR cytoplasmic domain that are in close
proximity to the major effector binding sites (Lazar et al, 2004); in
contrast, NHE-RF1 associates with the extreme C-terminus of
PDGFR and therefore may not alter effector association. Interest-
ingly, a role for the closely related NHE-RF2 adaptor in facilitating
an association between N-cadherin and PDGFR has recently
been reported (Theisen et al, 2007). Perhaps the nature of the
NHE-RF:receptor association, along with the spatiotemporal
specificity achieved by associating with Merlin and/or the ERM
proteins, can impose differential physical and signalling regulation
upon different membrane receptors. It will be interesting to see
whether the association of Merlin with analogous PDZ adaptors is
important for receptor surface abundance in Drosophila. The
output of a variety of receptors could be regulated by Merlin
using this general mechanism, potentially explaining the many
intracellular pathways that have been reported to be affected by
Merlin.

The actin cytoskeleton

Many studies indicate a functional association between Merlin and
the actin cytoskeleton. Biochemically, Merlin can clearly associate
with actin in vitro. Merlin does not localise to stress fibres and
instead, like the ERM proteins, appears to decorate the cortical
actin network (James et al, 2001). Although lacking the bona fide
carboxyl-C-terminal actin-binding site found in the ERM proteins,
Merlin may instead directly bind F-actin via its N-terminal domain
(Brault et al, 2001; James et al, 2001). Alternatively,
indirect
tethering of Merlin to the cytoskeleton may occur via actin-binding
interactors such as bII-spectrin/fodrin, or heterodimerisation with
other ERMs (reviewed in McClatchey and Giovannini, 2005). The
importance of actin cytoskeleton association is underscored by the
fact that association of Merlin with the cortical actin network is
required for growth suppression and inhibition of EGFR signalling
(B Cole, MC, and AIM, unpublished data).

A functional association between Merlin and the cortical actin
cytoskeleton is also suggested by the fact that loss of merlin is
accompanied by disruption of cortical actin structures in some
cell types (Bashour et al, 2002; Lallemand et al, 2003). The
disorganised actin cytoskeleton observed in some Nf2
cells
could reflect the ability of Merlin to anchor actin to the membrane,
to inhibit signals that maintain a highly dynamic actin cyto-
skeleton, or both. For example, Merlin can inhibit both Arp2/3-
(Manchanda et al, 2005) and Rac-induced actin assembly (Pelton
et al, 1998).

 / 

Regulation

Beyond its physical identity, the membrane:cytoskeleton interface
is a dynamic compartment in which Merlin, the ERM proteins, and

British Journal of Cancer (2008) 98(2), 256 – 262

& 2008 Cancer Research UK

Unstable

Cell : cell adhesion

Stable

Merlin as a tumour suppressor
M Curto and AI McClatchey

259

Cadherin

RTK

NHERF

Catenins

GEFs

RhoGDI

Rac
GTP

Rac
GDP

N-Wasp

Spectrin

Arp2/3

N-Wasp

Pak

MYPT1

CIP-17

Merlin

ON

Cell proliferation

OFF

Figure 2 Merlin coordinates membrane receptor signalling and cell:cell contact. Schematic depiction of the basic molecular circuitry utilised by Merlin to
link intercellular adhesion with the regulation of membrane receptor signalling. As an example, the relationships among Merlin, Cadherin and the mitogenic
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) EGFR, are shown here. (Left) In conditions where cell:cell contacts are minimal or unstable, such as remodelling tissues or
sparse cultured cells, signals from activated RTKs lead to instability of cadherin-catenin-containing complexes, highly dynamic actin cytoskeleton, and
increased activation of Rac which, in turn, keeps Merlin inactive. Proliferative signals are transduced unopposed. (Right) The progressive recruitment of Merlin
to newly formed cell:cell contacts is accompanied by a decline in Rac activity, decreased turnover of the cortical actin cytoskeleton, and AJ stabilisation. At the
same time, complexing of Merlin to EGFR:E-cadherin could concomitantly tether it to the more stable actin network and restrict EGFR to an insoluble
adhesive compartment from which it can neither signal nor internalise (see also Figure 1). At late confluence, EGFR signalling induced by serum or exogenous
EGF is disabled and proliferative signals are silenced. These events do not occur in the absence of Merlin.

the molecular circuitry that controls their localisation and function
operate. A central node of this circuitry is occupied by the Rho
family of small GTPases, well-established regulators of actin
cytoskeleton remodelling and membrane trafficking. In contrast to
the Rho-dependent activation of the ERM proteins, Rac-dependent
phosphorylation of a particular C-terminal serine residue (S518)
leads to Merlin inactivation (Shaw et al, 2001). This is generally
thought to involve the phosphorylation-dependent transition from
a ‘closed’ to an ‘open’ conformation; however, while the lack of
S518 phosphorylation correlates well with the growth-suppressing
function of Merlin, it has not been definitively shown that active
Merlin is necessarily ‘closed’. Moreover, Merlin can be phosphory-
lated at residues other than S518 but the functional consequences
of such regulation are not yet known (McClatchey and Giovannini,
2005). Notably, S518 phosphorylation can be reversed by the
myosin phosphatase MYPT-1-PP1d (Jin et al, 2006, and references
therein). This provides a potentially interesting point of regulatory
convergence between Merlin and the ERM proteins given that
myosin phosphatase has also been shown to associate with and
induce dephosphorylation of the ERM proteins. Another point is
provided by recent studies indicating that the Ste-20 kinase Slik
can induce phosphorylation of both Merlin and the ERM proteins
in the fly (Hughes and Fehon, 2006). Importantly, by analogy to
the ability of
the ERM proteins to negatively regulate Rho

signalling, Merlin can negatively regulate Rac signalling (Shaw
et al, 2001), perhaps through an association with the Rac regulator
Rho-GDI or the Rac effector Pak or by directly controlling
membrane association of Rac in some cells (Kissil et al, 2002;
Okada et al, 2005). These core regulatory loops underlie the
complex nature of Merlin/ERM-regulated signalling at
the
membrane:cytoskeleton interface.

BIOLOGICAL CONTEXTS

The ability of Merlin to physically coordinate multiple signalling
entities as described above only hints at the combinatorial level of
complexity that is possible, given that Merlin can sense different
types of cell contact and regulate multiple membrane receptors.
The outcome of this coordinated regulation is likely to be context
dependent
for regulating
cell:cell contact and proliferation during tissue morphogenesis in
both developmental and regenerative processes is likely to make
these contexts critically dependent upon Merlin function.

in vivo. The exquisite requirement

For example, Nf2 is an essential gene in Drosophila since null
mutations result in embryonic lethality. Hypomorphic mutants
display tissue overgrowth consistent with its anti-proliferative
function. Recent
studies have used clonal deletion/somatic

& 2008 Cancer Research UK

British Journal of Cancer (2008) 98(2), 256 – 262

260

Merlin as a tumour suppressor
M Curto and AI McClatchey

recombination in developing imaginal discs to generate cells
lacking both Merlin and the related tumour suppressor Expanded
(Mer/Ex). The hyperplastic outgrowth of the mutant clones in
several adult structures (eye, wing, leg) appears to result from the
combined effect of increased proliferation and reduced apoptosis
during development of these structures and is associated with
increased surface abundance of several signalling and adhesion
receptors (Edgar, 2006; Maitra et al, 2006).
In this regard,
persistent EGFR signalling in Mer/Ex mutants is likely to
antagonise normal apoptosis-inducing signals within the develop-
ing imaginal discs and results in increased cell survival (Yang and
Baker, 2003).

Signalling via the recently characterised Salvador – Warts –
Hippo (SWH) pathway is also elevated in Mer/Ex double mutant
cells (Edgar, 2006; Harvey and Tapon, 2007). It has been proposed
that Merlin and Expanded are upstream regulators of the SWH
pathway, which suppresses Yki-dependent transcription of CycE,
DIAP, and Mer/Ex themselves. Direct molecular links between
Merlin and components of this pathway have not yet been found
and the identity of the upstream signal(s) that are regulated by
Mer/Ex is still unknown. The extent of these phenotypes might
also reflect a synergistic effect of the combined Mer/Ex mutation.
However, consistent with the theme derived from studies of
cultured mammalian cells, the adhesion molecule Fat appears to
confer contact-dependent regulation of the pathway (Harvey and
Tapon, 2007).

Merlin is also required for embryonic development in zebrafish,
as embryos fail to develop after anti-sense-mediated inactivation
of the nf2 gene. Loss-of-function nf2 mutants display biliary
hyperplasia and formation of choledochal cysts indicating that
Merlin is an important regulator of biliary tract development in
zebrafish (Sadler et al, 2005). These findings complement the
previous observations that both hepatocellular and cholangio-
cellular neoplasia develop in the liver of Nf2 heterozygous mutant
mice (McClatchey et al, 1998).

 / 

þ /2Nf2

The generation of Nf2-mutant mouse models has contributed
important information regarding Merlin function in development
and tumourigenesis. Merlin is required for the normal develop-
ment of several tissues; Nf2-null embryos fail to gastrulate due to
extra-embryonic defects (McClatchey and Giovannini, 2005). This
defect is rescued in mosaic Nf2
embryos which go on
to develop a number of additional abnormalities, including in
heart and skeletal development and in neural tube closure (AIM
unpublished data). In fact, recent studies have shown that targeted
deletion of Nf2 in the developing nervous system causes neural
tube defects from impaired tissue fusion (McLaughlin et al, 2007).
Abnormal cell detachment and apoptosis are found at the leading
front of unfused folds and the apical
side of ventricular
neuroepithelia. These phenotypes appear to derive from the
inability to form apico-junctional complexes (McLaughlin et al,
2007), consistent with the role of Merlin in controlling formation
and stabilisation of AJs (Lallemand et al, 2003).

þ / 

Heterozygous Nf2

-mutant mice develop a spectrum of
unusually highly metastatic tumours, mainly osteosarcomas,
fibrosarcomas, and liver carcinomas,
loss of the
wild-type allele. Although these mice do not spontaneously
develop schwannomas, meningiomas, or mesotheliomas, mouse
models for each have been developed through the use of
conditional mutant Nf2 alleles (Giovannini et al, 2000). Altogether,
these studies from different organisms and biological settings
reveal that perturbing Merlin function yields dramatic conse-
quences over a biological continuum from development to cancer.

that exhibit

PERSPECTIVES

In simple two-dimensional cell culture models the establishment
of cell:cell contact is progressive. Despite a similar morphological

appearance, the cellular physiologies of early vs late confluent
cultures are remarkably different and signalling that occurs in
non-contacting cells can still operate in early but not late stages of
confluence (Rothen-Rutishauser et al, 1998). Silencing of proli-
ferative signals from the time of initial closure of a monolayer
requires a few days to complete (Curto et al, 2007). Indeed, our
understanding of membrane receptor signalling in cultured cells
may be frequently confounded by inadequately defined cell
densities. An example of how Merlin could mediate the progressive
coordination of cadherin-based contact with the inhibition of
EGFR signalling is presented in the model in Figure 2. By operating
in a reverse fashion, this molecular circuitry could also control the
disassembly of cell:cell contacts in response to morphogenetic or
regenerative stimuli. For example, receptor and/or non-receptor
tyrosine kinase activity can destabilise cell adhesions directly by
phosphorylating cadherin-catenin complexes (Brunton et al,
2004), or indirectly by promoting Rac/Pak-mediated inactivation
of Merlin (Kissil et al, 2002; Shaw et al, 2001). In this scenario,
Merlin could serve as a three-channel rheostat linking, (1) the
metering of lateral surface area engaged in intercellular contacts, to
(2) the localised modulation of specific signalling receptors at the
interfacing membranes, to (3) the tensegrity of the cortical actin
cytoskeleton. Thresholds of receptor activity could be affected
by normal or pathological changes in the stoichiometry of these
interactions. Through association with the cortical cytoskeleton
and a reciprocal functional relationships with Rho-GTPases that
regulate actomyosin contractility, Merlin and the ERM proteins
seem poised to play an important role in linking changes in
cellular tensegrity to mitogenic signalling output.

Increasing evidence suggest that the function of Merlin in
stabilising AJs could be opposed by that of the ERM proteins.
Despite their similarity, the ERM proteins cannot compensate for
Merlin loss and vice versa; moreover, Merlin and the ERM proteins
can form heterodimers and exhibit overlapping but distinct
membrane localisations. In mature epithelia, the ERM proteins
are largely restricted to the apical domain where they are required
for proper localisation and regulation of apical surface proteins,
including NHE-RF1 itself (reviewed in Fievet et al, 2007). The
coexistence of contacting (junctional) and non-contacting (apical)
surfaces within the same epithelial cell necessitates mechanisms
for forming, maintaining, and reversing these compartments. In
this context, Merlin and the ERM proteins could play opposing
functions to partition junctional and apical membrane domains in
mature epithelia.

Interestingly, a series of in vitro studies also support a role for
active Ezrin in destabilising cell contacts (Pujuguet et al, 2003;
Elliott et al, 2004, 2005). Loss-of-function studies in Caenorhabditis
elegans, Drosophila, and mouse reveal defects specifically in
morphogenetic processes involving epithelial remodelling and
dynamic instability of intercellular contacts (Fievet et al, 2007).
These studies suggest that the ERM proteins are necessary for
proper AJ remodelling during epithelial morphogenesis. Notably,
in some developing epithelia,
including the mouse blastomere,
intestinal epithelium and epidermis, Ezrin is transiently and
markedly concentrated along cell:cell boundaries where Merlin
normally localises (Dard et al, 2004; Saotome et al, 2004; A
Gladden and AIM, unpublished data). An intriguing possibility is
that
the coexistence of Merlin and Ezrin within the same
membrane domain could maintain a dynamic state of the cell:cell
interface (Figure 3). This could be particularly important
in
proliferating epithelial
tissues where morphogenetic processes
involving the establishment or remodelling of cell contacts are
coordinated with proliferative and differentiation signals. The
progressive partitioning of
these proteins into junctional and
apical domains, respectively, would then yield a mature stable
epithelium. Given the prominent
in
maintaining organised apical surfaces
(ie plasma membrane
domains devoid of intercellular contacts), and that of Merlin in

role of ERM proteins

British Journal of Cancer (2008) 98(2), 256 – 262

& 2008 Cancer Research UK

Merlin as a tumour suppressor
M Curto and AI McClatchey

Apical

Lateral

ERM

Merlin

261

Dynamic

cell : cell adhesion

Stable

cell : cell adhesion

Figure 3 Merlin and the Ezrin, Radixin, and Moesin (ERM) proteins as regulators of cellular interfaces. In multicellular organisms, a regulated instability of
specific intercellular contacts is required during morphogenesis and tissue regeneration. While normally localised in the apical domain of stable epithelia
(right), the ERM protein Ezrin can also be found within dynamic cell:cell contacts (left), where Merlin also localises. As contacts stabilise to form mature
epithelia, this temporary intermixing of Merlin and Ezrin at membrane surfaces is resolved upon their partitioning into junctional and apical domains,
respectively (right). Given the prominent role of the ERM proteins in maintaining organised apical surfaces (ie plasma membrane domains devoid of
intercellular contacts), and that of Merlin in stabilising cell:cell contacts, localised intermixing could counteract the function of each, promoting a dynamic state
of intercellular adhesion. Ezrin, blue; Merlin, red.

stabilising cell:cell contacts, localised intermixing could counteract
the function of each, promoting a dynamic state of intercellular
adhesion. A compelling parallel is provided by recent studies linking
Ezrin over-expression to tumour metastasis – a fundamental
property of which is junctional instability (Khanna et al, 2004; Yu
et al, 2004; Elliott et al, 2005).

While more detailed investigations are necessary to verify such a
model, an essential function of Merlin and the ERM proteins may
be to work in concert to physically and functionally regulate
the cellular interfaces of metazoa. This possibility has also a
fascinating, yet unsettling, implication: that cancers may arise

from deregulating the very same mechanisms upon which multi-
cellular life is built.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Rick Fehon for discussions and the images in Figure 1b,
Jessica Casaletto and other members of the McClatchey laboratory
for discussions and comments on the manuscript. AIM is funded
by the National Institutes of Health and Department of Defense
Neurofibromatosis Research Program.

REFERENCES

Baser ME, Friedman JM, Wallace AJ, Ramsden RT, Joe H, Evans DG (2002)
Evaluation of clinical diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis 2.
Neurology 59: 1759 – 1765

Bashour AM, Meng JJ,

Ip W, MacCollin M, Ratner N (2002) The
neurofibromatosis type 2 gene product, merlin, reverses the F-actin
cytoskeletal defects in primary human Schwannoma cells. Mol Cell Biol
22: 1150 – 1157

Brault E, Gautreau A, Lamarine M, Callebaut I, Thomas G, Goutebroze L
(2001) Normal membrane localization and actin association of the NF2
tumor suppressor protein are dependent on folding of its N-terminal
domain. J Cell Sci 114: 1901 – 1912

Bretscher A, Edwards K, Fehon RG (2002) ERM proteins and merlin:

integrators at the cell cortex. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3: 586 – 599

Brunton VG, MacPherson IR, Frame MC (2004) Cell adhesion receptors,
tyrosine kinases and actin modulators: a complex three-way circuitry.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1692: 121 – 144

Curto M, Cole BK, Lallemand D, Liu CH, McClatchey AI (2007) Contact-
dependent inhibition of EGFR signaling by Nf2/Merlin. J Cell Biol 177:
893 – 903

Dard N, Louvet-Vallee S, Santa-Maria A, Maro B (2004) Phosphorylation of
ezrin on threonine T567 plays a crucial role during compaction in the
mouse early embryo. Dev Biol 271: 87 – 97

Edgar BA (2006) From cell structure to transcription: Hippo forges a new

path. Cell 124: 267 – 273

Elliott BE, Meens JA, SenGupta SK, Louvard D, Arpin M (2005) The
membrane cytoskeletal crosslinker ezrin is required for metastasis of
breast carcinoma cells. Breast Cancer Res 7: R365 – R373

Elliott BE, Qiao H, Louvard D, Arpin M (2004) Co-operative effect of c-Src
and ezrin in deregulation of cell – cell contacts and scattering of
mammary carcinoma cells. J Cell Biochem 92: 16 – 28

Fernandez-Valle C, Tang Y, Ricard J, Rodenas-Ruano A, Taylor A, Hackler
E, Biggerstaff J, Iacovelli J (2002) Paxillin binds schwannomin and
regulates its density-dependent localization and effect on cell morphology.
Nat Genet 31: 354 – 362

Fievet B, Louvard D, Arpin M (2007) ERM proteins in epithelial cell

organization and functions. Biochim Biophys Acta 1773: 653 – 660

Giovannini M, Robanus-Maandag E, van der Valk M, Niwa-Kawakita M,
Abramowski V, Goutebroze L, Woodruff JM, Berns A, Thomas G (2000)
Conditional biallelic Nf2 mutation in the mouse promotes manifestations
of human neurofibromatosis type 2. Genes Dev 14: 1617 – 1630

Hanahan D, Weinberg RA (2000) The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100: 57 – 70
Harvey K, Tapon N (2007) The Salvador – Warts – Hippo pathway – an

emerging tumour-suppressor network. Nat Rev Cancer 7: 182 – 191

Hughes SC, Fehon RG (2006) Phosphorylation and activity of the tumor
suppressor Merlin and the ERM protein Moesin are coordinately
regulated by the Slik kinase. J Cell Biol 175: 305 – 313

James MF, Beauchamp RL, Manchanda N, Kazlauskas A, Ramesh V (2004)
A NHERF binding site links the beta PDGFR to the cytoskeleton and
regulates cell spreading and migration. J Cell Sci 117: 2951 – 2961

James MF, Manchanda N, Gonzalez-Agosti C, Hartwig JH, Ramesh V (2001)
The neurofibromatosis 2 protein product merlin selectively binds F-actin
but not G-actin, and stabilizes the filaments through a lateral association.
Biochem J 356: 377 – 386

Jekely G (2003) Small GTPases and the evolution of the eukaryotic cell.

Bioessays 25: 1129 – 1138

Jin H, Sperka T, Herrlich P, Morrison H (2006) Tumorigenic transforma-
tion by CPI-17 through inhibition of a merlin phosphatase. Nature 442:
576 – 579

Khanna C, Wan X, Bose S, Cassaday R, Olomu O, Mendoza A, Yeung C,
Gorlick R, Hewitt SM, Helman LJ (2004) The membrane-cytoskeleton

& 2008 Cancer Research UK

British Journal of Cancer (2008) 98(2), 256 – 262

262

Merlin as a tumour suppressor
M Curto and AI McClatchey

linker ezrin is necessary for osteosarcoma metastasis. Nat Med 10:
182 – 186

King N (2004) The unicellular ancestry of animal development. Dev Cell 7:

313 – 325

King N, Hittinger CT, Carroll SB (2003) Evolution of key cell signaling and
adhesion protein families predates animal origins. Science 301: 361 – 363
Kissil JL, Johnson KC, Eckman MS, Jacks T (2002) Merlin phosphorylation
by p21-activated kinase 2 and effects of phosphorylation on merlin
localization. J Biol Chem 277: 10394 – 10399

Lallemand D, Curto M, Saotome I, Giovannini M, McClatchey AI (2003)
NF2 deficiency promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis by destabilizing
adherens junctions. Genes Dev 17: 1090 – 1100

Lazar CS, Cresson CM, Lauffenburger DA, Gill GN (2004) The Na+/H+
exchanger regulatory factor stabilizes epidermal growth factor receptors
at the cell surface. Mol Biol Cell 15: 5470 – 5480

Levine EM, Becker Y, Boone CW, Eagle H (1965) Contact inhibition,
macromolecular synthesis, and polyribosomes in cultured human
diploid fibroblasts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 53: 350 – 356

Maitra S, Kulikauskas RM, Gavilan H, Fehon RG (2006) The tumor
suppressors Merlin and expanded function cooperatively to modulate
receptor endocytosis and signaling. Curr Biol 16: 702 – 709

Manchanda N, Lyubimova A, Ho HY, James MF, Gusella JF, Ramesh N,
Snapper SB, Ramesh V (2005) The NF2 tumor suppressor Merlin and the
ERM proteins interact with N-WASP and regulate its actin polymeriza-
tion function. J Biol Chem 280: 12517 – 12522

McClatchey AI, Giovannini M (2005) Membrane organization and
tumorigenesis – the NF2 tumor suppressor, Merlin. Genes Dev 19:
2265 – 2277

McClatchey AI, Saotome I, Mercer K, Crowley D, Gusella JF, Bronson RT,
Jacks T (1998) Mice heterozygous for a mutation at the Nf2 tumor
suppressor locus develop a range of highly metastatic tumors. Genes Dev
12: 1121 – 1133

McLaughlin ME, Kruger GM, Slocum KL, Crowley D, Michaud NA, Huang
J, Magendantz M, Jacks T (2007) The Nf2 tumor suppressor regulates
cell – cell adhesion during tissue fusion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:
3261 – 3266

Morrison H, Sherman LS, Legg J, Banine F, Isacke C, Haipek CA, Gutmann
DH, Ponta H, Herrlich P (2001) The NF2 tumor suppressor gene product,
merlin, mediates contact inhibition of growth through interactions with
CD44. Genes Dev 15: 968 – 980

Morrison H, Sperka T, Manent J, Giovannini M, Ponta H, Herrlich P (2007)
Merlin/neurofibromatosis type 2 suppresses growth by inhibiting the
activation of Ras and Rac. Cancer Res 67: 520 – 527

Nelson WJ (2003) Adaptation of core mechanisms to generate cell polarity.

Nature 422: 766 – 774

Okada T, Lopez-Lago M, Giancotti FG (2005) Merlin/NF-2 mediates contact
inhibition of growth by suppressing recruitment of Rac to the plasma
membrane. J Cell Biol 171: 361 – 371

Pelton PD, Sherman LS, Rizvi TA, Marchionni MA, Wood P, Friedman RA,
Ratner N (1998) Ruffling membrane, stress fiber, cell spreading and
proliferation abnormalities in human Schwannoma cells. Oncogene 17:
2195 – 2209

Pujuguet P, Del Maestro L, Gautreau A, Louvard D, Arpin M (2003) Ezrin
regulates E-cadherin-dependent adherens junction assembly through
Rac1 activation. Mol Biol Cell 14: 2181 – 2191

Rangwala R, Banine F, Borg JP, Sherman LS (2005) Erbin regulates
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activation and MAP kinase-
dependent interactions between Merlin and adherens junction protein
complexes in Schwann cells. J Biol Chem 280: 11790 – 11797

Rothen-Rutishauser B, Kramer SD, Braun A, Gunthert M, Wunderli-
Allenspach H (1998) MDCK cell cultures as an epithelial in vitro model:
cytoskeleton and tight junctions as indicators for the definition of age-
related stages by confocal microscopy. Pharm Res 15: 964 – 971

Sadler KC, Amsterdam A, Soroka C, Boyer J, Hopkins N (2005) A genetic
screen in zebrafish identifies the mutants vps18, nf2 and foie gras as
models of liver disease. Development 132: 3561 – 3572

Saotome I, Curto M, McClatchey AI (2004) Ezrin is essential for epithelial
organization and villus morphogenesis in the developing intestine. Dev
Cell 6: 855 – 864

Shaw RJ, Paez JG, Curto M, Yaktine A, Pruitt WM, Saotome I, O’Bryan JP,
Gupta V, Ratner N, Der CJ, Jacks T, McClatchey AI (2001) The Nf2 tumor
suppressor, merlin, functions in Rac-dependent signaling. Dev Cell 1:
63 – 72

Te Velthuis AJ, Isogai T, Gerrits L, Bagowski CP (2007) Insights into the
molecular evolution of the PDZ/LIM family and identification of a novel
conserved protein motif. PLoS ONE 2: e189

Theisen CS, Wahl III JK, Johnson KR, Wheelock MJ (2007) NHERF links
the N-cadherin/catenin complex to the platelet-derived growth factor
receptor to modulate the actin cytoskeleton and regulate cell motility.
Mol Biol Cell 18: 1220 – 1232

Yang L, Baker NE (2003) Cell cycle withdrawal, progression, and cell
survival regulation by EGFR and its effectors in the differentiating
Drosophila eye. Dev Cell 4: 359 – 369

Yu Y, Khan J, Khanna C, Helman L, Meltzer PS, Merlino G (2004)
Expression profiling identifies the cytoskeletal organizer ezrin and the
developmental homeoprotein Six-1 as key metastatic regulators. Nat Med
10: 175 – 181

British Journal of Cancer (2008) 98(2), 256 – 262

& 2008 Cancer Research UK

