MED

1100

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.200700059

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.200700059

Predicting and Tuning Physicochemical
Properties in Lead Optimization:
Amine Basicities
Martin Morgenthaler,[a] Eliane Schweizer,[b] Anja Hoffmann-Rçder,[c]
Fausta Benini,[a] Rainer E. Martin,[d] Georg Jaeschke,[d] Bjçrn Wagner,[d]
Holger Fischer,[d] Stefanie Bendels,[d] Daniel Zimmerli,[d] Josef Schneider,[d]
FranÅois Diederich,*[a] Manfred Kansy,*[d] and Klaus Müller*[d]

This review describes simple and useful concepts for predicting
and tuning the pKa values of basic amine centers, a crucial step
in the optimization of physical and ADME properties of many
lead structures in drug-discovery research. The article starts with
a case study of tricyclic thrombin inhibitors featuring a tertiary
amine center with pKa values that can be tuned over a wide
range, from the usual value of around 10 to below 2 by (remote)
neighboring functionalities commonly encountered in medicinal
chemistry. Next, the changes in pKa of acyclic and cyclic amines
upon substitution by fluorine, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur func-

tionalities, as well as carbonyl and carboxyl derivatives are sys-
tematically analyzed, leading to the derivation of simple rules for
pKa prediction. Electronic and stereoelectronic effects in cyclic
amines are discussed, and the emerging computational methods
for pKa predictions are briefly surveyed. The rules for tuning
amine basicities should not only be of interest in drug-discovery
research, but also to the development of new crop-protection
agents, new amine ligands for organometallic complexes, and in
particular, to the growing field of amine-based organocatalysis.

1. Introduction

Modern drug-discovery chemistry is based on a multidimen-
sional optimization (MDO) approach, in which the optimization
of physicochemical properties, aspects of ADME (absorption,
distribution, metabolism, and excretion), and safety of a lead
compound are considered at an equal level together with po-
tency and selectivity. Optimization of physicochemical proper-
ties such as pKa and log D benefits from empirical knowledge
available through both internal and publicly available databas-
es.[1] In fact, with the establishment of high-throughput analyti-
cal methodologies, the amount of physicochemical data is
growing rapidly, allowing hundreds of compounds to be mea-
sured rapidly and precisely each day.[2] The availability of large
datasets covering a sufficiently broad structural diversity in-
creases the chances that improved schemes for reasonably
successful predictions of physicochemical properties can be
developed. Both databases and chemoinformatics tools aim at
enhancing the capacity of medicinal chemists to design com-
pounds with desired physicochemical and pharmacological
properties.

A large fraction of the drugs currently on the market or in
development contain one or more basic nitrogen atoms. They
contribute to essentially all molecular properties relevant to
the MDO process. Whether or not basic nitrogen atoms are
protonated in the biological environment may not only be crit-
ical for binding potency at the target, but also affects proper-
ties such as lipophilicity, membrane permeability,[3, 4] amphiphi-
licity, and the potential liability for phospholipidosis,[5] as well

as interference with the hERG (human ether-a-go-go-related
gene) potassium ion channel and associated cardiovascular
toxicity.[6–8] It is therefore important not only to know the pKa
value of an amine-containing compound, but even more so, to
be able to modulate its basicity in a rational, structure-based
fashion.

The incentive to survey possibilities for tuning amine basicity
arose from our exploration of tricyclic inhibitors of thrombin, a

[a] M. Morgenthaler, F. Benini, Prof. Dr. F. Diederich

Laboratorium für Organische Chemie, ETH Zürich
HCI, Hçnggerberg, 8093 Zürich (Switzerland)
Fax: (+ 41) 44-632-1109
E-mail: diederich@org.chem.ethz.ch

[b] Dr. E. Schweizer

Institut für Organische Chemie, Universität Wien
Abteilung Synthesechemie, Währinger Strasse 38, 1090 Wien (Austria)

[c] Dr. A. Hoffmann-Rçder

Institut für Organische Chemie, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität
Duesbergweg 10–14, 55128 Mainz (Germany)

[d] Dr. R. E. Martin, Dr. G. Jaeschke, B. Wagner, Dr. H. Fischer, Dr. S. Bendels,

D. Zimmerli, Dr. J. Schneider, Dr. M. Kansy, Prof. Dr. K. Müller
Pharmaceuticals Division, Discovery Chemistry
F. Hoffmann–La Roche AG, 4070 Basel (Switzerland)
Fax: (+ 41) 61-688-7408 (M.K.)
Fax: (+ 41) 61-688-0986 (K.M.)
E-mail: manfred.kansy@roche.com

klaus.mueller@roche.com

Supporting information for this article is available on the WWW under
http://www.chemmedchem.org or from the author.

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

1101

F. Diederich, M. Kansy, K. Müller, et al.

amine center in ( )-1 (Figure 1), depending on whether the
photometric titration was conducted from pH 2 to pH 13
from pH 13 to pH 2
(pKa 5.2) or

in the reverse direction,

MED

an enzyme

fluorophobicity/fluorophilicity of

serine protease from the blood coagulation cascade, to map
the
active
site.[2, 9–12] In that investigation, we observed that the pKa value
of a tertiary non-aromatic amine could be shifted from values
of around 10 to below 2 through the cumulative interaction ef-
fects of relatively remote functionalities (see Section 2). Simple
rules for predictions of amine basicity were subsequently de-
veloped based on extensive database mining. These are sum-
marized herein (see Section 3) along with a short overview of
the current understanding of stereochemical and conforma-
tional factors that influence amine basicities (see Section 4).
We are well aware that after seminal publications on predic-
tions of the strength of organic bases,[13, 14] numerous reports
have dealt with this subject, particularly within the context of
drug-discovery chemistry. Nevertheless, we feel that a survey
such as this is long overdue and will be of great benefit to re-
search groups involved in drug discovery as well as many
other areas in which amine basicity plays a crucial role.

It should be noted that the experimental data collection for
this review (both in the main text and the Supporting Informa-
tion (SI)) has been possible through high-throughput photo-
routine potentiometric pKa determinations,[2, 15, 16]
metric or
which over the past years have replaced classical low-through-
put titrimetric or electrochemical methods. The accuracy of pKa
determinations in the range of 3–11 is now typically DpKa 0.1
for compounds with sufficient aqueous solubility and UV ab-
sorption (compared with DpKa 0.5 for older methods prior to
1990). For these reasons, all pKa values in this review are
rounded to one digit after the decimal point. Nevertheless, it
should be mentioned that uncertainties in comparing data
might arise from systematic pKa shifts due to different solvent
systems, temperature, ionic strength, and other hidden experi-
mental effects. Finally, this review contains several experimen-
tal pKa values not previously published or re-measured for the
sake of consistent comparison; these new or corrected pKa
values are marked with an asterisk (*) in the figures through-
out this account for easy identification.

2. Tricyclic Thrombin Inhibitors

Our thrombin inhibitors are readily constructed using the 1,3-
dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides to maleimides as
the key step to build the central tricyclic scaffold.[17] This strat-
egy allows substituents to be introduced and modified in a
versatile fashion for occupation of the selectivity pocket S1,
the large distal hydrophobic D pocket, the tight proximal hy-
drophobic P pocket, and the region around the catalytic serine
and the oxyanion hole. How these substituents alter the pKa
value of the tertiary amine center in the tricyclic skeleton of
the targeted inhibitors and some of their precursors (the latter
data are mostly in the Supporting Information), are analyzed in
the following sections.

2.1. Variation of the S1 pocket vector

The investigation started with the unexpected finding that two
significantly different pKa values were measured for the tertiary

Figure 1. Experimental pKa values for the tertiary amine center in precursors
to tricyclic thrombin inhibitors, reflecting the basicity-lowering effects of b-
carbonyl and a-aryl substituents. The numbers in italics below the experi-
mental values indicate calculated[39] pKa values discussed in Section 5.

(pKa 9.3). Subsequent chemical analysis revealed that ( )-1
(and a large number of related imides) are unstable in even
mildly basic solution and that the succinimide moiety under-
goes rapid and regioselective ring opening by formation of
( )-2.[2, 18] The pKa of the carboxylate group (4.0) in ( )-2 could
be determined by potentiometric titration.

To shed light on the origin of the remarkably low pKa value
of ( )-1 (5.2), compounds ( )-3 to ( )-5 were measured. The
pKa of ( )-5 (7.0) is still three units smaller than the approxi-
mate value for a simple trialkylamine (~ 10.2) and some four
units below the pKa of heliotridane (11.4, (1S,7aS)-2,3,5,6,7,7a-
hexahydro-1-methyl-1H-pyrrolizine),[19] which could be taken as
the closest available parent compound in this series. A search
in the MedChem database[1, 2] revealed that a carbonyl group
in the b-position can lower the pKa value of an aliphatic amine
by ~ 1.8 units. As there are two imide C=O groups in ( )-5,
each in b-position to the tertiary amine center, the overall
effect could naïvely be guessed as DpKa = 2 ~ 1.8 =~ 3.6
units. Several remarks are appropriate at this point: First, the
pKa values observed for acyclic amines may represent confor-
mational averages and therefore may not be transferable di-
rectly to cyclic amines, which often adopt one specific confor-

1102

www.chemmedchem.org

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

Amine Basicities

mation with fixed spatial relationships between the electron-
withdrawing group and the amine function. This is particularly
true for bi- and polycyclic amines. Second, in rigid (poly)cyclic
systems, substantial direct through-space interactions may op-
erate in addition to s-transmission effects. Third, the transfera-
bility of pKa decrements may be best for 6-membered piperi-
dine units in which properly staggered synclinal and anti-peri-
planar arrangements of functional groups are closest to the sit-
uation in acyclic amines. However, for amines embedded in 5-
or 4-membered rings this may not hold, because significant
deviations from ideally staggered conformations are observed,
and s-transmission effects may be attenuated accordingly (see
Section 4). Finally, s-transmissions typically operate through all
intervening s-pathways between the electron-withdrawing
function and amine group.[13] This is nicely illustrated, for ex-
ample, by the shift from piperidine (pKa 11.1) to 2-(2’-oxopro-
pyl)piperidine (pKa 9.5), with one s-transmission pathway, and
from 2,2,6,6,-tetramethylpiperidine (pKa 11.1) to 4-oxo-2,2,6,6-
tetramethylpiperidine (pKa 7.9), with two s-transmission path-
ways (see Figure 14 a below). Such s-transmitted electron-with-
drawing effects in cyclic systems are discussed further in Sec-
tion 3.

The decrease in pKa from 7.0 (for ( )-5) into the range be-
tween 5 and 6 for the arylated tricycles ( )-1, ( )-3, and ( )-4
reflects the s-transmission effects of the aryl rings in a-position
to the nitrogen center, in agreement with the MedChem data-
G(a-phenyl) = 1.4). It is interesting to note that the
base (DpKa A
pKa-lowering effects are significantly different for the endo-
phenyl ring in ( )-3 (pKa 5.6) and the exo-phenyl ring in ( )-4
(pKa 5.9) (endo and exo refer to the orientation of the aryl sub-
stituent with respect to the bicyclic perhydropyrrolo A
G[3,4-c]pyr-
role scaffold). The relatively high pKa of ( )-2 (9.3) may be ex-
plained by the decreased electron-withdrawing power of a car-
G(COOH) = 1.9; s(C(=O)NH2) = 1.68),[13] as well
boxylate unit (sA
as, and probably most importantly, a direct (through-space)
stabilization of the protonated ammonium center by the car-
boxylate anion.

The opposite effect can be observed upon introduction of a
positive charge into the molecule by incorporating the amidi-
nium unit into the benzyl group of ( )-3. From data in the
MedChem database,[1] benzylamines with strong but neutral
electron-withdrawing groups in the para position, such as
cyano or nitro, produce an additional pKa shift of ~ 0.8 rela-
tive to the parent benzyl group. Hence, the substantial shift of
 1.1 observed in going from ( )-3 to ( )-6 may reflect the
additional destabilization of the protonated ammonium center
by the presence of a positive charge.

The phenylamidinium ring for occupancy of the S1 pocket
was subsequently fluorinated as shown for ( )-7 to ( )-11
(Figure 2), in order to decrease the basicity of the amidine resi-
due and thus potentially enhance the bioavailability of these
compounds.[2] Although this objective was reached (pKa2(()-6)
11.1; pKa2(()-11) 10.1), binding affinity unfortunately dropped
dramatically (Ki(()-6) = 0.057 mm; Ki(()-11) = 9 mm). Fluorine
substitution expectedly influences the pKa value of the tertiary
amine center as well; upon introduction of one or
two
F atoms, pKa1 decreases with one notable exception. The pKa1

Figure 2. Effects of F substitution on the pKa values of amine (pKa1) and ami-
dinium residues (pKa2) in the tricyclic thrombin inhibitors ( )-6 to ( )-11.

value of compound ( )-9 (4.2), with two F atoms meta to the
amidinium group, is 0.5 units higher than that of compound
( )-11 (3.7) with two F atoms in the ortho position. This in-
crease in basicity is readily explained by the fact that in ( )-9,
one of two F atoms must approach the nitrogen lone pair (the
aryl ring is roughly perpendicular to the mean plane of the
pyrrolidine ring to which it is attached), leading to both lone-
pair repulsion and unfavorable dipolar alignment, whereas
upon protonation, the C F and N + H bonds can undergo fa-
vorable dipolar alignment and lone-pair repulsion is eliminat-
ed.[20] Similar trends were also observed in the corresponding
series of nitrile precursors (Figure 1 SI).

2.2. Variation of the D and P pocket vector

When the F substituent in the para position of the benzylic
ring in ( )-6, which occupies the D pocket of the thrombin
is changed to Cl, Br, OMe, or OH, or the phenyl
active site,
group exchanged for a 4-pyridyl ring, the pKa value of the dis-
tant tertiary amine center is not affected and remains at 4.5
0.1.[10] Upon changing from the tricyclic imide to the tricyclic
lactam series, on the other hand, the pKa values change sub-
stantially (Figure 3). Lactams ( )-12 to ( )-14 feature an iso-
propyl group to favorably fill the P pocket of thrombin, which
results in improved binding to thrombin (Ki between 5 and
15 nm) and high selectivities over trypsin (~ 400–1600-fold).[9, 10]
Compared with imide ( )-6 (Figure 2, pKa 4.5) and the para-
substituted benzyl analogues mentioned above, the pKa values
of the tertiary amine centers in ( )-12 to ( )-14 are raised by
nearly two units to 6.2–6.5. This is clearly the result of remov-
ing one C=O group in the b-position.

Whereas the change from the isopropyl group in ( )-12 to
other hydrocarbon residues has expectedly only marginal ef-
fects (see compounds ( )-15 to ( )-18 in Figure 3), the intro-
residues (see ( )-19 to ( )-22 in
duction of
Figure 3) to fill the P pocket can change the pKa value signifi-

fluoroalkyl

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

www.chemmedchem.org

1103

C
H
T
U
N
G
T
R
E
N
N
U
N
C
H
T
U
N
G
T
R
E
N
N
U
N
C
H
T
U
N
G
T
R
E
N
N
U
N
MED

F. Diederich, M. Kansy, K. Müller, et al.

Figure 3. Long-range effects on the pKa value of the tertiary amine center in
tricyclic thrombin inhibitors. Note: ( )-12 measured in 0.1 m KNO3 by poten-
tiometric titration; ( )-13 and ( )-14 measured in 0.15 m SGA buffer (10 %
MeOH) by Sirius ProfilerSGA photometric titration;[16] the slightly different
pKa values for these three compounds can most likely be ascribed to the un-
equal solvent mixtures and ionic strengths.

cantly, despite the large topological distance of the F atoms
from the tertiary amine center, which is five or six bonds
away.[11] Thus, a CHF2 substituent, as in ( )-20 (F atoms in d-
position to the N atom), lowers the pKa to a value of 5.6. In the
presence of both OH/OMe and CF3 substituents in g-position
to the N atom, as in ( )-23 to ( )-25, measured pKa values are
as low as 4.9–5.5. This documents once more the substantial
electron-withdrawing effects of fluorine and oxygen atoms and
their dramatic effects on an amine center, even in rather
remote locations.

2.3. Variation of substituents pointing towards the oxyanion
hole

The introduction of F, OH, and OMe substituents at various po-
sitions of the terminal pyrrolidine ring ((+)-26 to ( )-41 in
Figure 4) to probe their bioisosteric behavior in thrombin bind-
ing produced striking effects on the basicity of the adjacent
tertiary amine center.[12] Inductive effects are transmitted over
two s-pathways, as substituents at positions 8 ((+)-26 to (+)-
33) and 7 ((+)-34 to ( )-41) are both located in b- and g-posi-
tion to the amine center. With one substituent, the pKa is de-
creased by amounts of  0.3 to  1.2 relative to the parent
compound ( )-6. Remarkably, difluorination at either position
produces essentially neutral amines with pKa values below 2
((+)-32 and ( )-40). Several trends are noticeable: First, the in-
teraction effects of fluorine are (expectedly) much stronger

Figure 4. Additional F, OH, or OMe substitution in the terminal pyrrolidine
ring changes the protonated tertiary ammonium ion into a moderately
strong acid.

than those of OH or OMe, resulting in pKa decrements that are
larger by  0.3 to  0.9 units. Second, the DpKa effects of OH
and OMe are somewhat similar, differing between 0 and 0.4
units, depending on the position and relative configuration at
the center of substitution. Third, the effects of two gem sub-
stituents (F or OMe) seem to be more or less additive. Finally,
the pKa decrements are essentially independent on the stereo-
chemistry at C7, but show a marked configurational depend-
ence for substituents at C8. Substituents at C8 are more
strongly subjected to the anisotropic steric bulk of the tricyclic
core, which could result in differential solvation, thus affecting
the pKa values.

The trends reported in Figures 3 and 4 are paralleled by the
experimental pKa values measured for a series of precursor
compounds not
containing the charged benzamidinium
group. These pKa data are collected in Figures 2 SI and 3 SI, re-
spectively.

All these pKa data for our tricyclic thrombin inhibitors, docu-
menting significant long-range effects not only of F atoms, but
also of OH and OMe substituents, led us to re-examine the pKa
decrements induced by electron-withdrawing groups as a
function of topological distance to an amine in a systematic
manner.

1104

www.chemmedchem.org

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

Amine Basicities

3. Trends for pKa Prediction of Amines

3.2. s-Acceptor substitution: general remarks

3.1. Alkyl substituents

While gas-phase acidities of alkylammonium ions show an in-
+ <
crease in pKa with alkyl substitution (NH4
R3NH +), it is well known that the less-favorable solvation of a
protonated tertiary ammonium ion lowers its pKa in water,
leading to the series NH4
(10.6) <
+ (10.8) > Me3NH + (9.8).[21] The pKa values are relatively
Me2NH2
insensitive to alkyl chain length, except for methyl versus ethyl
groups (or longer alkyl chains, Figure 5 a). a-Branching in an

(pKa 9.2) < MeNH3

+

+ < RNH3

+ < R2NH2

+

Figure 5. pKa values of acyclic and cyclic aliphatic amines.

aliphatic substituent tends to increase the basicity of only terti-
ary amines, but not primary or secondary amines. This may be
interpreted by the steric bulk around the N atom leading to a
decrease of the amine’s pyramidal shape and thus an increase
of the nitrogen lone-pair energy with a concomitant destabili-
zation of the neutral amine. Single b-branching has little or no
influence in all
three types of aliphatic amines; however,
double b-branching, such as in neopentylamine, decreases the
pKa (Figure 5 b). This finding can be rationalized by a destabiliz-
ing effect of the neopentyl group in the protonated ammoni-
um ion due to unfavorable solvation in staggered conforma-
tions and unavoidable 1,5-type steric interferences. The a- and
b-branching effects on amine basicity are nicely corroborated
by pKa values recently measured for a short series of N-(4’-aryl-
butyl)-N,N-dimethylamines (Figure 5 c), containing a gem-di-
methyl group in a-, b-, or d-position of the amine group.[22, 23]
Aliphatic ring size seems to have little influence on amine
basicity (Figure 5 d). Exceptions are the 3-membered aziridine
systems, which are substantially less basic.

As clearly demonstrated in the preceding analysis of the pKa
values of substituted tricyclic thrombin inhibitors, the incorpo-
ration of strong s-acceptor substituents can modulate the ba-
sicity of an amine group dramatically. Fluorine, sulfones, vari-
ous neutral O- or N-containing functional groups, and to a
lesser extent nitriles, are s-acceptors commonly encountered
in medicinal chemistry. For a general treatment of s-acceptor
properties of C X bonds in which X is a main-group element
from groups IVa–VIIa in the periodic table, the reader is refer-
red to a recent article by Alabugin and Zeidan[24] and to com-

prehensive tables of Hammett s-parameters.[25]

3.3. Fluorine substitution in open-chain aliphatic
amines

Fluorine substitution in the vicinity of an amine
center not only lowers its basicity but also enhances
metabolic stability, for example, against oxidation or
dealkylation by cytochrome P450 enzymes, one of
the major incentives for fluorine introduction in lead-
optimization processes. In open-chain molecules, flu-
orination at the b-position to an amine center leads
to a decrease in pKa of ~ 1.7 units for each additional
fluorine atom (Figure 6 a). It appears that each addi-
tional fluorine contributes similarly to electron with-
drawal from the amine and thus to a successively
larger destabilization of the protonated ammonium
form.

Increasing the number of carbon atoms between
F acceptor and amine sites leads to an exponential
attenuation of the pKa shifts, being typically a factor
of 0.5 between two homologs that differ by one s-
bond between the fluorine and amine function (Fig-
ure 6 b). The additional sp3 carbon atoms act as insu-

Figure 6. a) The additive effect of multiple fluorine atoms on amine basicity;
the pKa values for the fluorinated ethylamines were re-measured and con-
firm those given in the MedChem database,[1] except for difluoroethylamine
(MedChem database: 7.5); experimental DpKa values are indicated above
the arrows. b) Dependence of average pKa shifts (DpKa) induced per fluorine
substituent as a function of its topological distance from the basic center.

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

www.chemmedchem.org

1105

MED

lators, leading to a nonlinear loss of the acceptor magnitude.
The table in Figure 6 b summarizes the approximate pKa-lower-
ing effects by one fluorine atom at a specified position derived
from various singly and multiply F-substituted amines, assum-
ing additivity of the observed F-induced pKa decrements.[13]
Based on these data, one can easily and accurately calculate
the approximate pKa value of a multiply fluorinated acyclic ali-
phatic amine. However, this additivity scheme may have its in-
trinsic limitations if many (strong) s-acceptors are present
which may attenuate the s-transmissions of more remote ac-
ceptors and which may cooperatively stabilize conformations
in which the basicity-lowering effects of certain groups are
characteristically different (see Sections 3.4 and 4).

3.4. Fluorine substitution in cyclic aliphatic amines

As indicated in Section 2 and advocated by Perrin and co-
workers[13, 14] in cyclic systems the electron-withdrawing effect
towards the s-acceptor is transmitted via both s-pathways
connected to the nitrogen atom. The idea is outlined in Fig-
ure 7 a.

Figure 7. a) Consideration of the two available s-transmission paths in pre-
dicting pKa shifts for piperidine as a result of F introduction in the 4- or 3-
position, taking the DpKa values of Figure 6 b. b) Experimental pKa values of
mono- and difluorinated piperidines, and DpKa values (referenced to the
parent piperidine) given in parentheses below; the estimated DpKa values
based on the pKa shifts of Figure 6 b are placed parenthetically above and
below the arrows. c) DpKa values for equatorial and axial F substituents in pi-
peridine, as derived from the pKa shifts given by Bols and co-workers for
equatorial F substituents in the 3- and 4-positions of polyhydroxypiperidine
derivatives,[26, 33] and the experimental DpKa values of 3,3- and 4,4-difluoropi-
peridine with possible rationales for the conformationally differentiated
DpKa effects.

Taking 4-fluoropiperidine as an example, the fluorine is locat-
ed in g-position to the amine when passing along both alkyl
chains (Figure 7 a). According to the table in Figure 6 b, this re-
sults in a theoretical pKa shift of  1.4 with respect to unsubsti-
tuted piperidine. In comparison with the decrement of DpKa =

F. Diederich, M. Kansy, K. Müller, et al.

 1.7, estimated from the pKa value of a polyhydroxypiperidine
derivative carrying an equatorial fluorine substituent in the 4-
position,[26] this approximation is reasonable, albeit an underes-
timation. The actual measured pKa value of 4-fluoropiperidine
is 9.4 (Figure 7 b), which is highly consistent with the some-
what larger pKa decrement. By analogy, the pKa shift in 3-fluo-
ropiperidine can be calculated using the values for b- and d-
fluorination, resulting in an expected decrease of 2.0 pKa units
(Figure 7 a): again, close to but below the decrement of 2.3, es-
timated from a pair of polyhydroxylated piperidines, in which
one compound contains a fluorine substituent in a 3-equatorial
position.[26] This pKa decrement would have us expect a pKa
value for the 3-fluoropiperidine of 8.8; however, the actual
measured pKa is 9.3 (Figure 7 b), with a concomitant DpKa of
 1.8. In a series of elegant NMR studies, Lankin, Snyder, and
co-workers established that in various organic and water solu-
tions, protonated 3-fluoropiperidine exists exclusively as a
single conformer with the fluorine in axial orientation, whereas
after deprotonation the substituent adopts the equatorial posi-
In the axial orientation the dipole of the polar C F
tion.[27]
bond is favorably aligned antiparallel to the dipole of the H 
N + bond. This arrangement stabilizes the protonated state and
explains why the experimental pKa value of 3-fluoropiperidine
is higher than expected. Thus, 3-fluoropiperidine presents an
in which the experimental pKa shift ( 1.8)
interesting case,
would be expected to lie between that of an equatorial 3-F
substituent ( 2.3) and that of an axial 3-F substituent ( 1.4,
see Figure 7 c).

Based on the experimental pKa values of 4,4- and 3,3-
difluoroA
Gpiperidine (Figure 7 b) and the pKa decrements of 1.7
and 2.3 for equatorial fluorine substituents in the 4- and 3-po-
sitions, respectively, the pKa decrements due to the second
(axial) fluorine are calculated to be, respectively, 0.9 and 1.4.
Thus, pKa decrements for axial fluorine substituents are consid-
erably smaller than for the equatorial counterparts and reflect
the dramatic dependence of DpKa values on the relative orien-
tation of a fluorine substituent with respect to the amine func-
tion. Gratifyingly, these results are well corroborated by the pKa
shifts derived from experimental pKa values in the compound
series 42, cis-43, cis-44, and trans-44 (Figure 8 a),[28] as well as
for the DpKa of  0.9 for an axial 4-fluoro substituent, as ob-
tained from the pKa values reported for 45 and its 4-fluoro de-
rivative 46 (Figure 8 b). The average DpKa values for conforma-
tionally differentiated fluorine substituents in the 3- and 4-po-
sition of piperidine ( 1.8 and  0.7, respectively) compare re-
markably well with the corresponding respective DpKa values
obtained for b- and g-fluorine substituents in acyclic aliphatic
amines.

In this context, we report the pKa values measured for the
simple pair of epimeric 4-benzyl-3-fluoropiperidines, cis-47 and
trans-47 (Figure 8 c). The difference between their pKa values
(0.5) is only about half of what we might have expected (~ 0.9)
from our previous discussions. Close inspection of their confor-
mational behavior as neutral base and protonated salts in
water by NMR spectroscopic analysis reveals that cis-47 keeps
the 3-fluorine substituent in axial position in both its neutral
and protonated form (Figure 4 a SI). By contrast, the epimeric

1106

www.chemmedchem.org

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

C
H
T
U
N
G
T
R
E
N
N
U
N
Amine Basicities

Figure 8. Confirmation of the unequal DpKa effects of axial and equatorial
fluorine substitution in a series of piperidine derivatives.[28]

trans-47 adopts the expected diequatorial form only in its neu-
tral state, but when protonated, exhibits the characteristics of
two rapidly interconverting, roughly equally populated chair
forms with the substituents in diequatorial and diaxial arrange-
ments (Figure 4 b SI). Hence, trans-47 does not exhibit the full
pKa decrement expected for an equatorial 3-fluoro substituent,
as it acquires substantial 1,3-syn CF··· +NH stabilization in its
partially populated diaxial conformer.

The fluorine-induced pKa shifts identified for piperidines can
be translated back into the acyclic situation. Take, for example,
the case reported by van Niel et al.,[28] in which one and two
fluorine atoms were introduced into the propyl linker unit be-
tween a piperidine and an indole unit (Figure 9 a). Introduction
of the first fluorine atom results in a moderate pKa shift by
only  1 unit, whereas the second F atom produces a very pro-
nounced additional shift of  2 units. The average pKa decre-
ment per fluorine is 1.5 units,
in good agreement with the
shift expected for a fluorine in b-position to an amine (Fig-
ure 6 b). However, the dramatic difference between the two
pKa shifts clearly points to a specific inequality of the two
F atoms. Because the propyl chain in these molecules most
likely adopts an all-trans conformation, the first F atom will
assume a gauche conformation with respect to the piperidine
N atom. The most favorable position will be the one in which
the polar C F bond is 1,3-syn to the N + H bond of the pro-
tonated piperidine, with concomitant stabilization of the pro-
tonated base, while the second F atom will have to take the
other gauche position devoid of favorable 1,3-syn interactions

Figure 9. a) Unequal pKa shifts observed for the first and second F atom in-
troduced into the aliphatic linker attached to the N atom in piperidine deriv-
atives[28] and possible rationalization in terms of the presence and absence
of a 1,3-syn CF··· +NH interaction stabilizing the protonated ammonium ion.
b) DpKa values for the replacement of a b-CH3 by a b-CF3 group in primary,
secondary, and tertiary amines and possible rationalization in terms of the
presence and absence of 1,3-syn CF··· +NH interactions stabilizing the proton-
ated ammonium ion. Assuming that a b-fluorine atom in an anti-periplanar
or gauche conformation without syn interaction results in similar DpKa ef-
fects, the corresponding pKa shift parameters for 1,3-syn and trans/gauche
arrangements can be estimated; they are in remarkably close agreement
with the parameters obtained for equatorial and axial F substituents in pi-
peridines (Figures 7 and 8).

with the ammonium group. This case not only nicely illustrates
that the same principles operate similarly in both cyclic and
acyclic systems, but also provides an important new piece of
information: F atoms in b-position, either trans or gauche but
not 1,3-syn, to a (protonated) amine group, produce similar
(strong) pKa shifts.

With this information in hand, the case of trifluoroethyla-
mine and its N-methyl and N,N-dimethyl derivatives is illumina-
tive. In all three cases, fluorine atoms can be assigned to syn
and anti/gauche orientations with respect to the hydrogen
atoms at the protonated amine (Figure 9 b). For primary and
secondary amines, DpKa~ 4.9 is observed when all hydrogens
in b-position are replaced by fluorine. Two 1,3-syn CF··· +NH in-
teractions are possible, while one fluorine in anti orientation
does not interact with the amine hydrogens. For the tertiary
amine, DpKa = 5.4 indicates a decreased stabilization of the

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

www.chemmedchem.org

1107

MED

protonated state, as only one 1,3-syn interaction is possible,
while two fluorines adopt non-interacting anti and gauche ori-
entations. Taking these results together, the pKa shift contribu-
tion of a single 1,3-syn CF··· +NH interaction can be calculated
to be DpKa = 1.4, whereas the anti- or gauche-oriented fluo-
rines contribute DpKa = 2.0, in good agreement with the ba-
sicity shift effects identified for b-fluorinated piperidines (Fig-
ure 7 c).

3.5. Fluorine substitution in benzimidazoles

Although this review deals mainly with the effects of s-accept-
or substituents on the pKa values of aliphatic amines, one ex-
ample from our research should also be added to illustrate the
predictability of the effects of such substituents on the basicity
of aromatic amines. Specifically, we present fluorine effects on
the pKa values of benzimidazoles, common scaffolds in medici-
nal chemistry and used as a central platform in our inhibitors
of the metalloprotease neprilysin (NEP).[29, 30]

Figure 10 gives the pKa values for the protonation (pKa1) and
deprotonation (pKa2) of benzimidazole (48 a) and its differently
fluorinated derivatives 48 b–j. Interesting correlations between
the pKa values and the degree of fluorination at the benzene
ring were observed. They are explicitly shown in Figures 5 SI–
10 SI and are summarized in the following. Note that for non-
symmetrical cases such as 48 b, two different values for each
pKa1 and pKa2 would have to be considered in principle if tau-
tomerization were slow relative to pKa measurements; howev-
er, we have no experimental evidence for “split” pKa values.

Upon initial inspection of the data, increasing fluorination of
the phenyl ring strongly affects both pKa values, as expected,

Figure 10. Experimental values for pKa1 (deprotonation of benzimidazolium)
and pKa2 (deprotonation of benzimidazole) of benzimidazole 48 a and all its
possible derivatives 48 b–j, having one to four F substituents in the benzene
moiety.

F. Diederich, M. Kansy, K. Müller, et al.

which shift in the case of pKa1 from 5.5 (48 a) to 2.1 (48 j), and
in the case of pKa2 from > 12 (48 a) to 9.4 (48 j). At equal de-
grees of fluorination, remarkable variation in the pKa values is
observed which corroborates the importance of the position of
the fluorine atoms. Introduction of fluorine ortho to an N atom
in the benzimidazole system has a larger effect than meta sub-
stitution. Thus, ortho derivative 48 b features pKa1 4.2, whereas
for meta derivative 48 c, a value of 5.0 is measured. Similarly, in
the difluorinated series, 48 f with two ortho fluorines features
pKa1 3.0, whereas the value for bis-meta-substituted 48 g is 1.5
units higher (4.5).

A more detailed analysis of the data shows remarkably con-
sistent correlations. When comparing pairs of compounds that
differ by only one additional fluorine at the ortho position to
an imidazole nitrogen, a decrease in pKa1 of 1.2 0.2 units is
observed, independent of the number of fluorine atoms and
their substitution pattern in the starting compound (Figur-
e 5 SI).

Similarly, introduction of an additional fluorine at the meta
position decreases the pKa1 values by 0.5 0.1 units for all
pairs of compounds (Figure 6 SI). Shifting a fluorine from meta
to ortho leads to a decrease in pKa1 by 0.7 0.1 for each series
of mono- to tri-fluorinated benzimidazoles, again corroborating
the weaker effect of meta fluorination (Figure 7 SI). Interesting-
ly, and quite remarkably, virtually identical patterns are ob-
served for pKa2 values as a function of the F-substitution pat-
tern (Figures 8 SI–10 SI).

3.6. Oxygen-containing functional groups

The oxygen in ethers and alcohols also acts as a strong s-ac-
ceptor and is well suited, but remarkably underused, as a pKa-
modulating substituent (see also Figure 4). Figure 11 a shows
that the pKa values of amino groups change incrementally as a
function of the distance between N-donor and O-acceptor in
open-chain aliphatic hydroxy, ether, and acetoxy derivatives, as
previously demonstrated for fluorinated compounds. The DpKa
values in Figure 11 a refer to N,N-dimethylbutylamine (pKa 10.2)
as the parent base. It is apparent from the data that hydroxy
and methoxy groups have a nearly identical inductive effect.
The influence of these acceptors drops considerably for substi-
tution at or beyond the d-position. In comparison, an acetoxy
group causes distinctly larger decreases in pKa, as it is more ef-
ficient in electron withdrawal due to the additional carbonyl
group. The data nicely illustrate that the pKa shifts by hydroxy
or methoxy substituents at a given topological distance from
the basic center are approximately equal to those of an ace-
toxy substituent at a distance one bond further away.

For cyclic ethers such as morpholine, similar effects can be
identified. As the electron-withdrawing effect of the oxygen
atom acts through both s-pathways, as already pointed out in
Section 3.4, morpholine can be viewed as a secondary amine
with double methoxy substitution in b-position with an ex-
pected pKa shift of  1.2 units through each s-path (Fig-
ure 11 b). Indeed, the experimental values for both morpholine
and N-methylmorpholine are close to those expected.

1108

www.chemmedchem.org

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

Amine Basicities

Figure 11. Effects of oxygen-containing functional groups on amine pKa
values. a) Distance dependence of DpKa effects in open-chain alcohols,
ethers, and acetates; DpKa effects for OH and OMe groups in d- and e-posi-
tions are estimated by comparison with the corresponding value for the
OAc group and assuming continued attenuation. b) The consideration of
two s-transmission pathways in morpholine derivatives provides a consis-
tent rationalization (estimated value indicated above the arrow) of the ex-
perimental pKa values (shown with DpKa values in parentheses) below the
structures. c) Experimental pKa values in N-arylbutyl amines bearing an oxe-
tane unit at different topological distances from the amine center.[23] The
comparison of DpKa values indicates a distinct deviation from the more typi-
cal exponential attenuation observed for other electron-withdrawing
groups.

Another useful class of ethers are oxetanes, as they not only
modulate amine basicity, but can also favorably affect other es-
sential physicochemical and pharmacological compound prop-
erties.[23] The compounds in Figure 11 c demonstrate the applic-
ability of the rules for DpKa of open-chain ethers and alcohols
given in Figure 11 a. Closer inspection of these pKa data reveals
that the pKa decrements as a function of topological distance
between the oxetane and the amine group are not attenuated
in a strictly exponential fashion, as may have been expected.
This hints to specific conformation-dependent intramolecular
interactions operating differently in various members of this
series. They are the focus of ongoing research.[22]

3.7. Nitrogen-containing functional groups

Among the many N-containing functional groups, neutral
amides, carbamates, sulfonamides, and N-arylamines play a
considerable role in medicinal chemistry, and some of their
pKa-lowering effects are documented, albeit by only a compa-

Figure 12. Modulation of amine basicity by a) amides and carbamates, b) N-
aryl- and N-heteroarylamines, and c) sulfonamides. Experimental pKa and
DpKa values given in parentheses below. Estimated DpKa values (taking into
account two s-transmission pathways in the cyclic systems) are placed par-
enthetically above the arrows. The pKa shifts in a) and c) are estimated with
reference to N-n-butyl-N,N-dimethylamine (pKa 10.2) and n-butylamine
(pKa 10.7), respectively.

ratively small set of available data (Figure 12). We note again
relatively consistent patterns for DpKa shifts in going from the
monoacylated ethylenediamine to the cyclic piperazine cases,
taking into account the dual s-transmission paths in the latter,
as well as in going from the N-monoacylated ethylenediamine
to the corresponding propylenediamine, allowing us in princi-
ple to estimate the pKa shifts due to more distantly placed N-
acylamino groups. We also note a slight reduction of DpKa ef-
fects for such groups in b-position in going from N-acetyl, to
N-benzoyl, and to N-ethoxycarbonyl, as might have been ex-
pected. Likewise, N-aryl tends to have distinct but considerably
weaker effects that are similar to, but somewhat smaller than
those of hydroxy, methoxy, or acetoxy groups. Of particular in-

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

www.chemmedchem.org

1109

MED

F. Diederich, M. Kansy, K. Müller, et al.

terest is the case of N-tosylpiperazine, from which it is appar-
ent that a sulfonamide function exhibits a very strong pKa-low-
ering effect, more pronounced than that of an N-acyl unit and
perhaps more comparable to that of a keto-carbonyl unit (see
Section 3.9). Again, we note a consistent pattern in comparing
this pKa decrement with those derived for two acyclic monoar-
ylsulfonylated diamines using n-butylamine (pKa 10.7) as refer-
ence.

It is also interesting to look at the pKa-lowering effect of the
phenylthio group (Figure 13 c). As expected, the DpKa values
are considerably lower than those of structurally analogous
sulfones, but larger than for a methylthio group (b-(methyl-
thio)ethylamine, pKa 9.5 (DpKa = 1.2)).[32] The latter pKa decre-
ment is consistent with the experimental value of thiomorpho-
line (Figure 13 d, pKa 9.0 (DpKa = 2.1)), taking into account
two s-transmission paths in the cyclic system.[13]

3.8. Sulfur-containing functional groups

3.9. Carbonyl and carboxyl groups

The sulfone group is an important module in medicinal
chemistry owing to its powerful electron-withdrawing charac-
ter that affects many physicochemical parameters accordingly,
and that is topped only by highly fluorinated or cyano sub-
stituents. Figure 13 a shows how arylsulfones lower amine ba-

The electron-withdrawing effects of carbonyl and carboxyl de-
rivatives on the basicity of neighboring amine groups are
shown in Figure 14. The data for ketones depicted in Fig-

Figure 13. Modulation of amine basicity by a) aryl sulfones in acyclic amines,
b) a sulfone unit in a cyclic system, c) aryl thioethers in acyclic amines,[31]
and d) a thioether unit in a cyclic system. Experimental pKa values are fol-
lowed by DpKa values given in parentheses below. Estimated DpKa values
(taking into account two s-transmission pathways in the cyclic systems) are
placed parenthetically above the arrows.

sicities in a saturated acyclic system,
taking n-butylamine
(pKa 10.7) as reference.[31] The basicity-lowering effect of sul-
fones can again be viewed as an exponential function of the
topological distance to the amine center. Similar effects are
also found for secondary and tertiary amines. In addition, the
example in Figure 13 b affirms again that both s-pathways
have to be considered in cyclic amines. A b-sulfone group in
an acyclic system would result in a pKa shift of  2.9 units
which is consistent with the experimental DpKa value of  5.7
for the cyclic case.

Phenylsulfoxides may exhibit similar pKa-lowering effects as
corresponding phenylsulfones
(Figure 11 SI), although with
only one reliable example currently available, no general state-
ment can be made.

Figure 14. Modulation of amine basicity by carbonyl-containing functional
groups in a)–c) and nitriles in d). The respective pKa shifts are estimated with
reference to N-n-butyl-N,N-dimethylamine (pKa 10.2) and n-butylamine
(pKa 10.7). For the piperidine examples in a), experimental pKa values are
given with DpKa in parentheses below; estimated DpKa values (taking into
account two s-transmission pathways in the cyclic systems) are placed par-
enthetically above the arrows. The pKa values for the two nitrile cases in d)
with n = 2 and n = 3 are estimated from experimental pKa values for the cor-
responding N,N-diethylamine derivatives (9.3 and 10.1, respectively) by
taking into account a pKa shift of  0.6 in going from N,N-diethyl- to N,N-di-
methylamines.[31] The DpKa values for nitriles represent averages from pKa
shifts observed for various amines.

1110

www.chemmedchem.org

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

Different pKa decrements were also diagnosed for hydroxy
groups in the 4-position of a piperidine ring,[26] the effect of 4-
OHeq ( 0.6) being more pronounced than that of 4-OHax
( 0.2). This qualitatively parallels the findings for 4-fluorinated
piperidines, as mentioned in Section 3.4. For the interpretation
of the stronger pKa-modulating effects of a polar C X bond in
the equatorial 4-position, either a better aligned C X bond
dipole or pronounced through-bond s-conjugative transmis-
sion through properly aligned s*C X and intervening sC C orbi-
tals may be invoked (see Figure 7 c).[26]

Here we include two examples with recently measured pKa
values that not only complement these findings, but also illus-
trate another important conformational aspect. The first is
shown in Figure 16.

Amine Basicities

ure 14 a are referenced to N,N-dimethylbutylamine (pKa 10.2).
The amine pKa decrement induced by a keto-carbonyl group in
b-position appears to be in the range of 1.6–1.8 units, as
judged by both acyclic and cyclic systems. This value range is
similar to pKa decrements observed for carboxyester and car-
boxamide groups in b-position to an amine (Figure 14 b and c).
However, there is some scatter in the currently available pKa
data as well as a suspected systematic shift towards lower pKa
values in the series of w-aminocarboxyesters and amides, sug-
gesting the need to reassess various experimental data prior to
drawing further conclusions. Nevertheless, it appears that the
carbonyl group accounts for most of the electron withdrawal
in all these cases.

Finally, nitriles belong to the most powerful pKa-lowering
functional groups, as illustrated by the pKa shifts in Figure 14 d.
These effects parallel those identified for the phenylsulfone
group and are similar or somewhat larger than those of a CF3
group at an equal topological distance from an amine unit
(see Section 3.3).[31] Again, an exponential attenuation of the
pKa decrements as a function of topological distance between
the cyano and amino function is evident.

Carboxylic acids represent a special class of basicity-lowering
functional groups. When in close proximity to the amine, the
influence on amine basicity is relatively small due to intramo-
lecular stabilization of the protonated nitrogen atom by the
carboxylate anion, present at physiological pH (Figure 15). This

Figure 15. Intramolecular stabilization of the protonated ammonium center
decreases the basicity-decreasing effect of adjacent carboxylates.

results in markedly lower DpKa decrements relative to the
other carbonyl and carboxyl derivatives shown in Figure 14.

4. Electronic and Stereoelectronic Considera-
tions

The conformational dependence of functional-group-induced
pKa decrements is only at the beginning of being identified
and understood, but as discussed in Section 3.4, it can be sub-
stantial for fluorine-substituted piperidine derivatives.
In the
systematic study of polyhydroxylated piperidines, Bols and co-
workers identified distinct differences of pKa shifts for axial and
equatorial hydroxy groups.[26, 33] Without exception, axial OH
groups at the 3-position of the piperidine ring resulted in
markedly decreased DpKa values compared with equatorial OH
Interestingly, the difference in pKa shifts of 1.0 0.3
groups.
units, observed for many equatorial–axial pKa couples, corre-
sponds closely to the DpKa differences observed for fluorine
atoms in b-position to a cyclic or acyclic amine, as discussed in
Section 3.4.

Figure 16. A 3-hydroxy group in piperidine derivatives exhibits conforma-
tionally dependent pKa shifts similarly to fluorine (see Figures 7 c and 8 a).
The pKa-lowering effect of the axial OH group is much less pronounced than
that of the equatorial OH group.

The parent compound 49, a 4-benzyl piperidine with an aryl-
sulfonylethyl substituent at the N atom, exhibits a pKa value of
6.8, which corresponds nicely to expectation, taking into ac-
count the strong basicity-lowering effect of an arylsulfone
group in b-position and the slight pKa-reducing effects of the
remote phenyl group (~ 0.2) operating through both cyclic s-
paths. Taking compound 49 as reference, the presence of an
OH group in the 3-position of the piperidine in the cis (axial)
derivative 50 results in only a small pKa shift as anticipated. By
contrast,
is much more pro-
nounced in the trans (equatorial) epimer 51. Gratifyingly, the
difference in pKa shifts amounts to one pKa unit, as observed
for polyhydroxylated piperidines.[26]

the basicity-lowering effect

The second example is given for a cyclic and an acyclic rep-
resentative of a series of 3,3,3-trifluoro-2-hydroxypropylamines
(Figure 17).[34–37] This functional group has been of interest in
medicinal chemistry[35, 36] and as a chiral auxiliary in asymmetric
synthesis.[37] The measured pKa values of the two hydroxylated
amines indicate a pKa shift of approximately  2.3 relative to
the corresponding N-propylamines for the combined effects of
the CF3 and the OH group both in b-position to the amine
center. Because the DpKa effect due to a b-CF3 group is about

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

www.chemmedchem.org

1111

MED

F. Diederich, M. Kansy, K. Müller, et al.

Figure 17. Two examples of compounds bearing a 3,3,3-trifluoro-2-hydroxy-
propylamine unit. The hydroxy group is forced by the bulky CF3 group to
take a syn-orientation to the +N H bond, thus stabilizing the protonated
ammonium center.

 2.0, the additional pKa shift due to the b-OH is only ~ 0.3.
However, this would be expected if the bulky CF3 group is as-
sumed to be trans to the amine center, thus forcing the hy-
droxy group into a gauche orientation, where it could stabilize
the protonated form by similar favorable interactions as diag-
nosed for 3-hydroxypiperidine derivatives. Several X-ray crystal
structures for different 3,3,3-trifluoro-2-hydroxypropylamines
are available,[34–36] all of which show a conformational arrange-
ment of the CF3 and OH groups as depicted in Figure 17.

The first example (Figure 16) illustrates a case with good ad-
ditivity of individual functional group effects operating essen-
tially independently of each other.
In the second example
(Figure 17), the two pKa-modulating functions cooperate in
specific and mutually exclusive conformational orientations. In
such a case, a simple additivity scheme may not hold if one or
both functional groups exhibit a distinct conformational de-
pendence of pKa-lowering effects.

The conformational dependence of pKa shifts has been rec-
ognized only in recent years, and only fragmentary data are
available for most common functional groups. Much more ex-
perimental work is needed based on carefully designed model
systems to clarify such important effects. All examples given
above refer to systems in which the functional group (F or OH)
is placed either in the 6-membered piperidine ring or in a
simple aliphatic unit, both being able to adopt well-staggered
conformations. Whether and to what extent the pKa-lowering
effects observed in 6-membered rings or acyclic systems can
be transferred to cases in which the electron-withdrawing ef-
fects are transmitted through s-paths with poorly staggered or
even eclipsed arrangements, as in substituted 5- and 4-mem-
bered amines or in bicyclic ring systems, remains to be ex-
plored.

This is illustrated by a representative group of substituted
pyrrolidine derivatives (Figure 18). The experimental pKa values
may be referenced to the unsubstituted pyrrolidine (pKa 11.3)
or N-benzylpyrrolidine (estimated pKa~ 8.9; for details of the
calculations, see Figure 12 SI), which then results in the total
pKa decrements indicated in parentheses below each formula.
The expected total downshifts, calculated by pKa decrements
derived from acyclic systems (or 6-membered model ring sys-

Figure 18. Experimental pKa values of s-acceptor-substituted pyrrolidine de-
rivatives. The first values in parentheses give the actual DpKa relative to un-
substituted pyrrolidine (11.3). The expected total downshifts are given in ital-
ics in a second set of parentheses; they must be multiplied by a correction
factor of 0.6–0.8 to match the observed values. For details of the calcula-
tions, see Figure 12 SI.

tems) and taking into account the dual s-transmission paths,
are given parenthetically in italics. The calculated total decre-
ments must be reduced typically by a correctional factor of
0.6–0.8 in order to match the observed values. This may indi-
cate that s-transmission effects in these 5-membered ring sys-
tems are suboptimal compared with those in well-staggered
acyclic or 6-membered ring systems.

Returning to the outset of tricyclic thrombin inhibitors of
Figure 4, we note that the annulated succinimide unit posi-
tions each of the two imide carbonyl groups in both a b- and
g-position to the N atom of the central pyrrolidine. Hence,
taking into account both s-transmission paths for each carbon-
yl unit, and accounting for the various other substituents ac-
cordingly (see Figure 13 SI), the calculated total pKa decrements
again overestimate the electron-withdrawing effects relative to
the corresponding values derived from the measured pKa
values of compounds ( )-26 to ( )-41 with reference to the
pKa value (11.4) of the unsubstituted hexahydropyrrolizine. In-
terestingly, a correction factor of about 0.6–0.8 is again re-
quired to match calculated and experimentally derived DpKa
values. As previously emphasized, a more detailed understand-
ing of pKa decrements in imperfectly staggered systems re-
quires more experimental work with carefully designed model
systems.

5. Comments on pKa Prediction Methods and
Developments of Computational Algorithms

We already referred to the outstanding publications by Perrin
and co-workers, allowing us an easy and remarkably accurate

1112

www.chemmedchem.org

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

Amine Basicities

prediction of pKa values.[13, 14] Their approach is pragmatic and
more concerned with experimentally derived linear free-energy
relations for pKa predictions than with attempts to derive pKa
values from first principles. In this way, the authors developed
easy-to-use algorithms for certain classes of compounds which
can be used as guiding rules for a large variety of molecules.
More importantly, the relationship between molecular struc-
ture and pKa-lowering effects remains transparent, which is a
prerequisite for rational, structure-guided modulation of amine
basicity.

Numerous other publications deal with the topic of compu-
tational pKa predictions, but most of the algorithms are appli-
cable only to limited classes of compounds for which the cal-
culation method was parameterized. Unfortunately,
the
amount of useful and publicly available data is remarkably lim-
ited and increases at a relatively slow rate.[38] Furthermore, al-
gorithms built on large fragment-based parameter sets apply-
ing multi-linear correlation or neural-network-type techniques
tend to become black boxes that, even with reasonably accu-
rate predictions within the substructural calibration domain,
make it difficult to the user to back-translate calculated results
into structural features.

Up to now, all prediction methods have been based on mo-
lecular topology only and do not take into account conforma-
tional or other 3D structural aspects. In view of the important
and sometimes substantial yet still not sufficiently explored
conformational effects, any such method has to be applied
with due care.

An additional complication may arise from differences in sol-
vation of the protonated versus unprotonated amine as well as
the electron-withdrawing substituents, particularly in bicyclic
or otherwise sterically congested amines. Such effects may op-
erate in the tricyclic thrombin inhibitors as well as in some of
the bicyclic polyhydroxylated piperidine analogues discussed
above; they may account for significant pKa shifts.

Owing to such inherent limitations, currently available com-
putational pKa prediction schemes are of limited practical value
for general applications. Nevertheless, they can be helpful in
specific cases to predict trends in series of related compounds.
An in-depth discussion of the merits of the various computa-
tional approaches towards pKa prediction is clearly far beyond
the scope of this review. However, the increasing number of
recent reports mandates that some of this ongoing work is
briefly introduced; this may help the reader to get a quick
entry into this developing field.

Besides the experimentally derived pKa values of tricyclic
thrombin inhibitors discussed above, Figures 1–4 also provide
estimated values calculated by the commercially available and
relatively widely used ACD/pKa prediction tool.[39] Although the
general trends observed for the experimental pKa values are re-
produced for most inhibitors, the calculated pKa values are sys-
tematically some 1–1.5 units too high. Furthermore, this tool
does not account for the different pKa values of epimeric com-
pounds, such as ( )-24 and ( )-25 or ( )-3 and ( )-4. More
generally, we find reasonable predictions for relatively simple
amines for which experimental data are available for calibra-
for amine compounds with more complex
tion. However,

structures or for which no data are yet available in the public
domain, the method should be used with due care, as also evi-
dent in a recent publication of pKa values of amines containing
a sulfone group at different topological distances to the amine
center.[31] It is hoped, however, that this method may be con-
tinuously improved as more measured pKa values become
available;
this predictive
method can be extended to include conformational effects on
pKa as well.

remains to be seen whether

it

Xing and Glen developed a simple but effective model for
pKa predictions.[40] Based on a compound set of 384 basic and
645 acidic aqueous pKa values extracted from Lange’s Hand-
book of Chemistry,[41] an ionization model was generated. Com-
bined descriptors ranked by cross-validated partial
least-
squares analysis were mapped onto molecular tree constructs
around the ionizable center. The derived model
is based on
the hypothesis that the ionization of a particular group is de-
pendent on its sub-environments constituted by its neighbor-
ing atoms and bonds in topologically defined concentric
shells. The idea is thus related to the concept of Perrin et al.[13]
In a direct comparison with Perrin’s approach on a set of 25 in-
dependent test compounds, the described model had slightly
less predictive power. In a second phase, Xing and co-workers
refined their algorithm for selected and well-represented sub-
classes of basic and acidic compounds, resulting in improved
predictions, albeit at the cost of uniform applicability.[42]

Eckert and Klamt used an algorithm based on improved die-
lectric continuum solvation methods (DCSMs), also accounting
for short-range electrostatics of polar solutes and ions as well
as hydrogen bonding.[43] Compared with other algorithms, the
model was calibrated with a relatively small dataset of 43
bases, excluding aliphatic amines. A fitted model was derived
that was remarkably successful in predicting pKa values of un-
saturated heterocyclic bases, conjugated amines, and primary
aliphatic amines. However, the method systematically failed for
secondary and tertiary amines, for which separate ad hoc cor-
rection factors had to be introduced.
In this way, the pKa
values of a test set of 58 more complex bioactive N-containing
basic compounds could be predicted reasonably well, with
some 85 % of the predicted pKa values lying within one unit of
the experimental pKa values. This method, which has been
made commercially available,[43] is still computationally intense,
as it requires the energy calculation of the base in its neutral
and protonated states by relatively high-level density function-
al theory (DFT).

Seybold and co-workers performed a theoretical analysis on
a limited set of 19 mono-substituted anilines (as well as 19
mono-substituted phenol derivatives) to test the usefulness of
different partial atomic charges obtained from high-level ab
initio self-consistent field (SCF) calculations for pKa predic-
tions.[44] Among various electron-density-partitioning schemes,
they found partial atomic charges based on Bader’s “atoms-in-
molecules”
atomic orbital
method, and natural population analysis to correlate best with
experimental pKa data. However, significant deviations be-
tween correlation-predicted and actual pKa values were noted
for several cases. We are not aware of an extension of this

Lçwdin’s orthogonal

scheme,

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

www.chemmedchem.org

1113

MED

analysis to other classes of organic bases, particularly to non-
conjugated amines, to assess the potential of a more general
applicability of this method.

A limited set of 15 small aliphatic amines, nine of which
having one or more hydroxy groups in b-position to the basic
center, was investigated by da Silva and Svendsen using high-
level quantum-mechanical calculations of gas-phase basicities,
complemented by polarizable continuum methods and Monte
Carlo free-energy perturbations to estimate solvation ener-
gies.[45] Although this work pointed to the importance of intra-
molecular hydrogen bonding modulating basicities, the overall
pKa-predictive power of
this computationally demanding
scheme appears to be limited.

Zhang and co-workers investigated a set of 74 drugs con-
taining a basic center with experimental aqueous pKa values
ranging between 6 and 11.[46] They applied both a multi-linear
heuristic model and a nonlinear neural network algorithm
based on radial basis functions incorporating a vast set of
some 700 topological, geometrical, and quantum-mechanical
descriptors. Based on a training set of 58 compounds (thus
leaving only 16 compounds for testing) they concluded that
the nonlinear neural-network-based method was overall more
successful
than the linear heuristic model. However, both
methods showed a significant scatter of predicted versus ex-
perimental pKa data, which still appears to limit the general ap-
plicability of either method.

Nagy et al. found good linear correlations between the pKa
of nitrogen bases and the minimum of the molecular electro-
static potential (MEP), estimated by either semi-empirical or
small-basis-set ab initio SCF calculations.[47] This methodology
provided reasonable prediction schemes for individual subsets
of aliphatic amines, pyridines, and anilines. It was noted that a
generalization over all three subsets was not possible, except
with a significant sacrifice of pKa predictability. Furthermore,
each compound subset contained only a small number of rep-
resentatives with limited structural diversity, making it difficult
to assess the proposed method regarding its potential
for
more general applications even within only a given subclass. In
a subsequent investigation of solvation effects, Nagy found
that hydration at the basic center as well as conformational
changes of neighboring groups can strongly impact on the cal-
culated MEP and thus on predicted pKa values.[48]

A similar finding was described by Manivet and co-workers
in a recent theoretical investigation of the basicity of seroto-
nin.[49] Based on high-level DFT calculations, complemented by
estimates of solvation effects by a polarizable continuum
model, they showed that computed pKa values may differ sub-
stantially depending on the conformation of the aminoethyl
side chain, thus on the relative position of the terminal amino/
ammonium group relative to the 5-hydroxyindolyl unit.

Brown and Mora-Diez calculated the first pKa of one di-sub-
stituted and 12 mono-substituted benzimidazoles using an ap-
proach similar to Eckert and Klamt (see above), also taking into
account possible tautomers of the neutral base.[50] Best perfor-
mance was noted with a standard, but high-level DFT ap-
proach. Whereas directly calculated pKa values differed sub-
stantially from experimental data, correlated values gave ac-

F. Diederich, M. Kansy, K. Müller, et al.

ceptable agreement. However, it was noted that the applica-
tion of their method to two mono-substituted benzimidazoles,
not included in their original correlation, were moderately suc-
cessful. Thus,
the authors concluded that although their
method gives overall good pKa predictions for this important
structural motif, the predictive power may still be insufficient
for practical applications.

Finally, Chattaraj and co-workers introduced the concept of
“group philicity”[51] to predict pKa values for a set of 63 small-
molecule compounds containing carboxylic and phosphoric
acids, alcohols, and anilines.[52] While individual subclasses
showed promising linear correlations, this was not the case for
all compounds taken together. A polynomial second-order cor-
relation resulted in a significantly improved correlation for all
compounds. Whether this “group philicity”-based approach
can also be extended to a diverse set of saturated amines and
refined to a level of sufficient prediction accuracy to become a
method for general practical applications remains to be seen.
In conclusion, most pKa prediction methods proposed or
available today were derived and validated on data of relative-
ly small structural series. Therefore, any application of such
methods to compounds with new topological features should
be done with due care, and spot-check measurements are
highly recommended in such cases. This holds true even for
applications of more established tools such as ACD/pKa, which
is based on relatively large datasets.

6. Conclusions

This review provides useful insight for predicting and tuning
amine basicities, one of the crucial factors determining molec-
ular physicochemical properties of concern in lead optimiza-
tion. Since the pioneering overviews by Perrin and co-workers
some decades ago, many new data have become available for
both relatively complex structures, such as typically encoun-
tered in medicinal chemistry, and series of simpler model com-
pounds. This has provided the incentive for a review on the
current state-of-affairs regarding structural factors influencing
amine basicity along with new complementary experimental
pKa values. Computational pKa prediction tools are not yet suf-
ficiently sophisticated to be of general practical value in the
pharmaceutical
this situation is expected to
change in the future, as more experimental data become avail-
able, and continued efforts are spent to refine existing tools.
While this article primarily addresses scientists in drug-discov-
ery chemistry, it should be equally useful to those in develop-
ing crop-protection agents. Furthermore,
it should appeal to
the broad community pursuing the development of amine li-
gands for organometallic complexes and, in particular, amine-
based organocatalysis, for which fine-tuning of acid/base prop-
erties is of utmost importance.[53]

industry, but

Acknowledgements

We thank F. Hoffmann–La Roche Ltd., Basel and the ETH Re-
search Council for support of this work. F.D. acknowledges the

1114

www.chemmedchem.org

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

Amine Basicities

F. C. Donders chair during his visiting professorship at the Univer-
sity of Utrecht.

Keywords: amines · basicity · database mining · medicinal
chemistry · pKa values

[1] For an example of a commercial database that has been used in parts
of this work, see: MedChem Database Version 06, Daylight Chemical In-
formation Systems, Inc., Aliso Viejo, CA 92656 (USA); http://www.day-
light.com/.

[2] For protocols for determinations of high-throughput pKa and log D
values, see: J. Olsen, P. Seiler, B. Wagner, H. Fischer, T. Tschopp, U. Obst-
Sander, D. W. Banner, M. Kansy, K. Müller, F. Diederich, Org. Biomol.
Chem. 2004, 2, 1339 – 1352.

[3] A. Avdeef, Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 2001, 1, 277 – 351.
[4] A. Avdeef, Absorption and Drug Development: Solubility, Permeability,

and Charge State, Wiley, Hoboken, 2003.

[5] H. Fischer, M. Kansy, D. Bur, Chimia 2000, 54, 640 – 645.
[6] B. Fermini, A. A. Fossa, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 2003, 2, 439 – 447.
[7] D. Alberati, D. Hainzl, S. Jolidon, E. A. Krafft, A. Kurt, A. Maier, E. Pinnard,
A. W. Thomas, D. Zimmerli, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2006, 16, 4311 –
4315.

[8] C. Jamieson, E. M. Moir, Z. Rankovic, G. Wishart, J. Med. Chem. 2006, 49,

5029 – 5046.

[9] J. A. Olsen, D. W. Banner, P. Seiler, U. Obst-Sander, A. D’Arcy, M. Stihle, K.
Müller, F. Diederich, Angew. Chem. 2003, 115, 2611 – 2615; Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 2003, 42, 2507 – 2511.

[10] E. Schweizer, A. Hoffmann-Rçder, J. A. Olsen, P. Seiler, U. Obst-Sander, B.
Wagner, M. Kansy, D. W. Banner, F. Diederich, Org. Biomol. Chem. 2006,
4, 2364 – 2375.

[11] A. Hoffmann-Rçder, E. Schweizer, J. Egger, P. Seiler, U. Obst-Sander, B.
Wagner, M. Kansy, D. W. Banner, F. Diederich, ChemMedChem 2006, 1,
1205 – 1215.

[12] E. Schweizer, A. Hoffmann-Rçder, K. Schärer, J. A. Olsen, C. Fäh, P. Seiler,
U. Obst-Sander, B. Wagner, M. Kansy, F. Diederich, ChemMedChem 2006,
1, 611 – 621.

[13] D. D. Perrin, B. Dempsey, E. P. Serjeant, pKa Prediction for Organic Acids

and Bases, Chapman & Hall, London, 1981.

[14] J. Clark, D. D. Perrin, Q. Rev. Chem. Soc. 1964, 18, 295 – 320.
[15] A. Albert, E. P. Serjeant, The Determination of Ionization Constants, T&A

Constable Ltd., Edinburgh, 1971.

[16] a) Sirius Analytical

Instruments Ltd., Applications and Theory Guide to
pH-Metric pKa and log P Determination, Revision 1.0, August 1993;
b) Sirius Analytical Instruments, Ltd., GLpKa Instruction Manual, January
1999; c) http://www.sirius-analytical.com.

[17] U. Obst, P. Betschmann, C. Lerner, P. Seiler, F. Diederich, V. Gramlich, L.
Weber, D. W. Banner, P. Schçnholzer, Helv. Chim. Acta 2000, 83, 855 –
909.

[18] The extremely facile ring opening of the tricyclic imides in basic envi-
ronment, discovered during pKa determination, has been developed
into a useful preparative method in the meantime,
leading to new
highly substituted pyrrolizidines as inhibitors of the peptidyl-proline
isomerase (PPIase) Pin 1; see: R. Siegrist, M. Zürcher, C. Baumgartner, P.
Seiler, F. Diederich, S. Daum, G. Fischer, C. Klein, M. Dangl, M. Schwaiger,
Helv. Chim. Acta 2007, 90, 217 – 259.

[19] R. Adams, M. Carmack, J. E. Mahan, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1942, 64, 2593 –

2597.

[20] For a review on dipolar interactions, see: R. Paulini, K. Müller, F. Dieder-
ich, Angew. Chem. 2005, 117, 1820 – 1839; Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2005,
44, 1788 – 1805.

[21] M. Jones, Jr., Organic Chemistry, Norton, New York, 1997, pp. 1086 –

1090.

[22] G. Wuitschik, E. M. Carreira, personal communication.
[23] G. Wuitschik, M. Rogers-Evans, K. Müller, H. Fischer, B. Wagner, F. Schu-
ler, L. Polonchuk, E. M. Carreira, Angew. Chem. 2006, 118, 7900 – 7903;
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2006, 45, 7736 – 7739.

[24] I. V. Alabugin, T. A. Zeidan, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002, 124, 3175 – 3185.

[25] C. Hansch, A. Leo, D. Hoekman, Exploring QSAR—Hydrophobic, Electron-
ic, and Steric Constants, ACS Professional Reference Book, Washington
DC, 1995.

[26] H. H. Jensen, L. Lyngbye, A. Jensen, M. Bols, Chem. Eur. J. 2002, 8,

1218 – 1226.

[27] D. C. Lankin, N. S. Chandrakumar, S. N. Rao, D. P. Spangler, J. P. Snyder, J.

Am. Chem. Soc. 1993, 115, 3356 – 3357.

[28] M. B. van Niel, I. Collins, M. S. Beer, H. B. Broughton, S. K. F. Cheng, S. C.
Goodacre, A. Heald, K. L. Locker, A. M. MacLeod, D. Morrison, C. R.
Moyes, D. O’Connor, A. Pike, M. Rowley, M. G. N. Russel, B. Sohal, J. A.
Stanton, S. Thomas, H. Verrier, A. P. Watt, J. L. Castro, J. Med. Chem.
1999, 42, 2087 – 2104.

[29] S. Sahli, B. Frank, W. B. Schweizer, F. Diederich, D. Blum-Kaelin, J. D.
Aebi, H.-J. Bçhm, C. Oefner, G. E. Dale, Helv. Chim. Acta 2005, 88, 731 –
750.

[30] M. Morgenthaler, D. Blum-Kaelin, J. D. Aebi, F. Diederich, manuscript in

preparation.

[31] R. E. Martin, B. Plancq, O. Gavelle, B. Wagner, H. Fischer, S. Bendels, K.

Müller, ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 285 – 287.

[32] G. H. McIntyre Jr., B. P. Block, W. C. Fernelius, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1959, 81,

529 – 535.

[33] M. Bols, H. H. Jensen, L. Lyngbye, A. Jensen, I. Thomsen, Latv. Chim. J.

2002, 60 – 68.

[34] T. Katagiri, Y. Fujiwara, S. Takahashi, K. Uneyama, J. Fluorine Chem. 2005,

126, 1134 – 1139.

[35] R. C. Durley, M. L. Grapperhaus, M. A. Massa, D. A. Mischke, B. L. Parnas,
Y. M. Fobian, N. P. Rath, D. D. Honda, M. Zeng, D. T. Connolly, D. M. Heu-
velman, B. J. Witherbee, K. C. Glenn, E. S. Krul, M. E. Smith, J. A. Sikorski,
J. Med. Chem. 2000, 43, 4575 – 4578.

[36] R. C. Durley, M. L. Grapperhaus, B. S. Hickory, M. A. Massa, J. L. Wang,
D. P. Spangler, D. A. Mischke, B. L. Parnas, Y. M. Fobian, N. P. Rath, D. D.
Honda, M. Zeng, D. T. Connolly, D. M. Heuvelman, B. J. Witherbee, M. A.
Melton, K. C. Glenn, E. S. Krul, M. E. Smith, J. A. Sikorski, J. Med. Chem.
2002, 45, 3891 – 3904.

[37] T. Katagiri, N. Iguchi, T. Kawate, S. Takahashi, K. Uneyama, Tetrahedron:

Asymmetry 2006, 17, 1157 – 1160.

[38] While the most recent update (Version 06) of the MedChem database
(see Ref. [1]) contains some 12 000 additional entries compared with
the previous Version 03, fewer than 100 entries with new pKa values
became available.

[39] ACD/pKa Version 8.19. Head Office, Advanced Chemistry Development,
Inc., 110 Young Street, 14th floor, Toronto, ON, Canada M5C 1T4; http://
www.acdlabs.com.

[40] L. Xing, R. C. Glen, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 2002, 42, 796 – 805.
[41] J. G. Speight, Lange’s Handbook of Chemistry, 13th ed., McGraw Hill,

New York, 2005, Tables 5 – 8.

[42] L. Xing, R. C. Glen, R. D. Clark, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 2003, 43, 870 –

879.

[43] F. Eckert, A. Klamt, J. Comput. Chem. 2006, 27, 11 – 19; http://www.

cosmologic.de.

[44] K. C. Gross, P. G. Seybold, C. M. Hadad, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 2002, 90,

445 – 458.

[45] E. F. da Silva, H. F. Svendsen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2003, 42, 4414 – 4421.
[46] F. Luan, W. Ma, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, M. Liu, Z. Hu, B. Fan, Pharm. Res.

2005, 22, 1454 – 1460.

[47] P. Nagy, K. Novak, G. Szasz, J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem) 1989, 201, 257 –

270.

[48] P. Nagy, J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem) 1989, 201, 271 – 286.
[49] J. Pratuangdejkul, W. Nosoongnoen, G.-A. GuØrin, S. Loric, M. Conti, J.-

M. Launay, P. Manivet, Chem. Phys. Lett. 2006, 420, 538 – 544.

[50] T. N. Brown, N. Mora-Diez, J. Phys. Chem. B 2006, 110, 9270 – 9279.
[51] R. Parthasarathi, J. Padmanabhan, M. Elango, V. Subramanian, P. K. Chat-

taraj, Chem. Phys. Lett. 2004, 394, 225 – 230.

[52] R. Parthasarathi, J. Padmanabhan, M. Elango, K. Chitra, V. Subramanian,

P. K. Chattaraj, J. Phys. Chem. A 2006, 110, 6540 – 6544.

[53] B. List, J. W. Yang, Science 2006, 313, 1584 – 1586.

Received: March 19, 2007
Revised: May 2, 2007
Published online on May 25, 2007

ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 1100 – 1115

 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

www.chemmedchem.org

1115

