Tangential migration of neuronal precursors of
glutamatergic neurons in the adult mammalian brain

Gerald J. Suna,b,1, Yi Zhoua,c,1, Ryan P. Stadela,d,1, Jonathan Mosse, Jing Hui A. Yongf, Shiori Itoa, Nicholas K. Kawasakia,
Alexander T. Phana, Justin H. Oha, Nikhil Modaka, Randall R. Reedb,g,h, Nicolas Tonie, Hongjun Songa,b,c,d,f,i,2,
and Guo-li Minga,b,c,f,h,j,2

aInstitute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205; bThe Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205; cBiochemistry, Cellular and Molecular Biology Graduate Program, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205; dPredoctoral Human Genetics Training Program, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205; eDepartment of Fundamental Neurosciences, University of Lausanne, 1005 Lausanne, Switzerland; fCellular and Molecular Medicine
Graduate Program, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205; gCenter for Sensory Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205; hDepartment of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205;
iDepartment of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205; and jDepartment of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205

Edited by Fred H. Gage, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, San Diego, CA, and approved June 23, 2015 (received for review May 2, 2015)

In a classic model of mammalian brain formation, precursors of
principal glutamatergic neurons migrate radially along radial glia
fibers whereas GABAergic interneuron precursors migrate tangen-
tially. These migration modes have significant implications for brain
function. Here we used clonal lineage tracing of active radial glia-like
neural stem cells in the adult mouse dentate gyrus and made the
surprising discovery that proliferating neuronal precursors of gluta-
matergic granule neurons exhibit significant tangential migration
along blood vessels, followed by limited radial migration. Genetic
birthdating and morphological and molecular analyses pinpointed
the neuroblast stage as the main developmental window when
tangential migration occurs. We also developed a partial “whole-
mount” dentate gyrus preparation and observed a dense plexus of
capillaries, with which only neuroblasts, among the entire popula-
tion of progenitors, are directly associated. Together, these results
provide insight into neuronal migration in the adult mammalian
nervous system.
adult neurogenesis | lineage tracing | migration | hippocampus |
vascular niche

The nervous system is formed by migration of neuronal pre-

cursors and immature neurons to specific locations during
development. The classic radial unit hypothesis of mammalian
brain development postulates that in the developing neocortex,
glutamatergic, excitatory, principal neurons migrate radially to
form discrete information-processing columns of ontogenetic
origin (1), whereas GABAergic, inhibitory, modulatory interneurons
migrate tangentially across columns (2). Neurogenesis persists in the
adult mammalian brain in two primary regions and is thought to
follow the classic migration model (3, 4). In the subventricular zone
(SVZ) of the lateral ventricles, new neurons generated from neural
precursors migrate tangentially to the olfactory bulb to become
GABAergic interneurons (5, 6). In contrast, in the subgranular zone
(SGZ) of the dentate gyrus, new neurons generated from radial glia-
like neural stem cells (RGLs) migrate radially into the granule cell
layer to become principal glutamatergic granule cells (7). Due to
technical challenges, migratory patterns have only been examined at
the cell-population level, and thus we still lack detailed information
about the spatial relationship between individual precursors and their
progeny in vivo. Both adult neurogenic niches are highly vascularized,
and this property is hypothesized to play a critical role in adult
neurogenesis (3). In both adult SVZ (8–10) and SGZ (11), pro-
liferating progenitor cells are in close association with the vasculature,
yet the functional role of the vasculature in the niche remains to be
fully explored.

Contrary to the classic model, our recent clonal lineage tracing
of individual quiescent RGLs showed tangential distribution of
glutamatergic granule neurons with respect to their parental

RGL in the adult dentate gyrus (12). We therefore systematically
investigated the migration pattern and trajectory of these newborn
cells. Using a clonal lineage-tracing approach that preferentially
targets active RGLs in the adult mouse dentate gyrus, thereby
birthdating their newborn progeny in vivo, we found significant tan-
gential distribution of newborn neuroblasts from their parental RGL.
Furthermore, neuroblasts directly contact the vascular network,
suggesting an important function of blood vessels as a substrate for
migration. Together, our results reveal a previously unidentified
mode of glutamatergic neuronal migration under physiological
conditions in the adult mammalian brain.

Results
Spatial Distribution of Clonally Related Newborn Neuronal Progeny with a
Defined Birthdate. We used a tamoxifen-inducible Ascl1CreERT2
knockin mouse line (13) to sparsely label (∼8–16 cells per dentate
gyrus) and lineage-trace clones of neural precursors in the adult
dentate gyrus (Fig. 1A), following our previous strategy of clonally
labeling RGLs using the NestinCreERT2 mouse line (12). At 1 d post-
tamoxifen injection (1 dpi), labeled cells in the adult SGZ consisted
of over 90% Nestin+GFAP+ RGLs and a few early intermediate
progenitor cells (IPCs; n = 8 dentate gyri), as assessed by morphology

Significance

Mammalian brain development is a complex, ordered process
whereby newborn neurons follow stereotyped migration modes
to organize into specific patterns required for complicated neural
circuit formation. Classically, principal excitatory neurons are
thought to organize into radial columns that underlie the basic
brain circuits, whereas inhibitory neurons disperse tangentially
across these columns to modulate the principal circuits. These
principles are thought to be fundamental to the genesis of the
complex mammalian brain. Surprisingly, we found that pre-
cursors for excitatory principal neurons exhibit tangential mi-
gration in the adult mammalian brain. Our findings enrich our
understanding of neurodevelopment and lay important concep-
tual groundwork for studies of brain plasticity, disease, and repair.

Author contributions: G.J.S., Y.Z., H.S., and G.-l.M. designed research; G.J.S., Y.Z., R.P.S., J.M.,
J.H.A.Y., S.I., N.K.K., A.T.P., J.H.O., N.M., and N.T. performed research; R.R.R. contributed new
reagents/analytic tools; G.J.S., Y.Z., J.M., J.H.A.Y., S.I., N.K.K., A.T.P., J.H.O., N.M., and N.T.
analyzed data; and G.J.S., Y.Z., H.S., and G.-l.M. wrote the paper.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1G.J.S., Y.Z., and R.P.S. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: shongju1@jhmi.edu or gming1@
jhmi.edu.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1508545112/-/DCSupplemental.

9484–9489 | PNAS |

July 28, 2015 | vol. 112 | no. 30

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1508545112

at 1 dpi the majority of Ascl1CreERT2-labeled RGLs (96 ± 2%, n =
10 dentate gyri) had just divided (with one adjacent progeny) or
were in the process of cell division (Fig. 1A). Therefore, our
current approach selectively targets activating RGLs, allowing, to
our knowledge for the first time, birthdating of RGL progeny to
track their development with high temporal precision. At 1 month
posttamoxifen injection (mpi), we observed clones in which Prox-
1+NeuN+ mature dentate granule cells were distributed a long
distance (more than 100 μm) away from their mother RGL along
the SGZ plane (Fig. 1C and Movie S1). These results suggest, in
contrast to the classic model, tangential migration of a gluta-
matergic neuronal subtype in the adult mammalian brain under
physiological conditions.

Developmental Stage-Specific Tangential Distribution. Newborn
cells may exhibit tangential distribution due to passive mecha-
nisms such as displacement upon cell division. To provide further
evidence for active tangential migration, we explored the dy-
namics of cell distribution by time-course analysis. At 3 dpi, la-
beled cells exhibited little displacement from each other, despite
all being identified as highly proliferative IPCs (14) (Fig. 1D). In
contrast, at 7 dpi there was significant distance along the tan-
gential plane of the SGZ between labeled newborn neural pro-
genitors and their parental RGLs, the distribution of which was
very similar to that at 1–2 mpi (Fig. 1D). Only ∼15% of labeled
new neurons exhibited measurable radial displacement away
from the SGZ into the granule cell layer even at 1 or 2 mpi (all
<25 μm), yet among these cells ∼47% spread more than 25 μm
tangentially away from their parental RGL (Fig. 1E). The av-
erage tangential distance exceeded that of radial distance by
almost 18-fold. Notably, radial migration was absent at 7 dpi,
suggesting that tangential movement preceded any radial mi-
gration (Fig. 1E); no correlation between tangential and radial
migration was observed among individual cells that exhibited
both (Fig. 1E; R = 0.08, P = 0.85). Taken together, these results
establish that tangential distribution of newborn progeny from their
parental RGL could not have arisen by chance and instead repre-
sents the dominant mode of migration in the adult dentate gyrus.

We next asked whether tangential migration occurred during a
specific developmental stage (or stages) during adult neuro-
genesis. Adult hippocampal neurogenesis proceeds in a stereo-
typic sequence—dividing RGLs give rise to IPCs, which in turn
develop through neuroblast and immature neuron stages before
becoming mature glutamatergic granule neurons (Fig. 2A) (4).
Using morphological features and molecular markers to distin-
guish labeled cells at different developmental stages (Fig. 2A
and Table S1), we found that neuroblasts, corresponding to 3- to
7-d-old DCX+ cells with a bipolar, elongated morphology, were
the earliest cells in the developmental lineage that showed tan-
gential distribution away from their parental RGL (Fig. 2B). On
average, neuroblasts, immature neurons, and mature neurons
exhibited similar tangential distances away from their parental
RGLs (Fig. 2B). These results suggest that the majority of tan-
gential migration occurs within the neuroblast stage during adult
hippocampal neurogenesis.

Pattern and Magnitude of Tangential Distribution. A consequence of
tangential migration of neuronal progeny is that individual
clones disperse over areas beyond that of a radial unit, poten-
tially allowing individual RGLs to modify a large domain of the
hippocampal circuitry via neurogenesis. We visualized 2D SGZ
projections of clones over time in 300-μm-square windows (Fig.
S1; excluding clones with single RGLs that had not completed
division). We also included non–RGL-containing clones only for
1–2 mpi, because in some clones RGLs became differentiated
(12). Qualitatively, clones dispersed over large areas, strongly
suggestive of widespread tangential migration (Fig. S1).

E
C
N
E
I
C
S
O
R
U
E
N

Fig. 1. Tangential distribution of newborn granule neurons away from
their parental RGLs of origin in the adult dentate gyrus as revealed by in vivo
clonal analysis. (A) Sample projected confocal image of an Ascl1CreERT2;Rosa-
YFPf/+–labeled RGL in the dentate gyrus at 1 dpi. As shown in a high-mag-
nification image (Bottom), this GFAP+ RGL (closed arrowheads) underwent
an asymmetric division to produce a GFAP− neuronal progeny (open ar-
rowheads; on a different focal plane). [Scale bars, 100 μm (Top) and 10 μm
(Bottom).] (B) Computational simulations of the nearest distances between
two cells in the 3D dentate gyrus space. Each colored line represents the
reverse cumulative distribution of the nearest cell distances from a simula-
tion with a given number of total cells. (C) (Left) Sample projection confocal
image of a labeled clone in an Ascl1CreERT2;Rosa-YFPf/+ mouse at 1 mpi
(Movie S1) showing tangential distribution of Prox1+NeuN+ mature gluta-
matergic granule neurons and their parental GFAP+ RGL. (Inset) Two-
dimensional SGZ plane projection in 200-μm-square windows of all clonally
related cell locations. The RGL is represented as the center open circle; neural
progeny are represented as closed circles. (Right, Top) Schematic diagram for
measurements of tangential and radial distances of neuronal progeny from
the parental RGL. (Right, Bottom) Enlarged confocal images for a GFAP+ RGL
(1) and Prox1+NeuN+ mature neuronal progeny (2). (Scale bars, 10 μm.) GCL,
granule cell layer. (D) Distribution plot of the tangential distance between a
labeled RGL and its progeny within each clone at 3 dpi, 7 dpi, and 1–2 mpi
(*P < 0.05; two-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov test statistic: 0.85 for 3 vs. 7 dpi;
0.66 for 3 dpi vs. 1–2 mpi). Raw distributions are shown as bar graphs; curved
lines correspond to smoothed distributions. (E) Dot plot of the tangential
versus radial distance from the parental RGL for each neural progeny in all
labeled RGL-containing clones at 3 dpi, 7 dpi, and 1–2 mpi. (Inset) Tangential
distance of each neural progeny from its parental RGL.

and molecular marker expression (Table S1). Computational simu-
lations (12) estimated that given eight initially labeled cells, any two
labeled cells within 200 μm of each other had a 99% probability
of belonging to the same clone (Fig. 1B). Thus, although few
isolated IPCs were labeled at 1 dpi, the probability of their mis-
assignment to an RGL clone was 1% or lower. Crucially, given
our simulation results, we conservatively conducted all our anal-
yses by excluding clones in which progeny were >150 μm away
from their parent RGL, thus only focusing on clones with a max-
imum diameter of 300 μm.

In contrast to NestinCreERT2-based clonal

lineage tracing of
quiescent RGLs that exhibited stochastic activation over time (12),

Sun et al.

PNAS |

July 28, 2015 | vol. 112 | no. 30 | 9485

processes (Fig. 4A, Left). Eighty-eight percent of Tbr2+DCX+
and 80% of Tbr2−DCX+ cells with tangential processes were
closely associated with the vasculature (Fig. 4A, Right). In con-
trast, Tbr2+DCX− IPCs or Tbr2−DCX+ immature neurons with
radial processes mostly lacked vascular contact (Fig. 4A). We further
examined the interaction between neural progeny and endothelial
cells at the ultrastructural
level using electron microscopy. Re-
markably, processes and soma of some labeled neuroblasts were in
direct contact with blood vessels (Fig. 4B). These data support the
model that neuroblasts represent the dominant cell stage of active
migration via a vascular substrate.

Global View of Neural Precursors and Vascular Niche. To determine
whether the general population of neural precursors exhibited
properties similar to those clonally labeled in Ascl1CreERT2 mice,
we developed a partial “whole-mount” preparation by sectioning
the hippocampus parallel to the SGZ (Fig. 5A and Movie S3).
This preparation enabled large sheets of the SGZ to be visual-
ized in a single section. We first visualized CD31+ vasculature
and found a dense bed of blood vessels within the SGZ, in
contrast to a sparse, columnar architecture of vessels within the
granule cell layer (Fig. 5B). The SGZ vascular architecture may
therefore be uniquely suited to supporting tangential migration
of newborn progeny within the adult SGZ.

Fig. 3. Close association between tangentially migrating neuroblasts and
blood vessels in the adult dentate gyrus. (A) Sample confocal images (Left)
and 3D rendering (Far Right) of a CFP+ clone at 7 dpi with a neuroblast whose
soma and tangential process closely associated with a CD31+ blood vessel.
(B) Sample confocal image and 3D rendering of a GFP+ clone at 7 dpi containing
a parental RGL and dispersed Tbr2+DCX+ neuroblasts (open arrowheads) in close
association with CD31+ blood vessels (Movie S2). Note that CD31 and Tbr2
shared the same channel due to limited availability of channels but could
be distinguished by different morphology (Tbr2, nuclear staining; CD31,
tubular staining). (C) Sample confocal image and 3D rendering of a GFP+
clone at 7 dpi with a neuroblast whose tangential process extended along a
blood vessel and contained polarized GM130+ Golgi apparatus (closed
arrowheads) at its base, proximal to the cell soma. (D) Sample confocal image
and 3D rendering of GFP+ neuroblasts at 7 dpi with polarized γ-tubulin+
centrosomes (closed arrowheads) and GM130+ Golgi apparatus (open arrow-
heads) and in close association with CD31+ blood vessels. (Scale bars, 10 μm.)

Fig. 2. Developmental stage-specific tangential distribution of newborn
neural progeny. (A) Summary of molecular markers used for identification of
each cell type during adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Newborn cells are
generated from GFAP+Nestin+ RGLs that undergo asymmetric neuronal di-
visions, which develop into Tbr2+ intermediate progenitor cells with short,
multipolar processes within 3 d of birth. Within 3–7 d, newborn cells possess
long, bipolar processes and elongated somas in a Tbr2+/−DCX+ neuroblast
stage before penetrating the granule cell layer and becoming a polarized
Prox1+DCX+ immature neuron with axon and dendrite. Over the next
month, newborn cells mature into Prox1+NeuN+ neurons with spiny den-
drites and long axons that project to CA3. See also Table S1. (B) Summary of
the tangential distance of each neural progeny from its parental RGL at each
developmental stage. IN, immature neuron; N, mature granule neuron; NB,
neuroblast. Values represent mean ± SEM (*P < 0.01; #P ∼ 1; Wilcoxon rank-
sum test with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons; test statistic,
z = −5.58 and −0.72, respectively). (C) Histogram and cumulative distribution
plot of the maximum distance between clonally related neural progeny for
all clones, including non–RGL-containing clones. See Fig. S1 for a 2D SGZ
plane projection of representative clones (*P < 0.1; two-sample Kolmogorov–
Smirnov test statistic: 0.38).

We next quantitatively determined the extent of tangential
distribution of neuronal progeny in each clone under 2D SGZ
projection. As opposed to measuring the distance of each new-
born progeny to its mother RGL as in Fig. 1, we instead mea-
sured the maximum distance among all newborn progeny within
each clone. The mean values were 43 ± 16 μm and 69 ± 19 μm,
whereas the maximum values were 149 μm and 210 μm at 7 dpi
and 1–2 mpi, respectively. The distribution of maximum dis-
tances was modestly shifted from 7 dpi to 1–2 mpi (Fig. 2C). The
considerable spacing among neural progeny supports our model
of neuronal migration as opposed to primarily motility of RGLs.

Vascular Substrate for Putative Tangential Migration. We then in-
vestigated a potential cellular mechanism underlying tangential
migration of neuronal precursors in the adult hippocampus
in vivo. Tangential migration of GABAergic interneurons has
been shown to be facilitated by a combination of homotypic and
heterotypic cellular interactions, such as migration in chains and
along existing axonal processes, respectively (15). We therefore
searched for potential substrates that could support tangential
migration during adult hippocampal neurogenesis. In the adult
dentate gyrus, BrdU-incorporating cells are known to be in close
association with the vasculature (11). Indeed, we found that la-
beled neuroblasts mostly stayed in very close contact with CD31+
vasculature (Fig. 3 A and B and Movie S2). Notably, these
neuroblasts exhibited polarized organelles, such as GM130+
Golgi apparatus (Fig. 3C) and γ-tubulin+ centrosomes (Fig. 3D),
characteristic of migrating, mobile cells (15).
Quantitative analysis further showed that, among all labeled
cells, Tbr2+DCX+ and Tbr2−DCX+ neuroblasts were two major
cell types in contact with the vasculature, either via cell soma or

9486 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1508545112

Sun et al.

immature neurons (Fig. 6). Tangentially migrating neuroblasts
may use the vasculature as a migration substrate, revealing an
important role of this neurogenic niche component (Fig. 6).

Our finding of dominant tangential migration of neural pre-
cursors of principal glutamatergic dentate granule cells in the
adult brain is a departure from the classic radial unit hypothesis
of embryonic cortical development (1). Although early studies
described tangential migration of presumed excitatory neurons
in the embryonic cortex, they may have actually been describing
tangentially migrating inhibitory neurons, which were discovered
later (17). Interestingly, at least some rare (18), although usually
transient (19, 20), populations of excitatory cortical neurons
migrate tangentially in the developing brain. Tangential migra-
tion of neural precursors in the developing hippocampus has
previously only been observed in early postnatal developmental
stages, during which the hippocampus is still
immature and
marked by ongoing growth and development (21, 22). It may be
that radial and tangential migration modes are not specific to
neurons releasing a specific neurotransmitter. Indeed, in the
cerebellum, inhibitory principal Purkinje neurons exhibit radial
migration, whereas excitatory modulatory granule neurons mi-
grate tangentially as well as radially (23). A very small number of
glutamatergic modulatory interneurons are also generated in the
adult SVZ and migrate tangentially to the olfactory bulb (24).
Motor neurons in the spinal cord possess both radial and tan-
gential migration (25). Additionally, neurons originating from
the diencephalon can migrate tangentially to populate the amygdala,
a telencephalic nucleus (26).

Fig. 5. Neuroblast–vasculature interaction using a partial whole-mount
dentate gyrus SGZ preparation. (A) Schematic illustration of the partial
whole-mount SGZ preparation (Movie S3). (B) CD31+ blood vessels using a
whole-mount preparation visualized in SGZ (Left) and GCL (Right). (Scale
bar, 100 μm.) (C) Sample projected confocal image of Nestin-GFP tissue from
a partial whole-mount preparation immunostained for Tbr2, CD31, and DCX
(Movie S4). (Scale bar, 100 μm.) (D) Quantification of the vascular association
of different cell types expressing combinations of Nestin-GFP, Tbr2, and DCX
using a partial whole-mount preparation to view the population of progenitors
in the SGZ. Association was defined as having cell soma on a blood vessel and
compared with simulated random distributions of the same numbers of cells in
the same space. Values represent means ± SEM [n = 3 animals; *P < 0.05; **P <
0.01; one-tailed unpaired Student’s t test, observed > simulated; Tbr2+: t(4) =
2.20; Tbr2+DCX+: t(4) = 2.44; DCX+ (neuroblast): t(4) = 3.76]. (E) Sample confocal
image and 3D rendering of a Tbr2+DCX+ neuroblast migrating on a CD31+
blood vessel with polarized GM130+ Golgi apparatus (closed arrowhead) from a
partial whole-mount preparation in a Nestin-GFP mouse. (Scale bars, 10 μm.)

E
C
N
E
I
C
S
O
R
U
E
N

Fig. 4. Direct contact between tangentially migrating neuroblasts and blood
vessels in the adult dentate gyrus. (A) (Left) Quantification of the distribution
of various labeled precursors in close association with the vasculature at 7 dpi.
Values represent mean ± SEM. (Right) Summaries of precursor cell molecular
marker expression and the percentage of a given cell subtype in close associ-
ation with the vasculature. BV, blood vessel.
(B) Three-dimensional re-
construction, from serial electron microscopic sections, of a GFP+ SGZ neuronal
precursor (NP1; closed arrowhead) extending a tangential process along a
blood vessel. The immunofluorescence-identified, immunoperoxidase-labeled
cell (Top) sits alongside another neuronal precursor (NP2; open arrowhead)
and apposes the blood vessel with both its tangential process (Middle Left) and
its cell body (Top Right; arrowhead). (Scale bars, 5 μm.)

Using Nestin-GFP reporter mice (16) in combination with the
same immunohistological and morphological markers used for
clonal analysis (Fig. 2A and Table S1), we examined the asso-
ciation of SGZ progenitors with vasculature (Fig. 5C). Given
that a fraction of different cell types would be in close proximity
to blood vessels by chance, we simulated vascular association of
the same number of each cell type randomly placed in the same
SGZ space. We found that Tbr2+DCX+ or Tbr2−DCX+ neuro-
blasts were associated with CD31+ blood vessels significantly
above chance levels (Fig. 5D and Movie S4). These neuroblasts
on blood vessels also contained polarized GM130+ Golgi appa-
ratus, characteristic of migrating cells (Fig. 5E). Together with
findings from clonal analyses (Figs. 3 and 4), these results sup-
port a model whereby vasculature serves as a substrate for tan-
gential migration of newborn neural progeny during adult
hippocampal neurogenesis.

Discussion
In contrast to the prevailing model that glutamatergic neurons
migrate radially whereas interneurons migrate tangentially dur-
ing development, we demonstrated to our knowledge for the first
time in the adult mammalian brain that neuroblast precursors of
principal glutamatergic neurons exhibit significant tangential
distribution away from their parental stem cells under physiolog-
ical conditions. We revealed a two-step migration process during
adult hippocampal neurogenesis in which significant tangential
migration of neuroblasts is followed by limited radial migration of

Sun et al.

PNAS |

July 28, 2015 | vol. 112 | no. 30 | 9487

current approach permits clonal analysis of activating adult dentate
RGLs using the Ascl1CreERT2 knockin mouse line (13) and direct
examination of cell dispersion of individual newborn progeny with
respect to their parental RGL. With the high temporal and spatial
resolution our approach allows, we were able to directly compare
tangential and radial migration of individual cells for the first
time, to our knowledge. Interestingly, the two forms of migration
appeared to be temporally segregated, with tangential migration
preceding and exceeding radial migration. Together, these data
suggest that independent mechanisms may regulate the two modes
of migration. Future studies combining our clonal analysis with
conditional gene inactivation could elucidate shared or independent
molecular mechanisms governing different forms of migration.

We also developed a partial whole-mount preparation to opti-
mize visualization of the SGZ niche and showed that the general
population of neuroblasts is in close contact with the blood vessel
network and exhibits polarized Golgi apparatus, characteristic of
migrating cells. This preparation will allow for systematic charac-
terization of the complete global architecture of the hippocampal
niche in the future. Such a characterization could potentially re-
veal important motifs for understanding the underlying structure
of the vascular network and migrating cells that we have observed.
Ultimately, our technique can help broaden our knowledge of
general principles of neurogenic niches, especially in combination
with knowledge gained from similar approaches in the adult
SVZ (8–10).

Our clonal analyses of activating radial glia-like neural stem
cells reveal a previously unrecognized mode of neuronal migra-
tion during adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Given that adult
neural stem cells are dynamically regulated by their local envi-
ronment, including neuronal activity modulation (34, 35), our
findings have significant implications for understanding how in-
dividual neural stem cells could impact the function of the
existing microcircuitry via delivery of newborn neurons that are
primed to undergo a critical period of enhanced plasticity (36).
Our findings also provide a framework in which to investigate the
aberrant migration of newborn granule cells under pathological
conditions, such as epilepsy (37, 38). In addition, the identifi-
cation of a novel mode of glutamatergic cell migration tangen-
tially along the vasculature suggests a strategy for overcoming
current challenges in targeting glutamatergic neurons to injured
or degenerating regions for successful cell-transplantation ther-
apy in the adult mammalian brain (39). Together, our results
suggest that diverse modes of migration may be ubiquitous
among different neuronal classes in the adult mammalian brain,
providing important conceptual groundwork for future studies of
neural development, plasticity, regeneration, repair, and brain
disorders.

Materials and Methods
Animals and Tamoxifen Administration. Ascl1CreERT2;Rosa-YFP f/+ and
Ascl1CreERT2;Confetti f/+ mice and Nestin-GFP transgenic mice were used. All
mice in the study were backcrossed to the C57BL/6 background for at least
six generations. Animals were housed in a 14-h light/10-h dark cycle with
free access to food and water. Tamoxifen (66.67 mg/mL; Sigma; T5648)
was prepared in a 5:1 corn oil (Sigma)-to-ethanol mixture. To achieve sparse
labeling for clonal analysis (∼8–16 clones per hemisphere), a single dose of
tamoxifen (77.5 mg/kg for the Rosa-YFPf/+ reporter; 250 mg/kg for the
Confettif/+ reporter) was intraperitoneally injected into adult 8- to 10-wk-old
male and female mice. Animal procedures were performed in accor-
dance with institutional guidelines of the Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine.

Tissue Processing, Immunostaining, and Confocal Imaging. Serial 40-μm-thick
coronal sections were prepared for immunohistology as described (12). For
partial whole-mount dentate gyrus SGZ preparations the whole hippocam-
pus was dissected from the cortex and mounted dentate side-up on a frozen
sliding microtome, and serial 50-μm horizontal sections were collected. All
antibodies used are listed in SI Materials and Methods. Confocal images

Fig. 6. Two-step model for neuronal migration during adult hippocampal
neurogenesis. During adult hippocampal neurogenesis, radial glia-like cells
give rise to Tbr2+ intermediate progenitor cells within 3 d. In the next 4 d,
the cells become DCX+ proliferating neuroblasts that extend long processes
tangential to the SGZ and contact blood vessels directly. During this phase,
neuroblasts use blood vessels as a substrate to migrate tangentially away
from their parental RGL. After 7 d, newborn neural progeny extend radial
dendritic processes and develop into NeuN+Prox1+ dentate granule neurons
and exhibit limited radial migration through the granule cell layer. (Lower)
Global-view illustration of RGLs, neural progeny, and vasculature in the
adult SGZ.

Here we have described an example of tangential migration of
neuronal precursors of excitatory principal neurons in the adult
mammalian brain. The magnitude of migration observed, al-
though significant and not due to cell displacement upon di-
vision, is much less than that of migrating SVZ neuroblasts or
even radially migrating neocortical neurons. This may be due to
differences in tissue architecture. Neuroblasts in the SVZ are
born far from their target brain region and the neocortex is a
multilayered structure, both requiring cells to travel longer dis-
tances to populate all target regions. By comparison, the dentate
gyrus is a thin single-layer sheet whereby newborn neurons were
presumed, before the present study, to be born, develop, and
integrate all in the same location. Due to the limitation of single-
color reporters in resolving different clones and the probabilities
of clonality calculated from our simulations, we took an in-
herently conservative approach by imposing a 300-μm maximum
for clone diameter. Our reported magnitude of tangential mi-
gration distance may therefore be an underestimation.

The vasculature has been proposed to be a crucial niche
component for adult neurogenesis in both the SGZ and SVZ (8–
11); however,
its functional role is not well-understood. We
showed that neuroblasts exhibit several features of migrating
cells, such as polarized organelle distribution, and that they
display a tight, direct association with the vasculature at cellular
and ultrastructural levels. Although our data leave open the
possibility of vasculature-independent tangential migration, our
findings suggest that one function of the vascularized niche is to
support migration of neuronal progeny away from their parental
origin. Interestingly, GABAergic neurons generated in the adult
SVZ have also been shown to migrate along blood vessels in the
rostral migratory stream (27, 28) and toward injury sites fol-
lowing stroke (29). Thus, in the adult brain, the vasculature may
serve as a common substrate for migration of different neuronal
subtypes. This mechanism to support cell migration may also be
important during early development, because vascular outgrowth
often precedes neural outgrowth, and migrating cells can be found
in regions lacking classic substrates such as glial fibers (30, 31).

We and others have previously only documented radial migra-
tion during adult hippocampal neurogenesis (32, 33), having been
limited to population-level analyses that lacked lineage relation-
ship information of individual stem cells and their progeny. Our

9488 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1508545112

Sun et al.

were taken to confirm cell identity according to immunohistological and
morphological properties (Fig. 2A and Table S1).

Image Processing and Data Analysis. Clonal analysis and simulations to esti-
mate the probability of two cells belonging to a clone from 3D reconstructed
adult dentate gyri were performed as previously described (12). Clones that
spanned multiple serial sections were reconstructed using Reconstruct soft-
ware (John C. Fiala, NIH, Bethesda). Aligned images were exported at full
resolution for 3D visualization into Imaris (Bitplane). Cells and vasculature
were identified, localized, and digitized into 3D space in Imaris according to
distinct morphological and molecular markers (Fig. 2A and Table S1). Data
were exported to Matlab (The MathWorks) for analysis. Distance measure-
ments at the clonal level were collected from 7 hemispheres (five animals) at
3 dpi, 9 hemispheres (six animals) at 7 dpi, and 12 hemispheres (seven ani-
mals) at 1–2 mpi. For vasculature association analysis at the clonal level, all
labeled clones and percentages of vasculature association were quantified
and averaged across 10 hemispheres (five animals). For vasculature associa-
tion analysis at the population level, all cells in a horizontal section from
three Nestin-GFP animals were quantified. Simulated vasculature associa-
tions (Fig. 5D) were performed by randomly placing cells in the same 2D SGZ
space, as estimated by a third-degree polynomial plane fit. One hundred
iterations of the simulation were performed for each cell type.

Electron Microscopy Analysis. Adult C57BL/6 female mice were stereotaxically
injected with retrovirus expressing GFP (40) and processed 2 d after injection.
Fifty-micrometer-thick coronal sections containing clearly labeled newborn
progeny in close association with the CD31+ vasculature were sequentially
incubated in biotinylated anti-GFP, avidin–biotin–peroxidase complex,
3,3-diaminobenzidine (DAB) peroxidase, and 1% osmium tetroxide before be-
ing dehydrated and lifted into resin. Seventy-nanometer-thick serial sections
were collected onto copper grids and contrasted with a lead stain, and serial
images were taken using a Philips CM10 transmission electron microscope to
create 3D reconstructions with Fiji ImageJ software (41).

Statistical Analysis. Statistical analysis methods can be found in SI Materials
and Methods.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank A. Saghatelyan and members of the H.S.
and G.-l.M. laboratories for discussion, G. Enikolopov for Nestin-GFP mice,
and Y. Cai and L. Liu for technical support. This work was supported by the
NIH (NS048271 and MH105128; to G.-l.M.) and Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G.
Adelson Medical Research Foundation (G.-l.M.), NIH (NS047344; to H.S.),
Swiss National Science Foundation (PP00A-119026/1; to N.T.), Foundation
Leenaards (J.M.), and a predoctoral fellowship from the Children’s Tumor
Foundation (to G.J.S.).

1. Rakic P (2009) Evolution of the neocortex: A perspective from developmental biology.

22. Li G, Pleasure SJ (2014) The development of hippocampal cellular assemblies. Wiley

Nat Rev Neurosci 10(10):724–735.

Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol 3(2):165–177.

2. Corbin JG, Nery S, Fishell G (2001) Telencephalic cells take a tangent: Non-radial mi-

23. Komuro H, Yacubova E, Yacubova E, Rakic P (2001) Mode and tempo of tangential

gration in the mammalian forebrain. Nat Neurosci 4(Suppl):1177–1182.

cell migration in the cerebellar external granular layer. J Neurosci 21(2):527–540.

3. Fuentealba LC, Obernier K, Alvarez-Buylla A (2012) Adult neural stem cells bridge

24. Brill MS, et al. (2009) Adult generation of glutamatergic olfactory bulb interneurons.

their niche. Cell Stem Cell 10(6):698–708.

Nat Neurosci 12(12):1524–1533.

4. Ming Gl, Song H (2011) Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian brain: Significant an-

25. Leber SM, Sanes JR (1995) Migratory paths of neurons and glia in the embryonic chick

swers and significant questions. Neuron 70(4):687–702.

5. Lois C, Alvarez-Buylla A (1994) Long-distance neuronal migration in the adult mam-

malian brain. Science 264(5162):1145–1148.

6. Braun SMG, Jessberger S (2013) Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian brain. Front

Biol 8(3):295–304.

7. Toni N, et al. (2007) Synapse formation on neurons born in the adult hippocampus.

Nat Neurosci 10(6):727–734.

8. Mirzadeh Z, Merkle FT, Soriano-Navarro M, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A
(2008) Neural stem cells confer unique pinwheel architecture to the ventricular sur-
face in neurogenic regions of the adult brain. Cell Stem Cell 3(3):265–278.

9. Shen Q, et al. (2008) Adult SVZ stem cells lie in a vascular niche: A quantitative analysis

of niche cell-cell interactions. Cell Stem Cell 3(3):289–300.

10. Tavazoie M, et al. (2008) A specialized vascular niche for adult neural stem cells. Cell

Stem Cell 3(3):279–288.

11. Palmer TD, Willhoite AR, Gage FH (2000) Vascular niche for adult hippocampal

neurogenesis. J Comp Neurol 425(4):479–494.

12. Bonaguidi MA, et al. (2011) In vivo clonal analysis reveals self-renewing and multi-

potent adult neural stem cell characteristics. Cell 145(7):1142–1155.

13. Kim EJ, Ables JL, Dickel LK, Eisch AJ, Johnson JE (2011) Ascl1 (Mash1) defines cells with
long-term neurogenic potential in subgranular and subventricular zones in adult
mouse brain. PLoS One 6(3):e18472.

14. Berg DA, et al. (2015) Tbr2-expressing intermediate progenitor cells in the adult
mouse hippocampus are unipotent neuronal precursors with limited amplification
capacity under homeostasis. Front Biol 10(3):262–271.

15. Ghashghaei HT, Lai C, Anton ES (2007) Neuronal migration in the adult brain: Are we

there yet? Nat Rev Neurosci 8(2):141–151.

16. Encinas JM, Vaahtokari A, Enikolopov G (2006) Fluoxetine targets early progenitor

cells in the adult brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103(21):8233–8238.

17. Marín O, Rubenstein JL (2001) A long, remarkable journey: Tangential migration in

the telencephalon. Nat Rev Neurosci 2(11):780–790.

18. Britanova O, et al. (2006) A novel mode of tangential migration of cortical projection

neurons. Dev Biol 298(1):299–311.

19. Bielle F, et al. (2005) Multiple origins of Cajal-Retzius cells at the borders of the de-

veloping pallium. Nat Neurosci 8(8):1002–1012.

20. Teissier A, et al. (2010) A novel transient glutamatergic population migrating from
the pallial-subpallial boundary contributes to neocortical development. J Neurosci
30(31):10563–10574.

21. Seki T, Namba T, Mochizuki H, Onodera M (2007) Clustering, migration, and neurite
formation of neural precursor cells in the adult rat hippocampus. J Comp Neurol
502(2):275–290.

spinal cord. J Neurosci 15(2):1236–1248.

26. García-Moreno F, et al. (2010) A neuronal migratory pathway crossing from di-
encephalon to telencephalon populates amygdala nuclei. Nat Neurosci 13(6):680–689.
27. Snapyan M, et al. (2009) Vasculature guides migrating neuronal precursors in the
signaling.

adult mammalian forebrain via brain-derived neurotrophic
J Neurosci 29(13):4172–4188.

factor

28. Whitman MC, Fan W, Rela L, Rodriguez-Gil DJ, Greer CA (2009) Blood vessels form a

migratory scaffold in the rostral migratory stream. J Comp Neurol 516(2):94–104.

29. Grade S, et al. (2013) Brain-derived neurotrophic factor promotes vasculature-asso-
ciated migration of neuronal precursors toward the ischemic striatum. PLoS One 8(1):
e55039.

30. Saghatelyan A (2009) Role of blood vessels in the neuronal migration. Semin Cell Dev

Biol 20(6):744–750.

31. Tam SJ, Watts RJ (2010) Connecting vascular and nervous system development: An-

giogenesis and the blood-brain barrier. Annu Rev Neurosci 33:379–408.

32. Altman J, Das GD (1966) Autoradiographic and histological studies of postnatal
neurogenesis. I. A longitudinal investigation of the kinetics, migration and trans-
formation of cells incorporating tritiated thymidine in neonate rats, with special
reference to postnatal neurogenesis in some brain regions. J Comp Neurol 126(3):
337–389.

33. Duan X, et al. (2007) Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1 regulates integration of newly

generated neurons in the adult brain. Cell 130(6):1146–1158.

34. Song J, et al. (2012) Neuronal circuitry mechanism regulating adult quiescent neural

stem-cell fate decision. Nature 489(7414):150–154.

35. Jang MH, et al.

(2013) Secreted frizzled-related protein 3 regulates activity-

dependent adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Cell Stem Cell 12(2):215–223.

36. Ge S, Yang CH, Hsu KS, Ming Gl, Song H (2007) A critical period for enhanced synaptic

plasticity in newly generated neurons of the adult brain. Neuron 54(4):559–566.

37. Parent JM, et al. (1997) Dentate granule cell neurogenesis is increased by seizures and
contributes to aberrant network reorganization in the adult rat hippocampus.
J Neurosci 17(10):3727–3738.

38. Jessberger S, et al. (2007) Seizure-associated, aberrant neurogenesis in adult rats

characterized with retrovirus-mediated cell labeling. J Neurosci 27(35):9400–9407.

39. Ladewig J, Koch P, Brüstle O (2014) Auto-attraction of neural precursors and their

neuronal progeny impairs neuronal migration. Nat Neurosci 17(1):24–26.

40. Song J, et al. (2013) Parvalbumin interneurons mediate neuronal circuitry-neuro-

genesis coupling in the adult hippocampus. Nat Neurosci 16(12):1728–1730.

41. Schindelin J, et al. (2012) Fiji: An open-source platform for biological-image analysis.

Nat Methods 9(7):676–682.

E
C
N
E
I
C
S
O
R
U
E
N

Sun et al.

PNAS |

July 28, 2015 | vol. 112 | no. 30 | 9489

