Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor treatment
normalizes tuberculosis granuloma vasculature and
improves small molecule delivery

Meenal Dattaa,b,1, Laura E. Viac,1, Walid S. Kamouna,1, Chong Liua,2, Wei Chena,3, Giorgio Seanoa, Danielle M. Weinerc,
Daniel Schimelc, Kathleen Englandc, John D. Martina,d, Xing Gaoa,4, Lei Xua, Clifton E. Barry IIIc,e,5, and Rakesh K. Jaina,5

aEdwin L. Steele Laboratory for Tumor Biology, Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02114; bDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155; cTuberculosis Research Section, Laboratory of Clinical
Infectious Disease, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; dDepartment of Chemical
Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; and eDepartment of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7701, South Africa

Contributed by Rakesh K. Jain, December 29, 2014 (sent for review November 19, 2014; reviewed by Harold F. Dvorak, Jerrold Ellner, Eric J. Rubin, and
David G. Russell)

Tuberculosis (TB) causes almost 2 million deaths annually, and an
increasing number of patients are resistant to existing therapies.
Patients who have TB require lengthy chemotherapy, possibly
because of poor penetration of antibiotics into granulomas where
the bacilli reside. Granulomas are morphologically similar to solid
cancerous tumors in that they contain hypoxic microenvironments
and can be highly fibrotic. Here, we show that TB-infected rabbits
have impaired small molecule distribution into these disease sites
due to a functionally abnormal vasculature, with a low-molecular-
weight tracer accumulating only in peripheral regions of granulo-
matous lesions. Granuloma-associated vessels are morphologically
and spatially heterogeneous, with poor vessel pericyte coverage in
both human and experimental rabbit TB granulomas. Moreover,
we found enhanced VEGF expression in both species. In tumors,
antiangiogenic, specifically anti-VEGF, treatments can “normalize”
their vasculature, reducing hypoxia and creating a window of op-
portunity for concurrent chemotherapy; thus, we investigated
vessel normalization in rabbit TB granulomas. Treatment of TB-
infected rabbits with the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab signif-
icantly decreased the total number of vessels while normalizing
those vessels that remained. As a result, hypoxic fractions of these
granulomas were reduced and small molecule tracer delivery was
increased. These findings demonstrate that bevacizumab treat-
ment promotes vascular normalization, improves small molecule
delivery, and decreases hypoxia in TB granulomas, thereby pro-
viding a potential avenue to improve delivery and efficacy of cur-
rent treatment regimens.
antiangiogenesis | hypoxia | host-directed therapy | Mycobacterium
tuberculosis | rabbit model
As one of the most prevalent infectious diseases in the world

today, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) infects roughly
one-third of the global population, resulting in 2 million deaths
annually (1). Although current treatment regimens are largely
successful in curing the disease (2), they require 6–8 mo of
treatment with up to four agents (3), and multidrug-resistant
bacterial strains have emerged and proliferated (4). Resistance
to front-line therapies necessitates treatment with up to five or
six second-line agents that are poorly tolerated, and treatment
success is only achieved in 40–70% of patients (5). Failure to
cure drug-resistant disease leads to acquisition of further re-
sistance with a progressively poorer prognosis for these patients,
thus fueling an emerging epidemic of drug-resistant disease that
threatens to overwhelm fragile health care systems in developing
countries (6).

When infected with the tuberculosis (TB) bacilli, the body
triggers an immune response that walls off the bacteria in dense
cellular masses known as granulomas, or tubercular lesions (7).

These abnormal tissue structures, which can vary in size within
the same host, are surrounded by fibrous cuffs that serve to
contain the MTB bacilli (7, 8). Recent studies have demon-
strated a wide variation in the spatial distribution of drugs within
TB granulomas, with very few agents able to penetrate the
central regions (9). This differential ability of drugs to penetrate
TB granulomas has been incorporated into modern TB drug
development programs as a criterion for optimizing lead mole-
cules and selecting efficacious combinations (10). However, the
mechanisms that contribute to this differential penetration of

Significance

Tuberculosis (TB) is the second most lethal pathogen world-
wide. Pulmonary granulomas are a hallmark of this disease. By
discovering similarities between granulomas and solid cancer-
ous tumors, we identified a novel therapeutic target for TB, the
abnormal granuloma-associated vasculature that contributes
to the abnormal granuloma microenvironment. We then asked
if we could “normalize” granuloma vasculature by blocking
VEGF signaling, an approach originally shown to enhance
cancer treatment. Our results demonstrate that bevacizumab,
a widely prescribed anti-VEGF antibody for cancer and eye
diseases, is able to create more structurally and functionally
normal granuloma vasculature and improve the delivery of
a low-molecular-weight tracer. This effect suggests that vas-
cular normalization in combination with anti-TB drugs has the
potential to enhance treatment in patients with TB.

Author contributions: L.E.V., W.S.K., L.X., C.E.B., and R.K.J. designed research; M.D., L.E.V.,
W.S.K., C.L., W.C., D.M.W., D.S., K.E., and X.G. performed research; M.D., L.E.V., W.S.K.,
G.S., and J.D.M. analyzed data; and M.D., L.E.V., L.X., C.E.B., and R.K.J. wrote the paper.

Reviewers: H.F.D., Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center; J.E., Boston University; E.J.R.,
Harvard School of Public Health; and D.G.R., Cornell University.

Conflict of interest statement: R.K.J. received consultant fees from Enlight, Ophthotech,
and SynDevRx. R.K.J. owns equity in Enlight, Ophthotech, SynDevRx, and XTuit and serves
on the Board of Directors of XTuit and the Boards of Trustees of Tekla Healthcare Invest-
ors, Tekla Life Sciences Investors, and the Tekla Healthcare Opportunities Fund. No re-
agents or funding from these companies was used in these studies.

Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1M.D., L.E.V., and W.S.K. contributed equally to this work.
2Present address: Department of Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Friendship Hospital,
Capital Medical University, Beijing 100050, China.
3Present address: Department of Pancreato-Biliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China.
4Present address: Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University, Changsha 410008, China.
5To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: cbarry@mail.nih.gov or jain@steele.
mgh.harvard.edu.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1424563112/-/DCSupplemental.

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1424563112

PNAS | February 10, 2015 | vol. 112 | no. 6 | 1827–1832

S
E
C
N
E
I
C
S

L
A
C
I
D
E
M

I

G
N
R
E
E
N
G
N
E

I

drugs are not fully understood, and novel strategies to improve
TB drug delivery and efficacy are urgently needed.

Following infection with MTB, pulmonary granulomas form in
humans and develop heterogeneous microenvironments, often
featuring hypoxia (i.e., low levels of oxygen) and central necrosis,
which are recapitulated in nonhuman primate and rabbit models
of the disease (11). Large lesions appear to develop their own
vasculature, presumably allowing them to continue to grow (7).
However, the morphological and functional characteristics of
granuloma-associated vessels are largely unknown. In solid
tumors, cancer cells can form similar dense tissue masses with
abnormal associated vasculature. The physiological abnormali-
ties that characterize tumor vessels have been investigated ex-
tensively (12, 13). For example, hypoxia, a common feature in
solid tumors, stimulates the overproduction of proangiogenic
factors, such as VEGF. Proangiogenic factors enhance the for-
mation of new immature, tortuous, and hyperpermeable vessels
(12, 14), often with excess endothelial cells, a lack of associated
pericytes (i.e., perivascular cells), and uneven basement mem-
branes (15–17). These atypical features result in an impaired
blood flow that further compromises delivery of drugs and oxygen
(13). Hypoxia also causes immunosuppression, inflammation, and
fibrosis, and it can also confer resistance to many drugs (18). Here,
we propose that TB granulomas share many characteristics with
solid tumors, namely, that they are associated with abnormal and
dysfunctional vasculature that can impair the delivery of small
molecules, such as oxygen and antibiotics.

Because VEGF is a critical growth factor required for new
blood vessel formation (16), anti-VEGF agents were originally
developed to block tumor growth by inhibiting blood vessel
formation (19). However, bevacizumab, a humanized mono-
clonal antibody developed to neutralize human VEGF, failed to
improve survival benefit as a monotherapy but conferred survival
benefit only in combination with chemotherapy or immuno-
therapy (18). A potential explanation for the success of com-
bined therapies is that bevacizumab “normalizes” the abnormal
vasculature of tumors, resulting in improved delivery of con-
currently administered anticancer drugs, as well as alleviation of
hypoxia (13, 15, 18, 20, 21). However, this strategy has not been
tested in a TB disease model. In this study we show, for the first
time to our knowledge, in a rabbit model of TB that treatment
with bevacizumab normalizes granuloma vasculature, reduces
hypoxia, and enhances small molecule delivery during a “window
of normalization,” a transient effect observed in tumors (15, 20).
Because anti-VEGF drugs have been approved for both malig-
nant and nonmalignant diseases (18), our findings could be rapidly
tested in the clinic to enhance TB treatment, shorten treatment
duration, and avert the development of treatment resistance.

Results
Human and Rabbit TB Granulomas Express VEGF. First, we examined
VEGF expression levels in histological sections from patients with
TB who had received elective lung resection surgery and from ex-
perimentally infected rabbits (Fig. 1). Granulomas are character-
ized by concentric layers of differing cellular composition, often
organized around a central necrotic core (8). The predominant cells
found in the outer layer are lymphocytes, whereas those cells nearer
the necrotic core are primarily epithelioid macrophages (Fig. 1);
these two layers are frequently surrounded by a fibrotic rim (8). We
observed that VEGF was detectable in the granulomatous regions
of the lung (Fig. 1 A and C) and that it was most highly expressed in
the inner macrophage layer (Fig. 1 B and D) of both human and
rabbit granulomas. We examined similarly sized lymphoid aggre-
gates in human lungs (Fig. S1 A and B) and rabbit lungs (Fig. S1 C
and D), and found that VEGF expression was minimal in these
structures, where lymphocytes are the dominant cell type.

Fig. 1. Human and rabbit granulomas express VEGF. Representative line-
scanned histological sections from human patients after lung tissue resection
surgery (A and B) and from necropsied rabbits (C and D) show VEGF expression
(brown) in the cellular layers surrounding the central necrosis of necrotizing (N)
granulomas in humans (A) and rabbits (C), with magnified regions shown in B
and D. Macrophages (M) express higher levels of VEGF than lymphocytes (L) in
granulomas. (Scale bars: A, 1 mm; B and D, 200 μm; C, 500 μm.)

Microvessels in TB Granulomas Are Morphologically and Spatially
Heterogeneous. To assess blood vessel morphology and spatial
distribution in granulomas, we double-stained tissue sections
with antibodies detecting CD31 for endothelial cells and α
smooth muscle actin (αSMA) for pericytes (Fig. 2). We found
that TB granulomas have a lower overall density of microvessels
compared with normal lung tissue in both humans (Fig. 2 A–C)
and rabbits (Fig. 2 D–F). Analysis of the spatial distribution of
the vessels within granulomas showed a higher microvessel
density (MVD; quantified as the number of microvessels per
square millimeter of viable tissue) in the granuloma periphery
(i.e., a rim of CD31-positive vessels) that dramatically decreases
to an avascular central region, as quantified in rabbit tissues (Fig.
2G). Furthermore, we observed that many granuloma-associated
vessels were compressed or collapsed in the interior region of
granulomas, as indicated by a lack of open lumen in some CD31-
positive vessels. Pericytes, which support the endothelial layer of
blood vessels, play a key role in vessel maturation and function
(16, 22). Therefore, we also analyzed the fraction of CD31-
positive vessels surrounded by αSMA-positive cells. In the nor-
mal lung, αSMA-positive cells were seen mostly surrounding
larger vessels and were sparse around microvessels (Fig. 2 A and
D). Furthermore, TB granuloma-associated vessels were found
to have spatially heterogeneous αSMA-positive coverage, which
was even more sparse than the αSMA-positive coverage of the
normal lung (Fig. 2 C and F). These results suggest that the
granuloma vasculature is abnormal both morphologically and
structurally.

TB Lesion-Associated Blood Vessels Are Functionally Abnormal. To
evaluate the function of TB granuloma blood vessels, we ana-
lyzed the delivery and distribution of the fluorescent probe
Hoechst33342 (Hoechst), a low-molecular-weight dye that serves
as a model for small molecule first-line anti-TB agents, in MTB-
infected rabbits that had been sacrificed 7 min after i.v. admin-
istration of this agent (Fig. 3). Although this small molecule was

1828 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1424563112

Datta et al.

Fig. 2. TB granuloma blood vessels are morphologically abnormal and have heterogeneous spatial densities. Human resection tissues (A–C) and rabbit tissues
from an experimental MTB infection (D–F) labeled with CD31 (brown, open red triangles) and αSMA (pink, closed red triangles) are shown. The MVD is higher
in human (A and Inset) and rabbit (D) normal lung tissue adjacent to lesions than in human (B and C) and rabbit (E and F) granulomas. Staining for endothelial
cells revealed that in both human (B and C) and rabbit (E and F) granulomas, blood vessels are restricted to the granuloma periphery and tend to be absent
from the central region, as demonstrated by quantification of MVD (the number of CD31-positive microvessels per square millimeter of viable tissue) in rabbit
granulomas (G). Granuloma vessels are often compressed along the lesion periphery and collapsed within the interior (C and F, white arrows), as indicated by
a positive CD31 stain and lack of a visible open vessel lumen, unlike the open, often αSMA-covered vessels in the normal lung (A and D, black arrows). αSMA
costaining with CD31 shows that granuloma-associated blood vessels lack significant pericyte coverage in both human and rabbit tissues. (Scale bars: A, C, D,
and E, 200 μm; A, Inset, 20 μm; B, 500 μm; F, 50 μm.)

well distributed and gave an intense fluorescent signal throughout
normal lung parenchyma, its intensity was found to be very low in
granulomas and it was heterogeneously distributed (Fig. 3A).
Analysis of the spatial distribution of this small molecule showed
a statistically significant higher concentration in the periphery of
the lesion, falling off rapidly toward the central necrotic region
(Fig. 3B), correlating with high MVD in this region (Fig. 2G).

Bevacizumab Treatment Reduces Vessel Number and Increases Vessel
Pericyte Coverage and Lumen Area. Because the vasculature in TB
granulomas was found to be structurally and functionally ab-
normal, with impaired small molecule delivery, we next treated
TB-infected rabbits with bevacizumab (Avastin; Genentech, Inc.)
administered at a dose of 5 mg/kg i.v. once weekly (23). Gran-
ulomas were analyzed 3 and 8 d posttreatment from necropsied
rabbit tissues. Granuloma-associated vasculature was assessed
using a custom-built semiautomatic vessel segmentation algorithm
(Visiopharm). This program was used to select for endothelial
cells, pericytes, and vessel lumen in CD31/αSMA double-stained
rabbit lung tissues. Representative images of vessels in the control
and treated groups show the differences seen in vessel morphology
with bevacizumab treatment (Fig. 4A). We found that the vessel
area (i.e., average area of the granuloma-associated vessels) was
significantly increased 3 and 8 d after bevacizumab treatment
compared with controls (Fig. 4B). We also found that the number
of vessels per granuloma was reduced 8 d posttreatment compared
with 3 d posttreatment (Fig. 4C). The MVD featured a decreasing
trend at both 3 and 8 d posttreatment, although this difference was
not statistically significant (Fig. S2). Furthermore, we found that

the pericyte coverage of granuloma-associated vessels, quantified
as the average area of pericytes per vessel, was significantly in-
creased at both 3 and 8 d posttreatment, and that the vessel
lumen, quantified as average lumen area per vessel, was also
significantly increased 3 d posttreatment compared with the
control group (Fig. 4 D and E).

Bevacizumab Treatment Improves Hoechst Delivery and Oxygenation
in TB Granulomas. In cancer, normalization of vessels and
improvements in vascular perfusion can enhance the intratumoral
distribution of both low- and high-macromolecular-weight drugs in
tumors (18, 20, 21). Because bevacizumab treatment normalized
the structure and morphology of granuloma vasculature, we in-
vestigated if small molecule delivery had been improved via nor-
malization of vessel function. Hoechst delivery to granulomas was
quantified as an area fraction (Fig. 5). There was a significant
increase in dye delivery to TB lesions 3 d after bevacizumab
treatment compared with control animals (Fig. 5B). Although the
level of dye penetration was increased 8 d posttreatment, the area
fraction was not significantly higher compared with the controls.
Of note, bevacizumab treatment did not affect TB granuloma
volume, density, or activity, as assessed via [18F]fluorodeoxy-
glucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET)/computed
tomography (CT) (Fig. S3 A–C).

Large TB granulomas are characterized by the presence of
central necrosis surrounded by a rim of hypoxic cells in necro-
tizing granulomas (11), as seen in representative images from the
rabbit model (Fig. 6A). The hypoxic area fraction of the viable
(i.e., nonnecrotic) granuloma tissue from treated rabbits was

Datta et al.

PNAS | February 10, 2015 | vol. 112 | no. 6 | 1829

S
E
C
N
E
I
C
S

L
A
C
I
D
E
M

I

G
N
R
E
E
N
G
N
E

I

VEGF is highly expressed in granulomas compared with normal
lung tissue in both the rabbit model and samples of human
patients with TB. TB granulomas, similar to solid tumors, con-
tain spatially heterogeneous vessels that are compressed or col-
lapsed. These vessels are structurally abnormal, with a lack of
pericyte coverage, and dysfunctional, as demonstrated by poor
delivery of Hoechst dye. In solid tumors, the abnormal vascula-
ture creates an abnormal tumor microenvironment (i.e., interstitial
hypertension, hypoxia, acidosis) that fuels tumor progression and
treatment resistance. Hypoxic tumor cells often show a more
aggressive phenotype with enhanced metastatic potential (28).
Furthermore, the hostile microenvironment impairs the function
of antitumor immune cells (29). Importantly, tumor response to
therapy is also affected because hypoxic tumor cells often dem-
onstrate reduced sensitivity to radiation and chemotherapy (18),
and the delivery of systemically administered chemotherapeutics
into tumors is impeded (18). Previous studies showed that in
MTB, hypoxia triggers a set of adaptive transcriptional programs
by the bacteria that result phenotypically in dramatic reductions
in drug susceptibility (30).

Given these physiological similarities between vasculatures in
TB granulomas and solid cancerous tumors, we next assessed the
ability of bevacizumab to normalize granuloma-associated vas-
culatures. In solid tumors, to reach cancer cells, blood-borne
therapeutic agents must cross vessel walls and diffuse through
the intervening interstitium (31). The structural and functional

Fig. 4. Bevacizumab treatment normalizes granuloma-associated vessel
structure. (A) Vessel endothelial cells (CD31, brown), associated pericytes
(αSMA, pink), and the lumen were quantified in granulomas in tissue sec-
tions from rabbits treated with bevacizumab using the semiautomatic
Visiopharm software. (Scale bars: 100 μm.). The mean vessel area per granuloma
was significantly higher in the treated groups compared with controls (B), and
the mean vessel number per granuloma was significantly reduced between
days 3 and 8 posttreatment (C). The average pericyte area per vessel was in-
creased on both 3 and 8 d posttreatment (D), and the lumen area per vessel
was increased 3 d after treatment with bevacizumab (E). The lumen area was
decreased 8 d posttreatment compared with controls, although not signifi-
cantly (P = 0.06). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01.

Fig. 3. Delivery of a low-molecular-weight dye into rabbit granulomas is poor
in contrast to lung. Small molecule delivery was assessed by analyzing the
distribution of the low-molecular-weight fluorescent probe Hoechst (green)
into rabbit granulomas. (A) Representative immunofluorescent confocal mi-
croscope image of a rabbit lung shows that Hoechst delivery is reduced in
granulomas (white arrows) compared with the surrounding lung tissue, as
indicated by low, heterogeneous distribution of the dye in these areas of
dense nuclei (blue). As seen in a magnified necrotizing granuloma image (B)
and via quantitative analysis (C), there is significantly higher delivery of the
dye in the periphery of granulomas than in the central regions of the gran-
ulomas. a.u., arbitrary units; N, necrosis. *P < 0.05, Student’s t test. (Scale bars:
A, 1 mm; B, 500 μm.)

significantly reduced 3 d posttreatment with bevacizumab (Fig.
6B), but the necrotic fraction (Fig. 6C), overall volume (Fig. S3A),
and density (Fig. S3C), as assessed by CT, were not different,
suggesting a true reduction in the hypoxic fraction. Treatment
with bevacizumab did not change the bacterial burden of lesions
or the adjacent lung tissue (Fig. S3D).

Discussion
TB treatment in drug-susceptible disease fails due to resistance
in as many as 1–5% of patients despite simultaneous treatment
with four active agents (24). Theoretically, the emergence of
resistance should be very difficult in the face of four agents (25).
Recent results using scanning mass spectrometric imaging of
drug penetration in TB lesions suggest that different drugs have
differential abilities to diffuse into TB lesions, resulting in dis-
crete spatial localization of different agents (9, 10), which sug-
gests that drug delivery is limited in regions of TB lesions and
that bacterial populations in specific locations may be subjected
to, effectively, monotherapy. Understanding of the mechanisms
that limit TB drug delivery is urgently needed for the de-
velopment of effective treatments. Similarly, cancer treatment
can be hindered by limited drug delivery (26, 27). Character-
ization of the abnormal tumor vasculature has had a profound
influence on understanding tumor progression and the limi-
tations of treatment. The concept of vascular normalization us-
ing judicious doses of antiangiogenic drugs (e.g., bevacizumab)
has offered a clinically translatable approach to overcome some
of these limitations (13, 18). Therefore, we sought to exploit the
similarities between blood vessels formed in tumors and blood
vessels formed in TB granulomas to understand the impact of
these structures on TB disease progression and examine the
potential normalizing effect of antiangiogenic therapy on the
structure and function of granuloma-associated vessels.

Granulomas in the rabbit TB model used in this study are
known to harbor regions of hypoxia and necrosis (11). Hypoxia is
known to increase production of proangiogenic cytokines, in-
cluding VEGF, in solid tumors (19). Indeed, we found that

1830 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1424563112

Datta et al.

structurally typical and features improved functionality in terms
of oxygen and small molecule delivery, as has been observed in
tumor studies. Although the Hoechst dye used is an imperfect
model for TB drugs, our results suggest that permeation of some
drugs will be enhanced in granulomas. The effective concentration
of drug in the compartments bearing bacteria will be based on
perfusion into and diffusion out of these lesions, and will need to
be assessed on a drug-by-drug basis to optimize killing of the
bacteria. These results suggest that delivery of some drugs into
granulomas would be improved during this window, which would
be the optimal time to administer either higher dose therapies or
boost drugs given intermittently.

In summary, our study suggests that TB granulomas feature
abnormal vasculature and that bevacizumab is transiently able to
normalize granuloma-associated vessel structure and function.
Although human disease may have a longer duration of chro-
nicity, the lesions are strikingly dynamic (33) and their overall
structure with respect to vasculature is remarkably similar to the
lesions in rabbits; therefore, we expect a similar response with
antiangiogenic agents in humans as we have seen in this animal
model. Nonetheless,
there may be lesions with differential
structure resulting from irreversible pathology, such as cavities
that were not assessed in this analysis, that would behave dif-
ferently in response to antiangiogenic treatment. If administered
in conjunction with anti-TB drugs, antiangiogenic agents, such as
bevacizumab, have the potential to improve the delivery of an-
timicrobial drugs into granulomas and stimulate sensitivity to
drug treatment
through improved oxygen delivery into the
lesions during the window of normalization. Furthermore, this
type of “host-directed therapy” that targets the abnormal gran-
uloma vasculature and reduces hypoxia may lead to a more ro-
bust immune response again the bacteria. Through this mechanism,
vessel normalization has the potential to reduce the overall dura-
tion of TB chemotherapies and possibly avoid localized exposure of
the bacterium to monotherapy, thereby avoiding the development
of drug resistance, which is one of the main issues in the global
control of TB.

S
E
C
N
E
I
C
S

L
A
C
I
D
E
M

I

G
N
R
E
E
N
G
N
E

I

Fig. 6. Bevacizumab treatment reduces hypoxia in rabbit granulomas. (A)
Immunohistochemical sections of rabbit granulomas were quantified for
necrosis (N) and hypoxia (brown) via pimonidazole staining, as shown in
representative images. (Scale bars: 500 μm.) (B) Hypoxic fraction of the viable
(nonnecrotic) granuloma tissue area was found to be reduced 3 d post-
treatment with bevacizumab (*P = 0.03), but this reduction did not persist.
At 8 d posttreatment, the hypoxic fraction is significantly higher than in
granulomas from day 3 (**P = 0.002). (C) Necrotic fraction is also reduced on
day 3, but this reduction is not significant.

Fig. 5. Bevacizumab treatment enhances low-molecular-weight dye delivery
in rabbit granulomas. (A) Amount of Hoechst delivered into the granuloma
was assessed in immunofluorescent images by quantifying the area fraction of
Hoechst (green) of granulomas (dense blue regions), that is, the Hoechst dye
area per viable granuloma area, as shown in the representative images. (Scale
bars: 100 μm.) (B) Amount of Hoechst delivered to TB lesions was found to be
significantly higher 3 d after bevacizumab treatment compared with controls
(*P = 0.04); by 8 d posttreatment, however, the area fraction was no longer
significantly higher than the area fraction in untreated animals.

abnormalities of tumor vasculature hinder drug delivery, and the
delivery and efficacy of blood-borne antitumor agents are im-
paired as a result. A number of anti-VEGF agents have been
shown to normalize tumor vessel structure and function in ani-
mal models and patients (18). In the hope of applying this con-
cept to TB to improve drug delivery, we treated TB-infected
rabbits with bevacizumab, a VEGF-neutralizing antibody. More-
over, a recent complimentary study has demonstrated that
inhibiting the VEGF receptor early in infection in a zebrafish
model of TB reduced pathogenicity and improved treatment
efficacy (32).

In the rabbit TB model, bevacizumab treatment did not result
in aggravation of the disease state, evidenced by no significant
change in lesion volume, density, or inflammation, as measured
by FDG uptake, and bacterial load. However, we found that
immature vessels are pruned by bevacizumab treatment and that
the remaining vessels are structurally normalized, as indicated by
an increase in vessel pericyte coverage. The improved vessel
structure is associated with an increase in average vessel lumen
area. Because the nonpruned vessels are either already associ-
ated with or have actively recruited pericytes, the vessel walls
become more structurally normal and are better able to resist
compression or collapse. This pruning effect explains why vessel
area is increased 8 d posttreatment despite the reduction in
vessel number.

We found that hypoxic areas in granulomas were significantly
reduced by bevacizumab 3 d posttreatment and that delivery of
the Hoechst dye was significantly increased at that time point. By
8 d posttreatment, however, hypoxia rebounded and the Hoechst
dye area was no longer significantly increased. These data sug-
gest that by day 8, although the granuloma-associated vessels are
more structurally and functionally normal than vessels in control
granulomas, the reduction in the number of vessels due to vas-
cular pruning cannot sustain the maximal level of small molecule
delivery that was observed 3 d posttreatment. Thus, our data
show that bevacizumab treatment leads to a transient “window
of opportunity” between the start of treatment and 8 d post-
treatment, during which the granuloma-associated vasculature is

Datta et al.

PNAS | February 10, 2015 | vol. 112 | no. 6 | 1831

Materials and Methods
Human granuloma tissues were obtained from subjects undergoing lung re-
section surgery for multidrug-resistant TB, who gave consent for the clinical
protocol NCT00816426. Female New Zealand White rabbits were infected by
aerosol with MTB strain HN878, and were allowed 10–11 wk to develop TB
disease pathology, as described previously (11). Rabbits were treated with
5 mg/kg of bevacizumab (Avastin; Genentech, Inc.) by slow intravascular infusion
(23) or with a sham infusion of saline. [18F]FDG-PET/CT was used to monitor
granuloma volume, density, and FDG uptake as previously described (11, 34).
Rabbits were killed at the described time points, after pimonidazole (11) and
Hoechst (Sigma–Aldrich) injections, and the lung tissues were collected for
histology. The tissues were assessed for hypoxia (pimonidazole), small molecule
dye delivery (Hoechst), endothelial cells (CD31), and pericytes (αSMA). Experi-
mental procedures are described in detail in SI Materials and Methods.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Carolyn Smith for outstanding technical
support of the immunohistochemistry studies, and Drs. Matija Snuderl and
Rehka Samuel for their scientific input. We thank all of the participants
who enrolled in the study, as well as the staff of the International
Tuberculosis Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Pusan National Univer-
sity Hospital, and the National Medical Center for their assistance with this
work. We acknowledge Seokyong Eum for his service as a pathologist for
this study. This study was supported, in part, by Grant P01CA080214 (to R.K.J.)
and by grants from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (to R.K.J.), from
the American Cancer Society (to L.X.), from the Children’s Tumor Foundation
(to L.X.), and from the Susan G. Komen Foundation [Grant PDF14301739 (to
G.S.)]; through the Grand Challenges in Global Health Program to Douglas
Young, Imperial College (to C.E.B.); by the Intramural Research Program of
the NIH/National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (C.E.B.); and by
the Korean Ministry of Health and Welfare.

1. Dye C, et al. (2008) Measuring tuberculosis burden, trends, and the impact of control

19. Carmeliet P, Jain RK (2000) Angiogenesis in cancer and other diseases. Nature

programmes. Lancet Infect Dis 8(4):233–243.

407(6801):249–257.

2. Zumla AI, et al. (2014) New antituberculosis drugs, regimens, and adjunct therapies:

20. Jain RK (2005) Normalization of tumor vasculature: An emerging concept in anti-

Needs, advances, and future prospects. Lancet Infect Dis 14(4):327–340.

angiogenic therapy. Science 307(5706):58–62.

3. Zumla A, Nahid P, Cole ST (2013) Advances in the development of new tuberculosis

21. Goel S, et al. (2011) Normalization of the vasculature for treatment of cancer and

drugs and treatment regimens. Nat Rev Drug Discov 12(5):388–404.

4. Sakamoto K (2012) The pathology of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Vet

Pathol 49(3):423–439.

5. Falzon D, et al. (2015) Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis around the world: What

progress has been made? Eur Respir J 45(1):150–160.

6. Tang S, et al. (2013) Risk factors for poor treatment outcomes in patients with MDR-
TB and XDR-TB in China: Retrospective multi-center investigation. PLoS ONE 8(12):
e82943.

7. Russell DG, Barry CE, 3rd, Flynn JL (2010) Tuberculosis: What we don’t know can, and

does, hurt us. Science 328(5980):852–856.

8. Russell DG (2007) Who puts the tubercle in tuberculosis? Nat Rev Microbiol 5(1):39–47.
9. Dartois V (2014) The path of anti-tuberculosis drugs: From blood to lesions to my-

cobacterial cells. Nat Rev Microbiol 12(3):159–167.

10. Dartois V, Barry CE, 3rd (2013) A medicinal chemists’ guide to the unique difficulties

of lead optimization for tuberculosis. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 23(17):4741–4750.

11. Via LE, et al. (2008) Tuberculous granulomas are hypoxic in guinea pigs, rabbits, and

nonhuman primates. Infect Immun 76(6):2333–2340.

12. Carmeliet P, Jain RK (2011) Principles and mechanisms of vessel normalization for

cancer and other angiogenic diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov 10(6):417–427.

13. Jain RK (2013) Normalizing tumor microenvironment to treat cancer: Bench to bed-

side to biomarkers. J Clin Oncol 31(17):2205–2218.

14. Dvorak HF, Brown LF, Detmar M, Dvorak AM (1995) Vascular permeability factor/
vascular endothelial growth factor, microvascular hyperpermeability, and angio-
genesis. Am J Pathol 146(5):1029–1039.

15. Jain RK (2001) Normalizing tumor vasculature with anti-angiogenic therapy: A new

paradigm for combination therapy. Nat Med 7(9):987–989.

16. Baluk P, Hashizume H, McDonald DM (2005) Cellular abnormalities of blood vessels as

targets in cancer. Curr Opin Genet Dev 15(1):102–111.

17. Tong RT, et al. (2004) Vascular normalization by vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2 blockade induces a pressure gradient across the vasculature and improves
drug penetration in tumors. Cancer Res 64(11):3731–3736.

18. Jain RK (2014) Antiangiogenesis Strategies Revisited: From Starving Tumors to Alle-

viating Hypoxia. Cancer Cell 26(5):605–622.

other diseases. Physiol Rev 91(3):1071–1121.

22. Greenberg JI, et al. (2008) A role for VEGF as a negative regulator of pericyte function

and vessel maturation. Nature 456(7223):809–813.

23. Lopez ES, Rizzo MM, Croxatto JO, Mazzolini G, Gallo JE (2011) Suramab, a novel
antiangiogenic agent, reduces tumor growth and corneal neovascularization. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 67(3):723–728.

24. Ahmad S, Mokaddas E (2014) Current status and future trends in the diagnosis and
treatment of drug-susceptible and multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. J Infect Public
Health 7(2):75–91.

25. Munck C, Gumpert HK, Wallin AI, Wang HH, Sommer MO (2014) Prediction of re-
sistance development against drug combinations by collateral responses to compo-
nent drugs. Sci Transl Med 6(262):262ra156.

26. Jain RK (2001) Delivery of molecular and cellular medicine to solid tumors. Adv Drug

Deliv Rev 46(1-3):149–168.

27. Chauhan VP, Jain RK (2013) Strategies for advancing cancer nanomedicine. Nat Mater

12(11):958–962.

28. DeClerck K, Elble RC (2010) The role of hypoxia and acidosis in promoting metastasis

and resistance to chemotherapy. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 15:213–225.

29. Huang Y, Goel S, Duda DG, Fukumura D, Jain RK (2013) Vascular normalization as an
emerging strategy to enhance cancer immunotherapy. Cancer Res 73(10):2943–2948.
30. Rustad TR, Harrell MI, Liao R, Sherman DR (2008) The enduring hypoxic response of

Mycobacterium tuberculosis. PloS One 3(1):e1502.

31. Jain RK, Stylianopoulos T (2010) Delivering nanomedicine to solid tumors. Clin Oncol

7(11):653–664.

32. Oehlers SH, et al. (2014) Interception of host angiogenic signalling limits mycobac-

terial growth. Nature, 10.1038/nature13967.

33. Coleman MT, et al. (2014) PET/CT imaging reveals a therapeutic response to ox-
azolidinones in macaques and humans with tuberculosis. Sci Transl Med 6(265):
265ra167.

34. Via LE, et al. (2012) Infection dynamics and response to chemotherapy in a rabbit
model of tuberculosis using [¹⁸F]2-fluoro-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomog-
raphy and computed tomography. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 56(8):4391–4402.

1832 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1424563112

Datta et al.

