Clinics in Dermatology (2016) 34, 183–204

Cutaneous and ocular manifestations of
neurocutaneous syndromes
Karen A. Chernoff, MD, Julie V. Schaffer, MD⁎

Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA

Abstract Neurocutaneous syndromes are a heterogeneous group of congenital and hereditary disorders
with manifestations in the skin and the nervous system, usually together with ocular features that
represent diagnostic clues and potential sources of morbidity. Dermatologists and ophthalmologists
often need to work together in identifying and managing patients with these conditions; herein, we focus
on classic and under-recognized neurocutaneous syndromes. We begin with autosomal dominant
genodermatoses characterized by hamartomas and tumors in the skin, eyes, and central nervous system:
neurofibromatosis type 1, tuberous sclerosis complex, and PTEN hamartoma-tumor syndrome. This is
followed by a discussion of two mosaic disorders, Sturge-Weber syndrome and neurocutaneous
melanocytosis. In addition to providing an update on clinical presentations and evaluation of patients
with these conditions, we review recent
insights into their pathogenesis, drawing attention to
relationships among the diseases on a molecular level and implications regarding treatment. We also
highlight
the major features of other neurocutaneous syndromes that have ocular findings plus
pigmentary, vascular, hyperkeratotic, adnexal, connective tissue, photosensitive, and inflammatory
manifestations in the skin.
© 2016 Published by Elsevier Inc.

Overview of neurocutaneous syndromes

Neurocutaneous syndromes represent a heterogeneous
group of congenital and hereditary disorders with manifes-
tations in both the skin and the nervous system, usually
together with characteristic ocular features. These diseases
are traditionally known as “phakomatoses” (Greek phakos:
lentil, birthmark), a term coined by the Dutch ophthalmol-
ogist Jan van der Hoeve in 1923 to emphasize the patchy
nature of the clinical findings in neurofibromatosis and
tuberous sclerosis. Van der Hoeve later expanded this group
to include von Hippel–Lindau and Sturge-Weber syn-
dromes, and ataxia-telangiectasia was added in 1941. A

⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 212 263 5245.

E-mail address: Julie.schaffer@nyumc.org (J.V. Schaffer).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clindermatol.2015.11.003
0738-081X/© 2016 Published by Elsevier Inc.

variety of other conditions have subsequently been classified
as phakomatoses, with some authors limiting the category to
disorders characterized by neurocutaneous hamartomas and/
or tumors.

The constellation of features in some neurocutaneous
syndromes reflects the fact that affected tissues share an
embryonic origin in the neural crest.1 The neural crest
represents a transient population of embryonic cells that arise
from ectoderm and migrate outward from the dorsal region of
the neural tube. Upon reaching their final destinations, neural
crest cells differentiate into a wide variety of cells and
structures. Neural crest–derived cell populations include
melanocytes of the skin and eye, Schwann cells of peripheral
nerves, chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla, glomus cells,
and the leptomeninges.2 In patients with neurofibromatosis
(see later), these cell types are implicated in pigmented skin

184

lesions, Lisch nodules, neurofibromas, pheochromocytomas,
and glomus tumors, respectively. Enteric ganglion cells and
craniofacial mesoderm, including the membranous bones of
the face and cranium, also originate from the neural crest.3,4
This explains the Hirschsprung disease and facial dysmorph-
ism as well as leukoderma, heterochromia irides, and
deafness (due to the importance of melanocytes in the stria
vascularis of
the cochlea) observed in Waardenburg
syndrome, a classic neurocristopathy. Of note, considering
the frequency of ocular findings in neurocutaneous syn-
dromes, structures of the eye with neural crest lineage range
from the sclera and the stroma of the cornea, iris, and choroid
to the ciliary and extraocular muscles.

Although dermatologists are generally familiar with the
skin findings of neurocutaneous syndromes, they must also
be aware of ocular manifestations that represent diagnostic
clues and potential sources of morbidity. Dermatologists and
ophthalmologists often need to work together in identifying
and managing patients with these disorders, which com-
monly requires the input of neurologists, geneticists, and
other subspecialists. This paper focuses on several important
neurocutaneous syndromes, including classic phakomatoses
with prominent cutaneous and ocular manifestations (neuro-
fibromatosis type 1,
tuberous sclerosis complex, and
Sturge-Weber syndrome) as well as PTEN hamartoma-tumor
syndrome and neurocutaneous melanocytosis. In addition to
providing an update on clinical manifestations and evalua-
tion of these conditions, we review recent insights into their
pathogenesis, drawing attention to relationships between the
disorders on a molecular level and implications regarding
treatment. Tables 1 through 5 highlight the major features of
other neurocutaneous syndromes that have ocular findings
plus pigmentary, vascular, hyperkeratotic, adnexal, connec-
tive tissue, photosensitive, and inflammatory manifestations
in the skin.

Neurofibromatosis type 1

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1; von Recklinghausen
disease) is the most common neurocutaneous disorder,
affecting roughly 1 in 3000 individuals worldwide. It is
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, with up to 50% of
patients harboring a new spontaneous mutation in the NF1
gene and therefore having unaffected parents.5,6 Although
penetrance approaches 100%, expressivity is highly variable in
individuals with a constitutional (germline) NF1 mutation. In
addition, mosaicism for a NF1 mutation can lead to segmental
forms of NF1 with pigmentary and/or neural manifestations.
The NF1 gene encodes neurofibromin, a GTPase-activating
protein (GAP) that functions as a negative regulator of Ras
signaling (Figure 1).7,8 Ras requires GTP binding for full
activity in stimulating the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway, which promotes cell proliferation. By
accelerating the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP, neurofibromin

K.A. Chernoff, J.V. Schaffer

decreases Ras activity and thereby functions as a tumor
suppressor protein. In patients with NF1, loss-of-function
mutations in the NF1 gene lead to inappropriate activation of
the Ras-MAPK pathway and a predisposition for tumorigen-
esis. Neurofibromin is expressed in migrating neural crest
cells during embryogenesis, and its particular importance to
this lineage explains the Schwann cell- and melanocyte-
derived oculocutaneous manifestations of NF1.9 Similar to
other autosomal dominant tumor predisposition syndromes
caused by a defective tumor suppressor gene, a somatic
“second hit” mutation that inactivates the remaining NF1
allele can be found within skin lesions, such as the Schwann
cells of neurofibromas and the melanocytes of café-au-lait
spots (CALS).10

Cutaneous and ocular findings account for five of the
seven diagnostic criteria for NF1 developed by the National
Institutes of Health.11 A clinical diagnosis requires two of the
following: (1) ≥ 6 CALS (size N 5 mm prepuberty, N 15 mm
postpuberty); (2) ≥ 2 neurofibromas or ≥ 1 plexiform
neurofibroma; (3) freckling in the axillae or groin; (4) optic
glioma; (5) ≥ 2 Lisch nodules; (6) sphenoid dysplasia or
cortical thinning of long bones; and (7) a first-degree relative
with NF1. Approximately 70% of all patients with NF1 and
45% of those without an affected relative can be diagnosed by
1 year of age using the National Institutes of Health criteria.12
Commercially available testing can identify a pathogenic
NF1 mutation in ≥95% of nonfounder patients who meet the
National Institutes of Health criteria. This allows NF1 to be
diagnosed in young children who do not (yet) fulfill two clinical
criteria.13 It can also point to possible alternative diagnoses (eg,
Legius syndrome) in patients who meet criteria for NF1 but do
not have an identifiable NF1 mutation (see later).14

Cutaneous manifestations of NF1

Skin lesions with melanocytic origin

Pigmented lesions are of great aid in establishing the
diagnosis of NF1 due to their early age of onset and almost
ubiquitous occurrence, with the occasional exception of
patients with predominantly spinal neurofibromatosis.15
CALS represent the most common clinical finding in NF1,
with ≥ 99% of patients developing ≥ 6 of these lesions by 1
year of age.12 In patients with NF1, CALS are typically well
demarcated with smooth borders and homogenous pigmen-
tation (Figure 2A).16 Their color ranges from tan to dark
brown, and fading often occurs during adulthood.17 When
biopsied, CALS in patients with NF1 show an increased
concentration of melanin within the epidermis. Some studies
have noted a higher melanocyte density and frequency of
giant melanosomes compared with sporadic CALS.18,19

In the general pediatric population, approximately 25% to
35% of children have at least one CALS, but b 1% of children
have ≥4 of these lesions.20 The morphology of CALS is

Neurocutaneous syndromes

185

Table 1

Disorder

Selected neurocutaneous disorders with pigmentary manifestations

Major cutaneous findings

Potential neurologic findings

Potential ocular findings

Hyperpigmented lesions
Neurofibromatosis type 1 ⁎
Neurofibromatosis type 2

LEOPARD syndrome ⁎

Noonan syndrome ⁎

Cardiofaciocutaneous

syndrome ⁎

Mismatch repair cancer

syndrome

PTEN hamartoma-tumor

syndrome

Hypo- and/or hyperpigmentation
Tuberous sclerosis
“Pigmentary mosaicism”:

hypomelanosis of Ito, linear
and whorled nevoid
hypermelanosis

Incontinentia pigmenti

• See text
• Schwannomas—plaques,

often with
hyperpigmentation and
hypertrichosis, or nodules
(50%-70% of patients)

• Neurofibromas (uncommon)
• CALS (typically ≤ 5; ~ 50%

of patients)

• Lentigines, café-noir spots

• CALS, melanocytic nevi
• Keratosis pilaris ± atrophicans
• Lymphedema
• Curly hair
• Melanocytic nevi N CALS
• Keratosis pilaris ± atrophicans
• Focal PPK
• Infantile hemangiomas
• Curly hair, sparse eyebrows
• CALS, intertriginous

freckling

• Hypopigmented macules
• Neurofibromas
• See text

• See text
• Streaks/swirls of hypo- or

hyperpigmentation
along Blaschko lines

• Streaks/swirls of

reticulate gray-brown
hyperpigmentation (stage 3)

• Linear erythema with
vesicles (stage 1) or
verrucous plaques (stage 2)

• Hypopigmented, hairless

• See text
• Bilateral vestibular

schwannomas—hearing
loss, tinnitus

• Meningiomas, spinal
cord ependymomas

• Neuropathy

• Intellectual disability
• Hearing deficit
• Intellectual disability
• Hypotonia

• Intellectual disability
• Hypotonia, seizures

• See text
• Cataracts (60%-80%

of patients)

• Epiretinal membranes, retinal

hamartomas

• Strabismus, amblyopia

• Hypertelorism, epicanthal

folds, ptosis

• Hypertelorism, epicanthal

folds, ptosis

• Strabismus, refractive errors
• Blue-green irides
• Hypertelorism, epicanthal

folds, ptosis

• Strabismus, refractive errors,

nystagmus

• Lisch nodules (uncommon)
• Optic glioma (uncommon)

• CNS gliomas

• See text

• See text
• Intellectual

Seizures

• See text

• See text
• Variable

disability

• Intellectual disability
• Seizures, spasticity

• Retinal vascular abnormalities
• Strabismus, cataracts, optic

atrophy

Dyskeratosis congenita

Xeroderma pigmentosum †

bands favoring calves (stage 4)

• Reticulated

hyperpigmentation
or poikiloderma

• Nail dystrophy N PPK,

palmoplantar hyperhidrosis

• Solar lentigines
• Guttate hypopigmentation,

• Intellectual disability

(uncommon)

• Cerebellar ataxia

(Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson variant)

• Hyporeflexia, seizures
• Hearing deficit

Chédiak-Higashi syndrome

poikiloderma

• Photosensitivity
• Nonmelanoma skin
cancer N melanoma

• Diffuse pigmentary dilution
• Hyperpigmentation and

guttate hypopigmentation in
sun-exposed areas

• Silvery hair

• Sensory and motor

neuropathies

• Progressive ataxia
• Intellectual decline

• Lacrimal duct atresia,
entropion, trichiasis,
keratoconjunctivitis, retinal
abnormalities, cataracts
(uncommon)

• Conjunctivitis, keratitis,

corneal neovascularization
and scarring, xerophthalmia,
blepharitis, ectropion

• Lightly pigmented eyes
• Photophobia,

nystagmus, strabismus

(continued on next page)

186

Table 1 (continued)

Disorder

Waardenburg syndrome

Dermal melanocytosis
Nevus of Ota

K.A. Chernoff, J.V. Schaffer

Major cutaneous findings
• Depigmented patches on
forehead, mid extremities;
islands of sparing and CALS

• White forelock

Potential neurologic findings
• Hearing deficit

Potential ocular findings
• Heterochromia irides
• Dystopia canthorum
• Synophrys

• Speckled/mottled blue-gray

• Leptomeningeal melanocytosis

facial patches, usually
unilateral

(uncommon)

• Blue-gray pigmentation of the

sclera N iris, choroid; rarely
melanoma

• Iris mammillations
• Glaucoma (uncommon)
• Corneal clouding, glaucoma,
retinal degeneration (Hurler)

• Cherry-red macular spot

(GM1-G)

Hurler syndrome, GM1

gangliosidosis (GM1-G)

• Extensive dermal

melanocytosis (eg, anterior +
posterior trunk)

• Angiokeratoma corporis

diffusum (GM1-G)

• Neurodevelopmental

deterioration

CALS, café-au-lait spots; CNS, central nervous system; PPK, palmoplantar keratoderma.

⁎ RASopathies; similar pigmentary findings may be seen in Costello syndrome (see Table 4).
† Other photosensitive neurocutaneous disorders can present with pigmented lesions, such as Cockayne and Bloom syndromes (see Table 5).

another important consideration. In a recent series of 110
children (median age 3 years) with multiple CALS but no other
features of NF1, 77% (34/44) of those with ≥6 “typical” lesions
were eventually diagnosed with NF1, compared with 15%
(2/15) of those with ≥6 “atypical” lesions that had smudgy,
irregular borders and nonhomogeneous pigmentation.16 Irreg-
ular CALS with a “paint-splashed” border, especially when
multiple lesions are grouped in the same region or on one side of
the body, may reflect “pigmentary mosaicism” due to a
nonspecific chromosomal abnormality within lesional skin.

Intertriginous “freckling” (Crowe sign) presents as
numerous 1- to 4-mm brown macules that represent smaller
versions of CALS, actually more akin to lentigines than
ephelides. Although these lesions favor the axilla (Figure 2B)
and groin, they often occur in other sites such as the neck,
lower face, and trunk. Approximately 90% of NF1 patients
develop intertriginous freckling by 4 to 6 years of age.12

Although previously considered to be pathognomonic for
NF1, intertriginous freckling can also occur in piebaldism
and Legius, LEOPARD, and mismatch repair cancer
syndromes (see Table 1).21–25 Patients with these conditions
often have CALS as well, and thus can meet criteria for NF1.
Legius syndrome (previously known as NF1-like syndrome)
is an autosomal disorder caused by mutations in the SPRED1
gene, which encodes a protein that interacts with neurofi-
bromin and inhibits MAPK signaling.26 Features include
multiple CALS (~ 80% of patients), intertriginous freckling
(~ 50% of patients), lipomas, vascular anomalies, macro-
cephaly, and learning disabilities; however, Lisch nodules,
optic gliomas, and neurofibromas are not seen.23

Skin lesions with neural origin

Cutaneous (dermal) neurofibromas typically begin to
develop around puberty but may appear as early as 4 to 5

years of age. Less than half of children with NF1 have
clinically evident neurofibromas by 10 years of age,12 with
plexiform (see later) rather than cutaneous lesions predomi-
nating in this age group. In contrast, cutaneous neurofi-
bromas are present in ~ 85% of adults with NF1.

Classic cutaneous neurofibromas are dome-shaped or
pedunculated, soft to rubbery papulonodules that are skin
colored, pinkish, or hyperpigmented (Figure 2B, C). They
have a highly characteristic “buttonhole” sign of invagina-
tion when gentle pressure is applied; however, some
neurofibromas, especially early lesions, are barely elevated
or even macular. These under-recognized variants include
blue-red macules (with prominent blood vessels in the
upper dermis; see Figure 2C), which favor the trunk and are
seen in ~ 8% of adults with NF1, and pseudoatrophic
macules (with reduced dermal collagen).27 Subcutaneous
neurofibromas represent a deeper subtype that tends to be
firmer and less sharply marginated than purely dermal
lesions. In addition to Schwann cells, both cutaneous and
subcutaneous neurofibromas are composed of perineural
cells, fibroblasts, and mast cells. Of note, recent studies
suggest
that mast cells have a key role in promoting
neurofibroma formation.28

Plexiform neurofibromas affect ~ 25% of individuals with
NF129 and are typically congenital in origin due to an early
postzygotic “second-hit” NF1 mutation. They usually
become clinically apparent by 3 to 5 years of age, with the
exception of smaller deep or internal lesions. Plexiform
neurofibromas may extend along a nerve, forming firm
nodules or masses that are tender and described as having a
“bag of worms” consistency upon palpation; they can also
diffusely infiltrate the skin and underlying tissues. Hyper-
pigmentation, hypertrichosis, and thickening of the overlying
skin are common findings (Figure 2D), which may lead to
misdiagnosis as a congenital melanocytic nevus.30

Neurocutaneous syndromes

187

Table 2

Selected neurocutaneous disorders with vascular manifestations

Disorder
Von Hippel–Lindau disease

Major cutaneous findings
• None

Ataxia telangiectasia

• Telangiectasias (eg, on ears,

cheeks, upper trunk)

• CALS, hypopigmented macules
• Progeric facies, premature

grey hair

• Papulosquamous facial

Potential neurologic findings
• Hemangioblastomas of

brain and spinal cord

• Ataxia, dysarthria, bradykinesia

(in first few years of life)

Potential ocular findings
• Hemangioblastomas

of the retina

• Conjunctival telangiectasias

(medial and lateral; mean
onset age 4-6 years)

Sturge-Weber syndrome
Microcephaly-capillary

malformation syndrome

Familial cerebral cavernous

malformations

Wyburn-Mason

(Bonnet-Dechaume-Blanc)
syndrome

PTEN hamartoma-tumor

syndrome

PHACE syndrome

Prolidase deficiency

Fabry disease ⁎

Homocysinuria

rash, granulomas

• See text
• Multiple capillary

malformations—small and

widespread
• Hyperkeratotic

capillary-venous malformations
(~ 10% of patients)

• Facial AVM

• See text
• Progressive microcephaly

• See text
• Hypertelorism, ptosis
• Optic atrophy

• Cerebral capillary

• Retinal vascular malformations

malformations

• Headaches, seizures,
cerebral hemorrhage

• Brain AVM
• Seizures, hemiparesis

(~5% of patients)

• Orbital AVM

• See text

• See text

• See text

• Segmental infantile

hemangioma, usually on the face

• Acral telangiectasias
• Leg ulcers
• Angiokeratoma corporis
diffusum (favoring bathing trunk

area)

• Hypohidrosis
• Malar flush, livedo reticularis,

thrombosis, atrophic scars
• Diffuse pigmentary dilution

of skin and hair

• Cerebrovascular abnormalities
• Posterior fossa malformations
• Intellectual disability

• Retinal vascular anomalies
• Optic nerve hypoplasia
• Hypertelorism, ptosis,

• Acral pain and paresthesias
• Cerebrovascular disease

(eg, stroke)

• Intellectual disability

exophthalmos

• Corneal (whorled) and

lenticular opacities

• Tortuous vessels of eyelid,

conjunctiva, and retina

• Lens subluxations (downward)

AVM, arteriovenous malformation; CALS, café-au-lait spots; PHACE, posterior fossa malformations, hemangioma, arterial anomalies, cardiac defects, and
eye anomalies.

⁎ Other lysosomal storage diseases (eg, fucosidosis, [galacto]sialidosis) can present with angiokeratoma corporis diffusum together with ocular findings

(eg, corneal opacities, cherry-red macular spots, conjunctival telangiectasias) and neurodevelopmental deterioration.

Large, bulky plexiform neurofibromas can cause soft tissue
and bony hypertrophy that result in disfigurement. Lesions
involving the orbit (see later), airway, or spine tend to be
especially problematic.31 Roughly 10% of plexiform neuro-
fibromas undergo transformation into a malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor (neurofibrosarcoma). This has a peak
incidence in young adults and is often heralded by persistent
pain, a new neurologic deficit, increased firmness, or rapid
growth of a previously stable plexiform neurofibroma.18

Vascular lesions of the skin

Vascular anomalies that have recently been recognized
as manifestations of NF1 include nevus anemicus and
glomus tumors.32–35 In a large prospective study, a nevus
anemicus was identified in 51% (77/151) of patients with

NF1 (59% [58/98] of children and 36% [19/53] of adults),
compared with only 2% (6/302) of age- and sex-matched
controls.35 The nevus anemicus was most often on the chest in
both groups. Interestingly, one third (2/6) of the sporadic lesions
but none of the 77 NF1-associated lesions were accompanied by
a port-wine stain. Because the NF1-associated nevus anemicus
is often apparent in the first 2 years of life, its use as an early
clinical marker has been proposed.34,35

In a recent series of glomus tumors identified in a pathology
database, 29% (6/21) of the patients had NF1.36 NF1-asso-
ciated glomus tumors tend to be multiple and affect the fingers
more than toes. Like their sporadic counterparts, they typically
present with paroxysmal pain and sensitivity to cold, often in
an ill-defined area of reddish discoloration and swelling.32
Biallelic inactivation of the NF1 gene within these lesions has
been described in NF1 patients.33

Selected neurocutaneous disorders with hyperkeratotic or adnexal manifestations

K.A. Chernoff, J.V. Schaffer

188

Table 3

Disorder

Major cutaneous findings

Potential neurologic findings

Potential ocular findings

• Widespread brown

• Intellectual disability

• Corneal opacities

Ichthyosis
X-linked recessive ichthyosis

Sjögren-Larsson syndrome

Neutral lipid storage disease

Multiple sulfatase deficiency

Refsum disease

Arthrogryposis-renal dysfunction-cholestasis

(ARC) syndrome

Colobomas, heart defects, ichthyosiform
dermatosis, mental retardation, and ear
anomalies (CHIME) syndrome ⁎

adherent scales, favoring
the neck

• Widespread

hyperkeratosis ± scaling,
favoring flexures and the
lower abdomen; pruritus;
PPK

• Widespread scaling with

variable erythema
• Similar to X-linked
recessive ichthyosis

• Scaling on extremities N

trunk

• Widespread scaling that

spares skin folds

• Migratory ichthyosiform

eruption

(uncommon; associated with
larger deletions)

• Spasticity, diparesis/
tetraparesis, seizures,
intellectual disability

• Intellectual disability
• Hearing deficit
• Neurodevelopmental

abnormalities

• Hearing deficit
• Neuropathy, ataxia
• Hearing deficit
• Neurodevelopmental

abnormalities
Hearing deficit

• Intellectual disability
• Seizures

• Perifoveal glistening
white dots, crystalline
macular dystrophy
• Photophobia, decreased
visual acuity

• Cataracts

• Cataracts

• Retinitis pigmentosa
• Cataracts
• Corneal opacities

• Colobomas (retinal,

choroidal)

• Hypertelorism, epicanthal

folds

• Cataracts

Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata

• Ichthyosis then follicular

• Neurodevelopmental

Cerebral dysgenesis, neuropathy, ichthyosis

and keratoderma (CEDNIK) syndrome

atrophoderma

• Widespread scaling with
variable erythema; PPK

abnormalities

• Microcephaly, abnormal

corpus callosum, intellectual
disability

• Neuropathy
• Hearing deficit

• Hypertelorism,

downward-slanting
palpebral fissures

• Optic atrophy

Erythrokeratoderma, palmoplantar keratoderma/pitting, and epidermal nevi
Keratitis-ichthyosis-deafness (KID) syndrome • Keratotic plaques, follicular

• Hearing deficit

• Keratitis

or diffuse hyperkeratosis;
grainy PPK; cheilitis

• Follicular occlusion triad,

Ichthyosis follicularis, atrichia, and

photophobia (IFAP) syndrome

Richner-Hanhart syndrome

(tyrosinemia type II)

Sebaceous nevi (SN), epidermal nevi

(EN; subset of nonepidermolytic lesions)

Nevoid BCC syndrome

Hypotrichosis
Trichothiodystrophy

cysts, adnexal neoplasms, SCC

• Follicular keratoses,
psoriasiform plaques

• Congenital atrichia
• Focal PPK

• Waxy yellowish (SN) and

tan-to-brown
hyperkeratotic or
papillomatous (EN) plaques
along Blaschko’s lines

• Adnexal neoplasms (SN)
• Early-onset BCCs
• Palmoplantar pits

• Short, fragile hair
• Variable ichthyosis,

photosensitivity, and nail
dystrophy

• Intellectual disability,

• Keratitis

seizures

• Progressive intellectual

• Dendritic keratitis,

disability

• Neurodevelopmental

abnormalities

corneal ulcers

• Coloboma, choristoma,

lipodermoids

• Macrocephaly, calcification

of falx cerebri

• Medulloblastoma

• Hypertelorism
• Subconjunctival epithelial

cysts

• Strabismus
• Cataracts, colobomas

• Intellectual disability

• Cataracts

Neurocutaneous syndromes

Table 3 (continued)

Disorder

Menkes disease

189

Major cutaneous findings
• Sparse, lightly pigmented,

kinky hair (pili torti)
• Lax skin with diffuse

pigmentary dilution

Potential neurologic findings
• Neurodevelopmental
deterioration, seizures

Potential ocular findings
• Poor visual acuity/
myopia, strabismus

• Blue irides

PPK, palmoplantar keratoderma; BCC, basal cell carcinomas; SCC, squamous cell carcinomas.

⁎ Similar findings are seen in the type Iq congenital disorder of glycosylation.

Other skin findings

As many as 15% to 30% of children with NF1 are
diagnosed with one or more juvenile xanthogranulomas

during the first 2 to 3 years of life.34,37 The lesions
are often multiple and favor the face, scalp, and groin.
A “triple association” among NF1, juvenile xanthogra-
nulomas, and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia has

Selected neurocutaneous disorders affecting the connective tissue

Potential neurologic findings
• Intracranial lipomas, vascular

Potential ocular findings
• Choristomas

• Microphthalmia, orbital cysts

• Colobomas, aniridia,

microphthalmia

• Ectopia lentis
• Poor visual acuity

• Microphthalmia
• Sclerocornea
• Cataracts
• Retinal abnormalities
• Angioid streaks, mottling of

retinal pigment epithelium
Choroidal neovascularization
& hemorrhage

• Downward-slanting palpebral

Table 4

Disorder

Encephalocraniocutaneous

lipomatosis

Oculocerebrocutaneous
(Delleman) syndrome
Focal dermal hypoplasia

Microphthalmia with linear skin

defects syndrome (MIDAS
syndrome)

Major cutaneous findings
• Lipomas and fibromas favoring
eyelids and scalp, with overlying
alopecia (nevus psiloliparus)

• “Skin tags” with skeletal muscle
• ACC over ears
• Dermal atrophy, fat

“herniation,” telangiectasias,
and dyspigmentation along
Blaschko lines; scalp ACC

abnormalities, and cysts

• Agenesis of corpus callosum,
giant tectum-absent vermis
• Intellectual disability
• Myelomeningocele

• Periorificial papillomas
• Stellate ACC on face and neck • Intellectual disability, seizures
• Hypoplasia of corpus callosum,

microcephaly

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum

• Yellowish, cobblestone,

• Cerebrovascular disease

sagging plaques on neck and in
other flexures

(eg, stroke)

AR cutis laxa type II, including

• Loose, sagging skin; favors

• Neurodevelopmental

De Barsy syndrome (DBS)

hands/feet in IIB

Costello syndrome

Lipoid proteinosis

Hunter syndrome

Cerebrotendinous
xanthomatosis

• Lax acral skin
• Acanthosis nigricans,
periorificial papillomas

• Nevi, lentigines
• Curly hair, early androgenetic

alopecia

• Vesicles/erosions → “ice pick”

scars

• Waxy thickening of skin and
oropharynx; verrucous plaques
on elbows/knees

• Pebbly papules in scapular

region

• Tuberous and tendinous
xanthomas

abnormalities

• Pachygyria (IIA)
• Hypoplasia of corpus callosum,

fissures

• Strabismus, high myopia (IIA)
• Corneal opacities, cataracts

dystonia (IIB/DBS)

• Intellectual disability
• Seizures

(IIB/DBS)

• Hypertelorism, epicanthal

folds, ptosis

• Strabismus, refractive errors

• Temporal lobe calcifications
• Neuropsychiatric

abnormalities, seizures

• Beaded papules along eyelid

margins

• Prominent corneal nerves;
corneal ulcers (uncommon)

• Neurodevelopmental

• Optic atrophy, retinopathy

abnormalities

• Neurodevelopmental and
psychiatric abnormalities,
ataxia, dystonia

• Neuropathy

• Cataracts
• Optic disc pallor, retinal vessel

sclerosis

ACC, aplasia cutis congenita; AR, autosomal recessive; MIDAS, microphthalmia, dermal aplasia and sclerocornea.

190

K.A. Chernoff, J.V. Schaffer

Table 5

Selected neurocutaneous disorders presenting with photosensitivity and/or inflammatory skin lesions

Disorder
Cockayne syndrome ⁎

Major cutaneous findings
• Photosensitivity, solar

lentigines (less than in XP),
atrophic skin

• Cyanotic acral edema

Potential neurologic findings
• Neurodevelopmental

abnormalities
• Microcephaly
• Hearing deficit

Bloom syndrome

• Photosensitivity, malar

• Microcephaly, intellectual

Rothmund-Thomson

syndrome †

Aicardi-Goutières syndrome

erythema and telangiectasias

• CALS
• Facial erythema and edema →

poikiloderma on face, dorsal
hands, buttocks

• Photosensitivity (variable)
• Acral keratoses, ulcers and SCC
• Acral chilblain lupus

Hartnup disease

Biotinidase and

• Photosensitive pellagra-like

dermatitis

• Periorificial erythema and

holocarboxylase synthetase
deficiencies

erosions
• Alopecia

Phenylketonuria

Cryopyrin-associated periodic

syndromes

Blau syndrome

Psoriasiform dermatitis,

microcephaly and
developmental delay

• Diffuse pigmentary dilution of

skin and hair

• Eczematous dermatitis
• Sclerodermatous changes of

proximal extremities

• Urticarial papules and plaques

(may be cold induced)

• Granulomatous dermatitis

• Psoriasiform dermatitis

Potential ocular findings
• Sunken eyes
• Pigmentary retinal

degeneration, optic atrophy

• Cataracts
• Microphthalmia, iris hypoplasia
• Conjunctival telangiectasias
• Retinal drusen

• Cataracts
• Corneal abnormalities
• Sparse eyelashes

• Abnormal eye movements

• Intermittent nystagmus

• Conjunctivitis, blepharitis
• Optic atrophy

• Blue irides
• Cataracts

disability (mild)

• Intellectual disability

(mild; uncommon)

• Neurodevelopmental
deterioration
• Microcephaly, white matter

changes

• Intermittent ataxia
• Psychiatric disturbances
• Neurodevelopmental

abnormalities, hypotonia,
seizures

• Hearing deficit
• Neurodevelopmental

deterioration

• Headache, aseptic meningitis
• Hearing deficit
• Cranial neuropathies
• Seizures
• Cerebral arteritis
• Neurodevelopmental
abnormalities
• Microcephaly

• Conjunctivitis, uveitis, optic

disc edema

• Uveitis
• Cataracts, glaucoma

• Cataracts

CALS, café-au-lait spots; SCC, squamous cell carcinomas; XP, xeroderma pigmentosum.

⁎ Photosensitivity is also a finding in XP (see Table 1).
† Poikiloderma with neutropenia, Clericuzi type, has similar features.

been described; however, the magnitude of additional
risk of
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia in young
children with NF1 plus juvenile xanthogranulomas
compared with the 200- to 500-fold increased risk of
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia associated with
NF1 alone (incidence of 1/2000 to 1/5000) remains to
be determined.

Pruritus is a common manifestation of NF1. It is usually
generalized but occasionally related to a particular neurofibroma
or other skin lesion. The increased density of mast cells within
neurofibromas and CALS may play a pathogenic role in
NF1-associated itch.19

Ocular manifestations of NF1

Ocular lesions with melanocytic or neural origin

Lisch nodules are the most common ocular finding in NF1
and represent a useful clinical marker. Among patients with
NF1, the prevalence of these pigmented iris hamartomas
increases from ~ 40% at age 5 years to ~ 70% at age 10 years
to ~ 95% in adults.12 They appear as small (b 1-2 mm),
dome-shaped, well-defined yellow-brown papules on the iris
(Figure 3), especially its inferior portion, and are best

Neurocutaneous syndromes

191

Fig. 1 Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3 K)/AKT signaling pathway abnormalities in
neurocutaneous syndromes. GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GNAQ, Q-class G protein α-subunit; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; mTOR,
mammalian target of rapamycin; PIP2/3, phosphatidylinositol di/triphosphate.

visualized on slit-lamp examination.38 In contrast, iris nevi
are flat or slightly elevated, ill-defined, densely pigmented
lesions. Because Lisch nodules are benign and do not impair
vision, they are rarely biopsied. Reports of the histologic
findings have described a mix of pigmented spindle-shaped
cells containing melanosomes, fibroblast-like cells, and mast
cells.39 Whether the pigmented cells are of melanocytic or
schwannian origin has been debated.39,40

Optic gliomas occur in 10% to 20% of patients with
NF112,41,42 and usually develop before 7 years of age.
Conversely, most optic gliomas occur in children with NF1.43
These tumors represent benign, low-grade pilocytic astrocyto-
mas that may affect the optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic tract, or
hypothalamus. Although many patients remain asymptomatic,
clinical manifestations can include decreased visual acuity,
visual field defects, loss of color vision, proptosis, strabismus,
and nystagmus. Ophthalmologic examination may also show
optic disc pallor and a relative afferent pupillary defect.
Children with hypothalamic involvement can develop preco-
cious puberty, which may initially present with accelerated
linear growth,44 and larger tumors occasionally lead to
hydrocephalus and signs of increased intracranial pressure.

In children with NF1, recommended monitoring for optic
gliomas includes annual evaluation by an ophthalmologist
until at least 8 years of age and then possibly biennially up to
age 18.42 Ophthalmologic assessment should include visual
acuity, color vision, visual fields, ocular motility, pupillary
reflexes, slit-lamp examination, and funduscopy.45 Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and orbit is indicated if

signs or symptoms develop. Although there has been debate
in the literature regarding routine imaging, screening with
MRI in asymptomatic individuals has not been found to be of
benefit31,42,46; however, imaging may be considered when it
is not possible to perform a reliable eye examination.

When plexiform neurofibromas affect the eyelid or orbit,
consequences can include proptosis, strabismus, amblyopia,
congenital glaucoma, and skull deformities. Sphenoid
dysplasia, a bony defect in the posterior orbital wall, is
typically associated with an orbital plexiform neurofibroma.
This characteristic osseous lesion is included in the
diagnostic criteria for NF1 and classically presents with
pulsating exophthalmos within the first year of life.12

Studies using near-infrared reflectance imaging with
confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscopy have found patchy
choroidal nodules in 80% to 100% of adults and ~70% of
children with NF1,47,48 compared with b 10% of unaffected
individuals. This has led to a proposal
that choroidal
abnormalities be added to the diagnostic criteria for NF1. Recent
reports have also drawn attention to retinal vasoproliferative
tumors, which can lead to loss of vision, in patients with NF1.49

Other manifestations of NF1

Neurodevelopmental manifestations of NF1 can include
learning disabilities (30%-50% of patients), attention deficit
and autism spectrum disorders, and sleep disturbances. Brain
MRI shows characteristic “unidentified bright objects” in 50%

192

K.A. Chernoff, J.V. Schaffer

Fig. 2
Skin findings in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1. A, Café-au-lait spots with homogeneous pigmentation and smooth borders.
B, Axillary “freckling,” café-au-lait spots, and pink, dome-shaped neurofibromas. C, Larger blue-red macule as well as numerous small,
dome-shaped neurofibromas. D, Plexiform neurofibroma presenting as a hyperpigmented plaque in a child. Such lesions may be misdiagnosed
as congenital melanocytic nevi.

to 75% of patients, and central nervous system (CNS) tumors
other than optic gliomas occasionally develop.50 Macroce-
phaly is another common finding (30%-50% of patients).

Skeletal abnormalities associated with NF1 range from
scoliosis (~10% of patients) to the more specific thinning of
long bone cortex that can lead to pseudoarthrosis. NF1 patients
have an increased risk of breast cancer (~fivefold elevation in
women b 50 years of age) and other tumors such as
pheochromocytomas, gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST),
and rhabomyosarcomas. NF1-associated cardiovascular abnor-
malities include essential hypertension (~30% of patients), renal
artery or pulmonic stenosis, and cerebrovascular anomalies.18

Mosaic NF1

In segmental NF1 (formerly known as neurofibromatosis
type 5), CALS, “freckling,” and/or neurofibromas are found
in a patchy distribution (eg, blocklike). This is a reflection of

mosaicism due to a postzygotic mutation in the NF1 gene.
Affected individuals may meet criteria for NF1, but because
only a limited portion of the body is affected, they have a
substantially lower risk of extracutaneous manifestations;
indeed, many patients with mosaic NF1 have only
pigmentary lesions or only cutaneous neurofibromas. If the
mutation involves the gonads in addition to the skin,
however, there is a possibility of full-blown NF1 in the
patient’s offspring.

Advances in the management of NF1

Guidelines for the management of patients with NF1 have
been published.51,52 Recognition of the critical role of mast
cells in neurofibroma tumorigenesis led to investigation of
imatinib, an inhibitor of the c-Kit receptor on mast cells, as a
treatment for plexiform neurofibromas. A promising initial

Neurocutaneous syndromes

193

targeted inhibition of other kinases, such as those in the
MAPK pathway (eg, RAF, MEK) and vascular endothelial
growth factor receptors, or mTOR inhibitors as potential
therapies for tumors in NF1 patients.55

Tuberous sclerosis complex

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is another classic
autosomal dominant neurocutaneous disorder, with a
roughly 1 in 10,000 births56,57;
reported incidence of
however, considering the wide variability in expressivity, it
is thought that the true incidence of TSC is actually higher
due to the presence of undiagnosed mildly symptomatic
individuals. Approximately two thirds of patients with TSC
have a spontaneous new mutation.

TSC is caused by mutations in either of two genes, TSC1
and TSC2. Familial cases are linked to each of the genes in
roughly equal frequency, whereas de novo cases are four
times more likely to be due to TSC2 mutations. Individuals
with TSC2 mutations tend to have a more severe phenotype,
with an increased likelihood of mental retardation.58

The TSC1 and TSC2 genes encode hamartin and tuberin
proteins, respectively, which function together in a complex.
Tuberin (like neurofibromin) has GAP activity. By acceler-
ating the hydrolysis of GTP, tuberin “turns off” Rheb, a
protein that stimulates the mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) pathway (see Figure 1). Loss-of-function mutations
in TSC1 or TSC2, therefore, lead to inappropriate mTOR
signaling, which results in increased cell growth and
survival.59–61 Patients with TSC can develop hamartomas
in nearly any organ system, most often the skin, retina, brain,
kidney, heart, and lung. Diagnostic criteria were created in
1992 and most recently revised in 2012 (Table 6). The
importance of cutaneous, oral, and ocular
findings as
markers of TSC is underscored by the fact that 5 of the 11
major criteria and 4 of the 6 minor criteria involve the skin,
mouth, or eyes. Dermatologists commonly have a role in
diagnosing TSC, and skin lesions often represent the first
signs of this condition.

Cutaneous, oral, and ocular manifestations
of TSC

Hypopigmented lesions

Fig. 3

Lisch nodules in a patient with neurofibromatosis type 1.

report described dramatic improvement in a life-threatening
imatinib therapy53;
cervicofacial plexiform lesion after
however, only a modest benefit was seen in a recent phase
2 trial, with a 20% reduction in plexiform neurofibroma
volume in 26% (6/23) of NF1 patients who received imatinib
for at least 6 months.54 Ongoing studies are evaluating

Table 6
complex (TSC)

2012 revised diagnostic criteria for tuberous sclerosis

Major features
• Hypomelanotic macules (≥3, at least 5 mm in diameter)
• Angiofibromas (≥3) or fibrous cephalic plaque
• Ungual fibromas (≥ 2)
• Shagreen patch
• Multiple retinal hamartomas
• Cortical dysplasias (including tubers and white matter radial

migration lines)

• Subependymal nodules
• Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma
• Cardiac rhabdomyoma
• Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM)
• Angiomyolipomas (≥2)
Minor features
• “Confetti” skin lesions
• Dental enamel pits (≥3)
• Intraoral fibromas (≥ 2)
• Retinal achromic patch
• Multiple renal cysts
• Nonrenal hamartomas
Definite clinical diagnosis: 2 major features ⁎ –or– 1 major + 2

minor features

Possible clinical diagnosis: 1 major feature –or– 2 minor

features

Definite genetic diagnosis: Identification of a pathogenic

mutation in either TSC1 or TSC2 in DNA from normal tissue †
Adapted from Northrup and Krueger (2013).67 Changes from the 1998
criteria are italicized.

⁎ With the exception of LAM + angiomyolipomas.
† Approximately 10% to 25% of patients with TSC have no

mutation identified by conventional genetic testing, so a normal result
does not exclude TSC unless a known pathogenic mutation in an
affected relative is excluded.

life,

Hypomelanotic macules represent the earliest and most
prevalent (N 90%) skin finding in patients with TSC.62
Although often present at birth or within the first few months
of
require
examination with a Wood’s lamp to become evident,
especially in children with lightly pigmented skin. Small
(b 2 cm), polygonal or “thumbprint”-shaped hypopigmented
macules are most common (Figure 4A), although their size

these lesions may take longer and/or

194

K.A. Chernoff, J.V. Schaffer

Fig. 4
adolescent. C, Fibrous plaque on the forehead. D, Periungual fibromas on the toes. E, Shagreen patch with prominent follicular orifices.

Skin findings in patients with tuberous sclerosis. A, Multiple thumbprint-like hypomelanotic macules. B, Facial angiofibromas in an

can reach N 10 cm and the characteristic lance-ovate “ash leaf
spot” (rounded at one end and tapered at the other) may also
be observed. The lesions are usually multiple, and the trunk
and buttocks are most often affected. Poliosis of the scalp
hair, eyebrows, or eyelashes may be seen when the
underlying skin is affected. When a biopsy is performed,
hypopigmented macules of TSC are found to have a
reduction in the amount of epidermal melanin but a normal
number of melanocytes, unlike the depigmented lesions of
vitiligo and piebaldism.

A single hypopigmented macule or patch (ie, a nevus
“depigmentosus”)
is relatively common in the general
population, occurring in roughly 2% to 4% of infants or
children and 5% of adults; however, ≥ 3 of these lesions are

found in only 0.1% of the general population.63 As a result,
at least 3 hypomelanotic macules are required to constitute a
major criterion for TSC. In addition, the minor criterion of
“confetti” lesions refers to the presence of numerous small
(1-2 mm), guttate (droplike) hypopigmented macules. Such
lesions favor the extremities and are apparent in b 5% of
patients with TSC.62

Although CALS are often noted as a feature of TSC, these
lesions are seen in b 30% of patients with TSC and are
usually solitary.62 As such,
the
prevalence of CALS in the general population.20

this may simply reflect

Achromic patches on the retina are analogous to the
hypopigmented macules found on the skin of individuals
with TSC. These “punched out” spots of
retinal

Neurocutaneous syndromes

195

Table 7
hamartoma-tumor syndrome

2013 revised clinical diagnostic criteria for PTEN

Major criteria
• Multiple mucocutaneous lesions (any of the following):
• Trichilemmomas (≥ 3, at least 1 biopsy proven)
• Acral keratoses (≥3 papules or palmoplantar pits)
• Mucocutaneous neuromas (≥3)
• Oral papillomas, particularly on tongue and gingiva (≥ 3,

biopsy-proven, or dermatologist-diagnosed)

• Pigmented macules on the glans penis
• Macrocephaly (N 97th percentile; 58 cm in adult women, 60

cm in adult men)

• Lhermitte-Duclos disease (LDD; in an adult)
• Breast cancer
• Endometrial cancer (epithelial)
• Thyroid cancer (follicular)
• Gastrointestinal (GI) hamartomas, including ganglioneuromas

but not hyperplastic polyps (≥3)

Minor criteria
• Vascular anomalies, including multiple intracranial

developmental venous anomalies

• Lipomas (≥ 3)
• Testicular lipomatosis
• Autism spectrum disorder
• Mental retardation (IQ ≤ 75)
• Renal cell carcinoma
• Colon cancer
• Esophageal glycogenic acanthosis
• Thyroid cancer (papillary or follicular variant of papillary)
• Thyroid structural lesions (eg, adenoma, multinodular goiter)
Operational diagnosis in an individual:
3 major criteria including macrocephaly, LDD, or GI
hamartomas –or–2 major criteria + 3 minor criteria

Operational diagnosis when a family member meets

diagnostic criteria or has a PTEN mutation:

2 major criteria –or– 1 major + 2 minor criteria –or– 3 minor

criteria

Adapted from Pilarski et al.90

depigmentation are present
in up to 40% of TSC
patients.64,65 Other ocular pigmentary changes that can be
seen in TSC include iris depigmentation.66

Hamartomatous lesions

Hamartomatous mucocutaneous lesions in patients with
TSC have a predilection for the cephalic region, where
mesenchymal tissues are derived from the neural crest, as
well as the lower back, ungual area, and occasionally flexural
sites. Facial angiofibromas (previously known by the
misnomer “adenoma sebaceum”) are the second most
common cutaneous manifestation of TSC. They typically
begin to appear between 2 and 5 years of age and develop by
adolescence in ~ 75% of patients.62 In contrast, facial
angiofibromas associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 1 or Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome tend to have onset in
adulthood. Of note, connective tissue nevi, gingival papules,
and confetti-like hypomelanotic macules may also be seen in
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1.

TSC-associated angiofibromas classically present as
smooth, dome-shaped, pink-to-red papules and nodules
(Figure 4B). They are distributed bilaterally over the central
face, with the occasional exception of unilateral involvement
in patients with mosaic TSC. Angiofibromas often start as
erythematous macules, becoming more elevated and some-
times coalescing over time. Eyelid involvement is seen in
~ 40% of patients.64 Fibrous cephalic plaques favor the
forehead but can occur in other facial sites (Figure 4C). These
lesions, which represent larger variants of the angiofibroma,
are evident in ~ 25% of patients with TSC. Histologically,
angiofibromas and fibrous plaques feature a dermal prolifer-
ation of fibroblasts and dilated blood vessels in a collagenous
stroma with concentric perifollicular fibrosis.

Ungual fibromas (Koenen tumors) may be considered as
an acral counterpart to facial angiofibromas. The prevalence
of these lesions in TSC patients increases with age, from
15% to 20% in children62,67 to 80% in adults.68 Skin-colored
to pink papules, which often have tapered or hyperkeratotic
tips, are commonly found on multiple digits (Figure 4D).
Periungual fibromas (originating from the proximal or lateral
nail fold) predominate on the feet (especially the fifth toe)
and may be associated with a longitudinal groove in the nail
plate. Of note, similar grooves sometimes occur without a

Fig. 5
associated with soft tissue overgrowth. B, Subtle keratotic papules on the ankle.

Skin findings in PTEN hamartoma-tumor syndrome. A, Vascular malformation with lymphatic and arteriovenous components,

196

visible fibroma. In contrast, subungual fibromas (originating
the nail plate) and “red comets” (blanchable
under
longitudinal red streaks with proximal narrowing) favor the
hands (especially the thumb). Splinter hemorrhages and
leukonychia may also be observed.68 The
longitudinal
distribution of ungual lesions suggests that repetitive trauma
represents a pathogenic factor.

Molluscum pendulum are angiofibroma variants that

occur in flexural sites and resemble large skin tags.

The shagreen patch is a specific type of connective tissue
nevus that usually becomes evident during the first decade of
life, eventually affecting approximately half of patients with
TSC.62,69 These skin-colored to yellowish-brown or pink,
slightly elevated plaques favor
the lumbosacral area
(Figure 4E). They have a characteristic peau d’orange or
pigskin-like texture with prominent, slightly depressed
follicular orifices.

The oral manifestations of TSC can be useful

in
establishing the diagnosis. Intraoral fibromas affect 20%
to 70% of patients, with a higher prevalence in adults than
children. These papules are most often located on the
gingiva, but they can also occur in buccal, labial, and other
sites.70 Multiple dental enamel pits are present in N 95% of
adults with TSC, compared with ≤ 7% of individuals in the
general population.71

Retinal hamartomas with astrocytic histology similar to
that of cortical tubers are found in 30% to 50% of patients
with TSC.64,72 These lesions are often present in young
children and can represent a useful diagnostic marker.
Morphologic subtypes of retinal hamartomas include: (1)
flat, translucent lesions; (2) opaque, multinodular, calcified
“mulberry” lesions; and (3)
lesions with
overlapping features.64 Although retinal hamartomas do
not usually lead to visual loss, they are associated with an
increased risk of subependymal giant cell astrocytomas,
renal angiomyolipomas, cognitive impairment, and epilep-
sy.73 Retinal astrocytomas with more aggressive behavior
and hamartomas of the iris and ciliary body are also
occasionally observed in patients with TSC.

transitional

Other hamartomatous manifestations of TSC

Involvement of the CNS with hamartomatous lesions
represents the greatest source of morbidity and mortality in
patients with TSC. MRI of the brain shows multiple cortical
tubers (a form of cortical dysplasia) and subependymal
nodules (often calcified) in 80% to N 90% of TSC patients
before 2 years of age, and the severity of brain involvement
may correlate with seizure activity and intellectual deficits.
Infantile spasms affect ~ 70% of TSC patients, typically
beginning at 3 to 6 months of age, and other forms of
epilepsy often develop later
in childhood. Cognitive
impairment, autism spectrum disorders, and neuropsychiatric
conditions are common, although the degree of disability

K.A. Chernoff, J.V. Schaffer

varies considerably. Subependymal giant cell astrocytomas
with more aggressive behavior can also develop, most often
during childhood.

Other systemic findings in TSC (see Table 6) result from
benign hamartomatous growths that may be asymptomatic or
highly problematic, depending on their location and size.
Cardiac rhabdomyomas, one of the earliest and most specific
manifestations of TSC, have great diagnostic utility. These
lesions are present in N 80% of infants with TSC and are
often detected prenatally. Fortunately, they only occasionally
disrupt cardiac function and tend to regress over time.
Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis affects 30% to 40%
of young women with TSC and can result in progressive
dyspnea on exertion and recurrent pneumothoraces. Renal
angiomyolipomas are found in 75% to 90% of TSC patients
and sometimes lead to renal failure.

Advances in the management of TSC

Guidelines for surveillance and management of patients
with TSC have recently been published.74 The discovery of the
relationship between hamartin/tuberin and the mTOR pathway
has led to great advances in the management of tuberous
sclerosis via use of mTOR inhibitors such as sirolimus
(rapamycin) and everolimus. Large clinical trials have found
that oral administration of these agents is beneficial for renal
angiomyolipomas, pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis,
and subependymal giant cell astrocytomas.75–78

After the observation that facial angiofibromas regress in
TSC patients receiving systemic sirolimus,79 topical appli-
cation of this medication has been successfully employed to
treat
these lesions (as well as fibrous plaques and
hypomelanotic macules) without systemic absorption.80–83
Sirolimus concentrations of b 0.1% to 1% have been used,
with more irritation produced by the commercially available
0.1% solution (Rapamune® 1 mg/mL) than ointment and gel
formulations.81,83 Reduced erythema and flattening are
typically seen within 3 months of initiating topical therapy
of angiofibromas, with the most dramatic improvement in
children ≤ 10 years of age. Although relapses occur upon
discontinuation, maintenance via decreasing from daily to
thrice weekly application has been described.81,83

PTEN hamartoma-tumor syndrome

The PTEN hamartoma-tumor syndrome (PHTS) encom-
passes a spectrum of disorders caused by loss-of-function
germline mutations in the phosphatase and tensin homolog
(PTEN) tumor suppressor gene. Cowden syndrome and
Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, autosomal dominant
genodermatoses with overlapping features, are included in
this group. PHTS is characterized by hamartomatous
overgrowth in a variety of organ systems, with prominent

Neurocutaneous syndromes

197

Fig. 6
Port-wine stain versus segmental infantile hemangioma. A, This infant with a blotchy pink port-wine stain involving the V1 and V2
distributions is at risk for Sturge-Weber syndrome. B, Minimal-growth segmental infantile hemangioma, not a port-wine stain. Clues to the
diagnosis include the prominent telangiectasias and slightly elevated red papules at the medial canthus. This infant is at risk for PHACE syndrome.

manifestations in the skin and brain. Ocular findings also
occur in PHTS and can represent clues to the diagnosis.

The PTEN gene encodes a lipid phosphatase that
negatively regulates the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3
K)/AKT pathway (see Figure 1). Signaling via PI3 K/AKT,
which inhibits the tuberin tumor suppressor protein,
is
therefore increased in patients with PHTS. As in tuberous
sclerosis,
this results in elevated mTOR activity that
promotes cell growth and survival (see earlier). Recently,
gain-of-function germline mutations in the PIK3 CA or
AKT1 gene were found in a subset of patients with a Cowden
syndrome phenotype but no PTEN mutation.84

Somatic loss of PTEN function is associated with a wide
array of sporadic human cancers,85 including those of neural
lineage.86–88 PTEN also plays an important role in the
development of the CNS. Homozygous deletion of PTEN
during murine embryogenesis leads to enlarged, architectur-
ally disordered brains with increased cell survival, size, and
proliferation.89 This explains the high frequency of macro-
cephaly in individuals with PHTS.

Revised, evidence-based diagnostic criteria for PHTS
were proposed in 2013 (Table 7).90 Goals included increasing
specificity and incorporating recently recognized clinical
manifestations. Genetic testing can help to confirm the
diagnosis of PHTS and identify affected family members.91

the genitalia (penis N vulva),

macules of
lipomas, and
vascular anomalies with a fast-flow component (Figure 5A).
More severely affected PHTS patients with a PTEN “second
hit” that occurs during embryonic development may be born
with prominent mosaic manifestations resembling Proteus
syndrome, such as segmental overgrowth, verrucous
epidermal nevi, and deformities related to lipomatosis and
vascular malformations; however, true Proteus syndrome is
caused by mosaicism for activating AKT1 mutations, and
patients with mosaic PIK3 CA mutations can also have
similar findings. Mucocutaneous neuromas have recently
been added as a major diagnostic criterion for PHTS (see
Table 7).90 These lesions often arise during childhood and
present as skin-colored to pink, dome-shaped papules on the
extremities and face.92

In contrast,

the classic mucocutaneous hallmarks of
Cowden syndrome typically develop during the second or
third decade of life. Trichilemmomas and other verrucous
papules favor the face and ears, keratoses are seen in acral
locations (Figure 5B), and sclerotic fibromas appear as
skin-colored to whitish, firm papules.93 Oral papillomas,
which can represent fibromas or (less commonly) glycogenic
acanthosis, most often occur on the tongue, gingiva, and lips;
multiple lesions may lead to a cobblestone-like texture.

Cutaneous and oral manifestations of PHTS

The skin findings that characterize the Bannayan-
Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome phenotype usually become
apparent by early childhood. They include pigmented

Ocular manifestations of PHTS

Corneal nerve hypertrophy is evident in approximately one
third of patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome.
Like mucocutaneous neuromas, this finding is shared with
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 B (MEN2 B). Children

198

K.A. Chernoff, J.V. Schaffer

Fig. 7
“bathing trunk” distribution. B, Numerous small and medium-sized congenital melanocytic nevi without a large “mother ship” nevus.

Patients at risk for neurocutaneous melanocytosis. A, Multiple satellite nevi associated with a giant congenital melanocytic nevus in a

with PHTS may also have prominent Schwalbe lines,
pseudopapilledema, downward-slanting palpebral fissures,
amblyopia, and strabismus.94,95 Other ocular features that
have been reported in patients with PHTS include myopia,
angioid streaks, and cataracts.

Other manifestations of PHTS

is present

Macrocephaly, one of the most consistent features of
in ≥ 80% of affected individuals.90
PHTS,
Intracranial developmental venous anomalies are also
commonly observed when a brain MRI is performed. Less
common neurologic manifestations include developmental
delay, autism, seizures, and hypotonia. Lhremitte-Duclos
disease, a hamartomatous dysplastic gangliocytoma of the
cerebellum, occurs in a minority of young adults with PHTS.
Patients with PHTS have increased risk for the develop-
ment of malignancy, particularly breast (25%-N50% of
women), thyroid, endometrial, colon, and renal carcinomas.
Hamartomatous changes can also develop in a variety of
organs (see Table 7).

Advances in the management of PHTS

Guidelines for cancer surveillance in patients with PHTS
have been proposed.96,97 Treatment with sirolimus has been
reported to improve vascular and lipomatous lesions of
PHTS.98,99 Clinical
trials are in progress to further
investigate the utility of mTOR inhibitors in PHTS.

Sturge-Weber syndrome

Sturge-Weber syndrome (SWS) is a sporadic neurocuta-
neous disorder characterized by a facial port-wine stain
(PWS) associated with ipsilateral capillary-venous

abnormalities affecting the leptomeninges (leading to
seizures,
intellectual disability, and/or hemiparesis) and
often the choroid of the eye (leading to glaucoma).100,101
Definitions of SWS used in the literature have varied, with
some authors requiring all three components for a diagnosis
of complete SWS.102 Although patients with a PWS plus
leptomeningeal involvement alone are generally diagnosed
as having SWS, those with a facial PWS and glaucoma alone
are usually classified separately or considered as having
partial SWS.100,103,104 Leptomeningeal and choroidal vas-
cular anomalies have also been described in the absence of a
PWS and may represent another partial variant of SWS.

The overall incidence of SWS is estimated to be between
1 in 20,000 and 50,000 live births.105 SWS occurs almost
exclusively in patients whose PWS involves the distribution
of the ophthalmic (V1) branch of the trigeminal nerve. This
region includes the forehead, mid-nose, upper eyelids, and
sometimes a “watershed” area on the lower eyelids that may
also be innervated by V2.100,101,104,106 SWS occurs in ≤ 10%
of patients with a unilateral PWS affecting only a portion of
the V1 distribution, with the upper eyelid representing the
highest-risk site within this region. The incidence of SWS
increases to 25% to N 50% in those with a PWS affecting the
entire V1 region, with greatest likelihood if bilateral or
together with the V2 and V3 involvement.100,101,104,106

It has long been hypothesized that both PWSs and SWS
are caused by mosaicism for a somatic mutation, with the
clinical manifestations depending on the timing and location
of the mutational event in the developing embryo. An earlier
mutation in a progenitor cell would therefore result in a
larger field of anomalies and potentially affect regional
tissues beyond the skin. Of note, cephalic neural crest–
derived cells destined to form the tissues involved in
SWS—nasofrontal
facial skin (including pericytes and
smooth muscle of blood vessels), ocular choroid, and pia
mater (especially in the parieto-occipital area)—all arise
from the same embryonic region.100,102,104 A somatic
activating missense mutation in the GNAQ gene (Arg183
Gln) was recently identified in affected tissues (both skin and
brain) in 88% (23/26) of patients with SWS as well as in the

Neurocutaneous syndromes

skin in 92% (12/13) patients with nonsyndromic PWSs.107
This gene encodes the Q-class G protein α-subunit,
activation of which increases MAPK signaling
(see Figure 1).

A different GNAQ mutation (Gln209 Leu) that produces
more robust MAPK upregulation is found in uveal melanomas,
blue nevi, and nevus of Ota melanocytes.108 Interestingly,
dermal melanocytosis (including nevus of Ota with potential
ocular involvement) and PWSs occur together as “twin spots”
in patients with phakomatosis pigmentovascularis (PPV),
which can be associated with uveal melanoma.109 PPV thus
presumably reflects the effects of same GNAQ mutation in
different cell types (melanocytic and vascular).

Cutaneous manifestations of SWS

The cutaneous hallmark of SWS is a facial PWS, a
capillary malformation that presents at birth as a pinkish-red
patch with a unilateral N bilateral segmental distribution
(Figure 6A). The differential diagnosis may include a stage 1
arteriovenous malformation (warm, favors the central face)
and an early or minimal-growth segmental infantile heman-
gioma (prominent telangiectasias ± peripheral red papules;
Figure 6B). Facial PWSs must also be distinguished from the
more common nevus simplex (salmon patch) that presents as
congenital vascular “stain(s)” on the mid-face (forehead,
glabella, nasal tip, philtrum), eyelids, occiput, and/or nape
(“stork bite”). These lesions are not associated with
extracutaneous manifestations and tend to fade between 1
and 3 years of age, especially when located on the face. In
contrast, PWSs persist. By late adolescence or adulthood,
they commonly develop a darker red-purple color and
become thicker, often with superimposed nodularity.105
Other findings that may be associated with a PWS involving
the V2 or V3 region include maxillary overgrowth, macro-
cheilia, gingival hypertrophy, and dental abnormalities. This
reflects the common origin of facial connective tissue and
bones as well as dental papillae from the neural crest.

Treatment of

facial PWSs with a pulsed-dye laser
(PDL) during infancy can prevent the potential psychoso-
cial sequelae of this highly visible birthmark. Approxi-
mately 6 to 10 PDL sessions at intervals of 2 to 4 weeks
are generally required,110 and early initiation of therapy
helps to avoid lesional thickening and maximize efficacy.
Overall, approximately three fourths of
facial PWSs
improve substantially with PDL treatment, with lesions
located on the central face tending to be more resistant
than those in other sites. PDL treatment is safe in infants
and children of all ages, producing short-lived purpura and
a low risk of temporary hypo- or hyperpigmentation or
(less often) scarring. Although such side effects are more
common in individuals with darkly pigmented skin (eg,
skin type V), these patients can have a good response and
should not be excluded from treatment.111

199

Ocular manifestations of SWS

The most common ocular manifestation of SWS is glau-
coma. It occurs in approximately 15% to 20% of individuals
with a PWS in the V1 and/or V2 region, with a higher
likelihood if the PWS affects both the upper and lower eyelids
or is bilateral. Additional risk factors for glaucoma in patients
with a facial PWS include episcleral involvement, evidence of
a choroidal vascular malformation on funduscopic examina-
tion, iris heterochromia, and neurologic findings of SWS.103
PWS-associated glaucoma is congenital or develops during the
first 2 years of life in approximately 60% of affected
individuals, and this can lead to buphthalmos (enlargement
of the globe).112 A large, cloudy cornea in an infant can be a
sign of acute glaucoma, which represents an ophthalmologic
emergency. In contrast, PWS-associated glaucoma with onset
in later childhood or early adulthood typically presents with
painless, progressive visual field loss.113

Several pathogenic mechanisms for PWS-associated glau-
coma have been proposed. Recent use of enhanced depth
imaging spectral-domain optical coherence tomography
(SD-OCT) in SWS patients has enabled detection of choroidal
abnormalities that are not visible via funduscopic examina-
tion.114 Early-onset glaucoma may result from the choroidal
malformation and related trabecular dysgenesis, leading to
mechanical obstruction of the angle of the eye.112,115 In
later-onset glaucoma, increased episcleral venous pressure and
premature degenerative changes of the trabecular network/
Schlemm canal are thought to play a role.103,116

Glaucoma can be a major source of morbidity in patients
with periocular PWSs, and early initiation of treatment is
critical
in improving visual outcomes. Considering the
substantial risk of congenital glaucoma, an initial ophthal-
mologic evaluation should be performed in the neonatal
period. Lifelong monitoring is recommended, with ophthal-
mologic examinations every 3 to 6 months during the first 2
years of life, and then at least yearly.102,103 Medical therapy is
generally initiated for PWS-associated glaucoma, but surgi-
cal interventions such as trabeculotomy or trabeculectomy are
often required, especially for early-onset disease. Of note,
there is no evidence that PDL treatment of periocular PWSs
worsens glaucoma or increases the risk of its development.112

Other manifestations of SWS

Neurologic manifestations represent the greatest cause of
morbidity in SWS. Seizures are the most common clinical
finding, occurring in ~ 70% to 80% of affected individ-
uals106,117 and most often developing during the first year of
life. Cognitive impairment is noted in approximately half of
SWS patients and ranges from mild learning disabilities to
severe mental retardation. Other possible neurologic sequel-
ae include hemiparesis (contralateral to the PWS) and visual
field defects, both of which may occur in transient strokelike
episodes, as well as behavioral problems, headaches, and

200

endocrine dysfunction due to effects on the hypothalamic-
pituitary axis (eg, growth hormone deficiency).

Neuroimaging can help to establish the diagnosis of SWS
and evaluate the extent of intracranial involvement. MRI
using a combination of gadolinium-enhanced scans and
susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) is recommended for
the initial evaluation of infants and children with SWS.118,119
This can show characteristic findings such as cortical
calcifications, enlargement of
the choroid plexus, and
abnormalities in leptomeningeal, periventricular, and trans-
medullary veins.118 Diffusion- and perfusion-weighted MRI
may also be used to assess effects on the brain parenchyma.
Of note, MRI performed in the first few months to year of life
is less sensitive in detecting manifestations of SWS.105

Early recognition and aggressive control of seizures is a
key component in the management of SWS patients, and
intervention.118
refractory epilepsy may require surgical
Because venous congestion and thrombosis contribute to
progressive brain injury in SWS, low-dose aspirin may be of
benefit, especially in patients with strokelike epi-
sodes118,120,121; however, whether prophylactic administra-
tion of
low-dose aspirin and/or anticonvulsants to
presymptomatic patients with extensive brain involvement
improves prognosis remains to be determined.118–121

Neurocutaneous melanocytosis

Neurocutaneous melanocytosis (NCM) refers to prolifer-
ation of melanocytes in the CNS as well as the skin in
patients with congenital melanocytic nevi (CMN). Melano-
cytes are physiologically present in the pia mater of the
meninges, which is the primary site of brain involvement in
NCM. Individuals with both cutaneous and CNS melanomas
are excluded from diagnosis of NCM due to the possible
metastatic origin of the brain lesions.122

As noted for SWS (see earlier), mosaicism for a mutation
arising in a neuroectodermal progenitor cell during early
embryogenesis could lead to a broad distribution of skin
lesions (eg, numerous and/or large CMN) and involvement of
extracutaneous tissues.123 Recently, the same somatic activat-
ing mutation in codon 61 of the NRAS gene was identified in
multiple different CMN and brain lesions of individual patients
with NCM but not in unaffected tissues or blood.124 Activated
NRAS signals through both MAPK and PI3 K/AKT pathways
(see Figure 1), in contrast to stimulation of only the MAPK
pathway by the activated BRAF found in most small CMN. In
addition to increasing cell proliferation,
the PI3 K/AKT
pathway promotes melanocyte survival and directional
migration, which may contribute to the large and widespread
melanocytic lesions observed in NCM.

Congenital melanocytic nevi: Risk factors for NCM

The presence of numerous CMN, regardless of whether or
not there is “mother ship” large CMN (defined as final size

K.A. Chernoff, J.V. Schaffer

N 20 cm), represents the most important risk factor for NCM
(Figure 7). Approximately two thirds of patients with NCM
have a large CMN accompanied by “satellite” nevi, and one
third of patients have many small to medium-sized CMN
(generally N 10 lesions).122,125 Among individuals with a
large CMN, those with N 20 satellite nevi have a fivefold
risk of NCM compared with those with ≤ 20
higher
satellites.126 An increased risk of NCM has also been
noted in patients with CMN that have a final size of N 40 cm
or (in some studies) a posterior axial location.

Ocular findings in patients with NCM

NCM does not typically have ocular manifestations. In
addition to ocular signs of increased intracranial pressure (eg,
papilledema), uveal coloboma-like lesions and alterations in
the retinal pigment epithelium have been reported.127 A
constellation of findings referred to as SCALP syndrome
includes a sebaceous nevus, CNS malformations, aplasia
cutis congenita, limbal dermoid, and pigmented CMN.128

Neurologic manifestations of NCM

NCM is divided into symptomatic and asymptomatic
forms, with the latter representing patients whose brain
involvement is detected via MRI screening. MRI findings
of NCM can include areas of brain parenchyma
(especially the temporal lobes/amygdala) with increased
T1 signal, gadolinium enhancement of diffusely thick-
ened meninges, and obvious masses.129,130 CNS abnor-
malities
the Dandy-Walker malformation,
posterior fossa cysts, and intraspinal lipomas are occa-
sionally evident.

such as

Symptomatic NCM occurs in approximately 4% of
patients with high-risk CMN, and the prognosis is poor
even in the absence of melanoma. Patients typically present
with hydrocephalus, seizures, and signs of
increased
intracranial pressure (eg, vomiting, headache). Symptoms
develop at a median age of 2 years, although individuals with
a discrete intracranial mass tend to become symptomatic later
(median age, ~ 10 years) and are more likely to have focal
sensorimotor deficits.131 Neurologic manifestations such as
developmental delay and abnormal tone are observed ~ 15%
of children with high-risk CMN, including a subset of those
with normal brain MRIs.132

Asymptomatic NCM can be diagnosed based on MRI-
evidence of CNS melanosis in 5% to 25% of infants and
children with high-risk CMN.129,132,133 Due to the paucity of
longitudinal studies, the proportion of these patients destined
to become symptomatic from NCM is unknown. In one
series, 10 patients with asymptomatic NCM diagnosed at a
mean age of 6 months were followed for 5 years, and only 1
individual developed neurologic symptoms.133

Neurocutaneous syndromes

Screening for and management of NCM

Infants at risk for NCM can be screened with MRI of the
brain and spine. Sensitivity is maximized if imaging is
performed during the first 4 to 6 months of life, before
myelination that may obscure evidence of melanosis, and
gadolinium enhancement can help to visualize thickened
meninges.129,133 At-risk patients should also be followed with
serial neurologic examinations and developmental assessments.
Patients with clinical or MRI evidence of NCM may
benefit from referral to a pediatric neurologist and, in some
instances, a neurosurgeon. In one study, more than one third
of CMN patients with abnormal MRI findings required
intervention.132 For patients with asymptomatic
surgical
NCM, repeat MRI studies are indicated if clinical manifes-
tations develop and otherwise on an approximately annual
basis, with adjustments depending on the severity and
progression of the MRI findings.134 A treatment strategy
targeting both MAPK (eg, MEK inhibitors) and PI3 K/mTOR
(eg, sirolimus) pathways could have benefit in patients with
symptomatic NCM.135

References

1. Sarnat HB, Flores-Sarnat L. Embryology of neurocutaneous syn-
dromes: role of neural crest. In: Neurocutaneous Syndromes during
Development. London, UK: John Libbey Eurotext. 2005.

2. Sarnat HB, Flores-Sarnat L. Embryology of the neural crest:

its
inductive role in the neurocutaneous syndromes. J Child Neurol.
2005;20:637-643.

3. Le Dourarin N, Kalcheim C. The Neural Crest. 2nd ed. Cambridge,

UK: Cambridge University Press. 1999.

4. Hall BK. The Neural Crest in Development and Evolution. New York,

NY: Springer-Verlag. 1999.

5. Huson SM, Compston DA, Clark P, Harper PS. A genetic study of von
Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis in south east Wales. I. Prevalence,
fitness, mutation rate, and effect of parental transmission on severity.
J Med Genet. 1989;26:704-711.

6. Samuelsson B, Axelsson R. Neurofibromatosis. A clinical and genetic
study of 96 cases in Gothenburg, Sweden. Acta Derm Venereol Suppl.
1981;96:67-71.

7. Skolnick MH, Ponder B, Seizinger B. Linkage of NF1 to 12
chromosome 17 markers: a summary of eight concurrent reports.
Genomics. 1987;1:382-383.

8. Wigler MH. Oncoproteins. GAPs in understanding Ras. Nature.

1990;346:696-697.

9. Stocker KM, Baizer L, Coston T, Sherman L, Ciment G. Regulated
expression of neurofibromin in migrating neural crest cells of avian
embryos. J Neurobiol. 1995;27:535-552.

10. Maertens O, De Schepper S, Vandesompele J, et al. Molecular
dissection of isolated disease features in mosaic neurofibromatosis
type 1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007;81:243-251.

11. National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference
Statement: Neurofibromatosis. Bethesda, Md., USA, July 13-15,
1987, 1. Neurofibromatosis; 1988. p. 172-178.

12. DeBella K, Szudek J, Friedman JM. Use of the National Institutes of
Health criteria for diagnosis of neurofibromatosis 1 in children. Pe-
diatrics. 2000;105:608-614.

201

13. Tsang E, Birch P, Friedman JM. Valuing gene testing in children with

possible neurofibromatosis 1. Clin Genet. 2012;82:591-593.

14. Van Minkelen R, van Bever Y, Kromosoeto J, et al. A clinical and
genetic overview of 18 years neurofibromatosis type 1 molecular
diagnostics in the Netherlands. Clin Genet. 2014;85:318-327.

15. Burkitt Wright EM, Sach E, Sharif S, et al. Can the diagnosis of NF1
be excluded clinically? A lack of pigmentary findings in families with
spinal neurofibromatosis demonstrates a limitation of clinical
diagnosis. J Med Genet. 2013;50:606-613.

16. Nunley KS, Gao F, Albers AC, Bayliss SJ, Gutmann DH. Predictive
value of café au lait macules at initial consultation in the diagnosis of
neurofibromatosis type 1. Arch Dermatol. 2009;145:883-887.

17. Duong TA, Bastuji-Garin S, Valeyrie-Allanore L, Sbidian E, Ferkal S,
Wolkenstein P. Evolving pattern with age of cutaneous signs in
neurofibromatosis type 1: a cross-sectional study of 728 patients.
Dermatology. 2011;222:269-273.

18. Boyd KP, Korf BR, Theos A. Neurofibromatosis type 1. J Am Acad

Dermatol. 2009;61:1-14.

19. De Schepper S, Boucneau J, Lambert J, Messiaen L, Naeyaert JM,
Lambert J. Café-au-lait spots in neurofibromatosis type 1 and in
healthy control individuals: hyperpigmentation of a different kind?
Arch Dermatol Res. 2006;297:439-449.

20. Landau M, Krafchik BR. The diagnostic value of café-au-lait macules.

J Am Acad Dermatol. 1999;40:877-890.

21. Carcavilla A, Pinto I, Muñoz-Pacheco R, Barrio R, Martin-Frías M,
Ezquieta B. LEOPARD syndrome (PTPN11, T468 M) in three boys
fulfilling neurofibromatosis type 1 clinical criteria. Eur J Pediatr.
2011;170:1069-1074.

22. Yeung JT, Pollack IF, Shah S, Jaffe R, Nikiforova M, Jakacki RI.
Optic pathway glioma as part of a constitutional mismatch-repair
deficiency syndrome in a patient meeting the criteria for neurofibro-
matosis type 1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2013;60:137-139.

23. Messiaen L, Yao S, Brems H, et al. Clinical and mutational spectrum
of neurofibromatosis type 1-like syndrome. JAMA. 2009;302:
2111-2118.

24. Stevens CA, Chiang PW, Messiaen LM. Café-au-lait macules and
intertriginous freckling in piebaldism: clinical overlap with neurofi-
bromatosis type 1 and Legius syndrome. Am J Med Genet A.
2012;158(A):1195-1199.

25. Wimmer K, Etzler J. Constitutional mismatch repair-deficiency
syndrome: have we so far seen only the tip of an iceberg? Hum
Genet. 2008;124:105-122.

26. Stowe IB, Mercado EL, Stowe TR, et al. A shared molecular
mechanism underlies the human rasopathies Legius syndrome and
neurofibroamtosis-1. Genes Dev. 2012;26:1421-1426.

27. Zeller J, Wechsler J, Revuz J, Wolkenstein P. Blue-red macules and
pseudoatrophic macules in neurofibromatosis 1. Ann Dermatol
Venereol. 2002;129:180-181.

28. Staser K, Yang FC, Clapp DW. Mast cells and the neurofibroma

microenvironment. Blood. 2010;116:157-164.

29. Zvulunov A, Esterly NB. Neurocutaneous syndromes associated
with pigmentary skin lesions. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1995;32:
915-935.

30. Schaffer JV, Chang MW, Kovich OI, Kamino H, Orlow SJ. Pigmented
plexiform neurofibroma: distrinction from a large congenital melano-
cytic nevus. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007;56:862-868.

31. Schnur RE. Type I, neurofibromatosis: a geno-oculo-dermatologic

update. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2012;23:364-372.

32. Stewart DR, Sloan JL, Yao L, et al. Diagnosis, management and
complications of glomus tumours of the digits in neurofibromatosis
type 1. J Med Genet. 2010;47:525-532.

33. Brems H, Park C, Maertens O, et al. Glomus tumors in neurofibro-
matosis type 1: genetic, functional, and clinical evidence of a novel
association. Cancer Res. 2009;69:7393-7401.

34. Ferrari F, Masurel A, Olivier-Faivre L, Vabres P. Juvenile
xanthogranuloma and nevus anemicus in the diagnosis of neurofibro-
matosis type 1. JAMA Dermatol. 2014;150:42-46.

202

35. Marque M, Roubertie A, Jaussent A, et al. Nevus anemicus in
neurofibromatosis type 1: a potential new diagnostic criterion. J Am
Acad Dermatol. 2013;69:768-775.

36. Harrison B, Moore AM, Calfee R, Sammer DM. The association
between glomus tumors and neurofibromatosis. J Hand Surg [Am].
2013;38:1571-1574.

37. Cambiaghi S, Restano L, Caputo R. Juvenile xanthogranuloma
associated with neurofibromatosis 1: 14 patients without evidence of
hematologic malignancies. Pediatr Dermatol. 2004;21:97-101.

38. Nichols JC, Amato JE, Chung SM. Characteristics of Lisch nodules in
patients with neurofibromatosis type 1. J Pediatr Ophthalmol
Strabismus. 2003;40:293-296.

39. Richetta A, Giustini S, Recupero SM, et al. Lisch nodules of the iris in

neurofibromatosis type 1. JEADV. 2004;18:342-344.

40. Williamson TH, Garner A, Moore AT. Structure of Lisch nodules in
neurofibromatosis type 1. Ophthalmic Paediatr Genet. 1991;12:
11-17.

41. Listernick R, Charrow J, Greenwald MJ, Esterly NB. Optic gliomas in
children with neurofibromatosis type 1. J Pediatr. 1989;114:788-792.
42. Listernick R, Ferner RE, Liu GT, Gutmann DH. Optic pathway
gliomas in neurofibromatosis-1: controversies and recommendations.
Ann Neurol. 2007;61:189-198.

43. Czyzyk E, Jóźwiak S, Roszkowski M, Schwartz RA. Optic pathway
gliomas in children with and without neurofibromatosis 1. J Child
Neurol. 2003;18:471-478.

44. Laue L, Comite F, Hench K, Loriaux L, Cutler GB, Pescovitz OH.
Precocious puberty associated with neurofibromatosis and optic
gliomas. Am J Dis Child. 1985;139:1097-1100.

45. Cassiman C, Legius E, Spileers W, Casteels I. Ophthalmological
assessment of children with neurofibromatosis type 1. Eur J Pediatr.
2013;172:1327-1333.

46. Avery RA, Hwang EI, Jakacki RI, Packer RJ. Marked recovery of
vision in children with optic pathway gliomas treated with
bevacizumab. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2014;132:111-114.

47. Yasunari T, Shiraki K, Hattori H, Miki T. Frequency of choroidal
abnormalities in neurofibromatosis type 1. Lancet. 2000;356:988-992.
48. Viola F, Villani E, Natacci F, et al. Choroidal abnormalities detected
by near-infrared reflectance imaging as new diagnostic criterion for
neurofibromatosis 1. Ophthalmology. 2012;119:369-375.

49. Shields JA, Pellegrini M, Kaliki S, Mashayekhi A, Shields CL. Retinal
vasoproliferative tumors in 6 patients with neurofibromatosis type 1.
JAMA Ophthalmol. 2014;132:190-196.

50. Levine TM, Materek A, Abel J, O’Donnell M, Cutting LE. Cognitive
profile of neurofibromatosis type 1. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2006;13:
8-20.

51. Ferner RE, Huson SM, Thomas N, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis
and management of individuals with neurofibromatosis 1. J Med
Genet. 2007;44:81-88.

52. Williams VC, Lucas J, Babcock MA, Gutmann DH, Korf B, Maria
BL. Neurofibromatosis type 1 revisited. Pediatrics. 2009;123:
124-133.

53. Yang FC, Ingram DA, Chen S, et al. Nf1-dependent tumors require a
microenvironment containing Nf1 +/– and c-kit dependent bone
marrow. Cell. 2008;135:437-448.

54. Robertson KA, Nalepa G, Yang FC, et al. Imatinib mesylate for
plexiform neurofibromas in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1: A
phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13:1218-1224.

55. Jessen WJ, Miller SJ, Jousma E, et al. MEK inhibition exhibits
efficacy in human and mouse meurofibromatosis tumors. J Clin
Invest. 2013;123:340-347.

56. O’Callaghan F, Shiell A, Osborne J, Martyn C. Prevalence of tuberous
sclerosis estimated by capture-recapture analysis. Lancet. 1998;352:
318-319.

57. Osborne JP, Fryer A, Webb D. Epidemiology of tuberous sclerosis.

Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1991;615:125-127.

58. Dabora SL, Jóźwiak S, Franz DN, et al. Mutational analysis in a cohort
of 224 tuberous sclerosis patients indicated increased severity of

K.A. Chernoff, J.V. Schaffer

TSC2, compared with TSC1, disease in multiple organs. Am J Hum
Genet. 2001;68:64-80.

59. Curatolo P, Bombardieri R, Jóźwiak S. Tuberous sclerosis. Lancet.

2008;372:657-668.

60. Napolioni V, Moavero R, Curatolo P. Recent advances in neurobi-

ology of tuberous sclerosis complex. Brain Dev. 2009;31:104-113.

61. Curran MP. Everolimus: in patients with subependymal giant cell
astrocytoma associated with tuberous sclerosis complex. Paediatr
Drugs. 2012;14:51-60.

62. Jóźwiak S, Goodman M, Lamm SH. Poor mental development in
patients with tuberous sclerosis complex: clinical risk factors. Arch
Neurol. 1998;55:379-384.

63. Fitzpatrick TB. History and significance of white macules, earliest
visible sign of tuberous sclerosis. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1991;615:26-35.
64. Rowley S, O’Callagan F, Osborne J. Ophthalmic manifestations of
tuberous sclerosis: a population based study. Br J Ophthalmol.
2001;85:420-423.

65. Shields CL, Reichstein DA, Bianciotto C, Shields JA. Retinal pigment
epithelial depigmented lesions associated with tuberous sclerosis
complex. Arch Opththalmol. 2012;130:387-390.

66. Lucchese NJ, Goldberg MF. Iris and fundus pigmentary changes in
tuberous sclerosis. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 1981;18:45-46.
67. Northrup H, Krueger DA. Tuberous sclerosis complex diagnostic
criteria update: recommendations of the 2012 International Tuberous
Sclerosis Complex Consensus Conference. Pediatr Neurol. 2013;49:
243-254.

68. Aldrich CS, Hong CH, Groves L, Olsen C, Moss J, Darling TN. Acral
lesions in tuberous sclerosis complex: insights into pathogenesis. J Am
Acad Dermatol. 2010;63:244-251.

69. Webb DW, Clarke A, Fryer A, Osborne JP. The cutaneous features of
tuberous sclerosis: a population study. Br J Dermatol. 1996;135:1-5.
70. Sparling JD, Hong CH, Brahim JS, Moss J, Darling TN. Oral findings
in 58 adults with tuberous sclerosis complex. J Am Acad Dermatol.
2007;56:786-790.

71. Mlynarczyk G. Enamel pitting. A common sign of tuberous sclerosis.

Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1991;615:67-69.

72. Robertson DM. Ophthalmic findings. In: Gomez MR, ed. Tuberous
Sclerosis Complex. 3rd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press;
1999. p. 145-159.

73. Aronow ME, Nakagawa JA, Gupta A, Traboulsi EI, Singh AD.
Tuberous sclerosis complex: genotype/phenotype correlation of retinal
findings. Ophthalmology. 2012;119:1917-1923.

74. Krueger DA, Northrup H. Tuberous sclerosis complex surveillance
and management:
the 2012 International
Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Consensus Conference. Pediatr Neurol.
2013;49:255-265.

recommendations of

75. Bissler JJ, Kingswood JC, Radzikowska E, et al. Everolimus for
angiomyolipoma associated with tuberous sclerosis complex or
sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis (EXIST-2): a multicenter, ran-
domised, double-blind, placebo-control
trial. Lancet. 2013;381:
817-824.

76. Bissler JJ, McCormack FX, Young LR, et al. Sirolimus for
angiomyolipoma in tuberous sclerosis complex or lymphangioleio-
myomatosis. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:140-151.

77. McCormack FX, Inoue Y, Moss J, et al. Efficacy and safety of
sirolimus in lymphangioleiomyomatosis. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:
1595-1606.

78. Franz DN, Belousova E, Sparangana S, et al. Efficacy and safety of
everolimus for subependymal giant cell astrocytomas associated with
tuberous sclerosis complex (EXIST-1): a multicenter, randomised,
placebo-controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2013;381:125-132.

79. Hofbauer GF, Marcollo-Pini A, Corsenca A, et al. The mTOR
inhibitor rapamycin significantly improves facial angiofibroma lesions
in a patient with tuberous sclerosis. Br J Dermatol. 2008;159:473-475.
80. Koenig MK, Hebert AA, Roberson J, et al. Topical rapamycin therapy
to alleviate the cutaneous manifestations of
tuberous sclerosis
complex: a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial to evaluate the

Neurocutaneous syndromes

safety and efficacy of topically applied rapamycin. Drugs R D.
2012;12:121-126.

81. Tanaka M, Wataya-Kaneda M, Nakamura A, Matsumoto S, Katayama
I. First left-right comparative study of topical rapamycin vs. vehicle for
facial angiofibromas in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex. Br J
Dermatol. 2013;169:1314-1318.

82. Wataya-Kaneda M, Tanaka M, Nakamura A, Matsumoto S, Katayama
I. A novel application of topical rapamycin formulation, an inhibitor of
mTOR, for patients with hypomelanotic macules in tuberous sclerosis
complex. Arch Dermatol. 2012;148:138-139.

83. Tu J, Foster RS, Bint LJ, Halbert AR. Topical rapamycin for
angiofibromas in paediatric patients with tuberous sclerosis: follow up
of a pilot study and promising future directions. Australas J Dermatol.
2014;55:63-69.

84. Orloff MS, He X, Peterson C, et al. Germline PIK3 CA and AKT1
mutations in Cowden and Cowden-like syndromes. Am J Hum Genet.
2013;92:76-80.

85. Bonneau D, Longy M. Mutations of the human PTEN gene. Hum

Mutat. 2010;16:109-122.

86. Wang SI, Puc J, Li J, et al. Somatic mutations of PTEN in

glioblastoma multiforme. Cancer Res. 1997;57:4183-4186.

87. Smith JS, Tachibana I, Passe SM, et al. PTEN mutation, EGFR
amplification, and outcome in patients with anaplastic astrocytoma
and glioblastoma multiforme. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2001;93:1246-1256.
88. Knobbe CB, Merlo A, Reifenberger G. Pten signaling in gliomas.

Neuro-Oncol. 2002;4:196-211.

89. Groszer M, Erickson R, Scripture-Adams DD, et al. Negative
regulation of neural stem/progenitor cell proliferation by the PTEN
tumor suppressor gene in vivo. Science. 2001;294:2186-2189.

90. Pilarski P, Burt R, Kohlman W, Pho L, Shannon KM, Swisher E.
Cowden Syndrome and the PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome:
systematic review and revised diagnostic criteria. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2013;105:1608-1616.

91. Tan MH, Mester J, Peterson C, et al. A clinical scoring system for
selection of patients for PTEN mutation testing is proposed on the
basis of a prospective study of 3042 probands. Am J Hum Genet.
2011;88:42-56.

92. Schaffer JV, Kamino H, Witkiewicz A, McNiff JM, Orlow SJ.

Mucocutaneous neuromas. Arch Dermatol. 2006;142:625-632.

93. Farooq A, Walker LF, Bowling J, Audisio RA. Cowden syndrome.

Cancer Treat Rev. 2010;36:577-583.

94. Wright K, Spiegel PH, eds. Pediatric Opthalmology and Strabismus.

2nd ed. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag; 2003.

95. Erkek E, Hizel S, Sanly C, et al. Clinical and histopathological
findings in Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome. J Am Acad
Dermatol. 2005;53:639-643.

96. Tan MH, Mester JL, Ngeow J, Rybicki LA, Orloff MS, Eng C.
Lifetime cancer risks in individuals with germline PTEN mutations.
Clin Cancer Res. 2012;18:400-407.

97. Piccione M, Fragapane T, Antona V, Giachino D, Cupido F, Corsello
G. PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes in childhood: description of
two cases and a proposal for follow-up protocol. Am J Med Genet.
2013;161A:2902-2908.

98. Schmid GL, Kassner F, Uhlig HH, et al. Sirolimus treatment of severe
PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome: case report and in vitro studies.
Pediatr Res. 2014;75:527-534.

99. Iacobas I, Burrows PE, Adams DM, et al. Oral rapamycin in the
treatment of patients with hamartoma syndromes and PTEN mutation.
Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2011;57:321-323.

100. Enrolras O, Riche MC, Merland JJ. Facial port-wine stains and

Sturge-Weber syndrome. Pediatrics. 1985;76:48-51.

101. Tallman B, Tan OT, Morelli JG, et al. Location of port-wine stains and
the likelihood of ophthalmic and/or central nervous system compli-
cations. Pediatrics. 1991;87:323-327.

102. Garzon MC, Huang JT, Enjolras O, Frieden IJ. Vascular malforma-
tions. Part II: Associated syndromes. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007;56:
541-564.

203

103. Khaier A, Nischal KK, Espinosa M, Manoj B. Periorcular port wine
stain: the great Ormond street hospital experience. Ophthalmology.
2011;118:2274-2278.

104. Ch’ng S, Tan ST. Facial port-wine stains—clinical stratification and
risks of neuro-ocular involvement. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg.
2008;61:889-893.

105. Comi AM. Update on Sturge-Weber syndrome: diagnosis, treatment,
quantitative measures, and controversies. Lymphat Res Biol. 2007;5:
257-264.

106. Piram M, Lorette G, Sirinelli D, Herbreteau D, Giraudeau B, Maruani
A. Sturge-Weber syndrome in patients with facial port-wine stain.
Pediatr Dermatol. 2012;29:32-37.

107. Shirley MD, Tang H, Gallione CJ, et al. Sturge-Weber syndrome and
port-wine stains caused by somatic mutation in GNAQ. N Engl J Med.
2013;368:1971-1979.

108. Van Raamsdonk CD, Bezrookove V, Green G, et al. Frequent somatic
mutations of GNAQ in uveal melanoma and blue naevi. Nature.
2009;457:599-602.

109. Shields CL, Kligman BE, Suriano M, et al. Phacomatosis pigmento-
vascularis of cesioflammea type in 7 patients: combination of ocular
pigmentation (melanocytosis or melanosis) and nevus flammeus with
risk for melanoma. Arch Ophthalmol. 2011;129:746-750.

110. Anolik R, Newlove T, Weiss ET, et al. Investigation into optimal
treatment intervals of facial port-wine stains using the pulsed dye laser.
J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012;67:985-990.

111. Enjolras O, Riche MC, Merland JJ. Facial port-wine stains and

Sturge-Weber syndrome. Pediatrics. 1985;76:48-51.

112. Sharan S, Swamy B, Taranath DA, et al. Port-wine vascular
malformations and glaucoma risk in Sturge-Weber syndrome. J
AAPOS. 2009;13:374-378.

113. Awad AH, Mullaney PB, Al-Mesfer S, Zwaan JT. Glaucoma in

Sturge-Weber syndrome. J AAPOS. 1999;3:40-45.

114. Arora KS, Quigley HA, Comi AM, Miller RB, Jampel HD. Increased
choroidal thickness in patients with Sturge-Weber syndrome. JAMA
Ophthalmol. 2013;131:1216-1219.

115. Singh AD, Kaiser PK, Sears JE. Choroidal hemangiomas. Ophthalmol

Clin N Am. 2005;18:151-161.

116. Shiau T, Armogan N, Yan DB, Thompson HG, Levin AV. The role of
episcleral venous pressure in glaucoma associated with Sturge-Weber
syndrome. J AAPPOS. 2012;16:61-64.

117. Kossoff EH, Buck C, Freeman JM. Outcomes of 32 hemispher-
ectomies for Sturge-Weber syndrome worldwide. Neurology.
2002;59:1735-1738.

118. Lo W, Marchuk DA, Ball KL, et al. Updates and future horizons on the
understanding, diagnosis, and treatment of Sturge-Weber syndrome
brain involvement. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2012;54:214-223.

119. Sudarsanam A, Ardern-Holmes SL. Sturge-Weber syndrome: from the

past to the present. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2014;18:257-266.

120. Lance EI, Sreenivasan AK, Zabel TA, Kossoff EH, Comi AM. Aspirin
use in Sturge-Weber syndrome: side effects and clinical outcomes.
J Child Neurol. 2013;28:213-218.

121. Bachur CD, Comi AM. Sturge-Weber syndrome. Curr Treat Options

Neurol. 2013;15:607-617.

122. Kadonga JN, Frieden IJ. Neurocutaneous melanosis: definition and

review of the literature. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1991;24:747-755.

123. Gerami P, Paller AS. Making a mountain out of a molehill: NRAS,
mosaicism, and large congenital nevi. J Invest Dermatol. 2013;133:
2127-2130.

124. Kinsler VA, Thomas AC, Ishida M, et al. Multiple congenital
melanocytic nevi and neurocutaneous melanosis are caused by
postzygotic mutations in codon 61 of NRAS. J Invest Dermatol.
2013;133:2229-2236.

125. Bett BJ. Large or multiple congenital melanocytic nevi: occurrence of
neurocutaneous melanocytosis in 1008 persons. J Am Acad Dermatol.
2006;54:767-777.

126. Marghoob AA, Dusza S, Olivieria S, Halpern AC. Number of satellite
nevi as a correlate for neurocutaneous melanocytosis in patients with

204

K.A. Chernoff, J.V. Schaffer

large congenital melanocytic nevi. Arch Dermatol. 2004;140:
171-175.

127. Kiratli H, Sahin A. Fundus features of a case of neurocutaneous

melanosis. Ophthalmic Genet. 2004;25:271-276.

128. Lam J, Dohil MA, Eichenfield LF, Cunningham BB. SCALP
syndrome: sebaceous nevus syndrome, CNS malformations,
aplasia cutis congenita,
limbal dermoid, and pigmented nevus
(giant congenital melanocytic nevus) with neurocutaneous mela-
nosis: a distinct syndromic entity. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008;58:
884-888.

129. Bekiesinska-Figatowska M, Szczygielski O, Boczar M, et al.
Neurocutaneous melanosis in children with giant congenital nevi.
Clin Imaging. 2014;38:79-84.

130. Ramaswamy V, Delaney H, Haque S, Marghoob A, Khakoo Y.
Spectrum of central nervous system abnormalities in neurocutaneous
melanosis. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2012;54:563-568.

131. Schaffer JV, McNiff NM, Bolognia JL. Cerebral mass due to
neurocutaneous melanosis: eight years later. Pediatr Dermatol.
2001;18:369-377.

132. Kinsler VA, Chong WK, Aylett SE, Atherton DJ. Complications of
in children: analysis of 16 years’
congenital melanocytic naevi
experience and clinical practice. Br J Dermatol. 2008;159:907-914.

133. Foster RD, Williams ML, Barkkovich AJ, et al. Giant congenital
melanocytic nevi: the significance of neurocutaneous melanosis in
neurologically asymptomatic children. Plast Reconstr Surg.
2001;107:9339-9341.

134. Price HN, Schaffer JV. Congenital melanocytic nevi-when to worry and
how to treat: facts and controversies. Clin Dermatol. 2010;28:293-302.
135. Posch C, Moslehi H, Feeney L, et al. Combined targeting of MEK and
PI3 K/mTOR effector pathways is necessary to effectively inhibit
NRAS mutant melanoma in vitro and in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci.
2013;110:4015-4020.

