Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

NF2 deficiency promotes tumorigenesis
and metastasis by destabilizing
adherens junctions

Dominique Lallemand,1 Marcello Curto,1 Ichiko Saotome,1 Marco Giovannini,2
and Andrea I. McClatchey1,3
1MGH Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School Department of Pathology, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA;
2INSERM 434, Fondation Jean Dausset-CEPH, 75010, Paris, France

Mutation of the Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) tumor suppressor gene leads to cancer development in humans
and mice. Recent studies suggest that Nf2 loss also contributes to tumor metastasis. The Nf2-encoded protein,
merlin, is related to the ERM (ezrin, radixin, and moesin) family of membrane:cytoskeleton-associated
proteins. However, the cellular mechanism whereby merlin controls cell proliferation from this location is not
known. Here we show that the major cellular consequence of Nf2 deficiency in primary cells is an inability to
undergo contact-dependent growth arrest and to form stable cadherin-containing cell:cell junctions. Merlin
colocalizes and interacts with adherens junction (AJ) components in confluent wild-type cells, suggesting that
the lack of AJs and contact-dependent growth arrest in Nf2−/− cells directly results from the absence of merlin
at sites of cell:cell contact. Our studies indicate that merlin functions as a tumor and metastasis suppressor by
controlling cadherin-mediated cell:cell contact.

[Keywords: NF2; merlin; tumor suppressor; metastasis; cytoskeleton; adherens junction]

Received October 29, 2002; accepted in revised form March 6, 2003.

Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is a familial cancer syn-
drome that features the development of multiple ner-
vous system tumors including schwannomas and me-
ningiomas (Gutmann 1997). The disease is caused by in-
herited heterozygous mutation of
the NF2 tumor
suppressor gene; somatic loss of the wild-type allele
leads to tumor development. The study of Nf2-mutant
mice shows that the NF2 tumor suppressor regulates the
proliferation of many cell types and that Nf2 loss plays a
broad role in both tumor development and in tumor me-
tastasis (McClatchey et al. 1997, 1998; Giovannini et al.
2000; Kalamarides et al. 2002). Despite the cloning of the
NF2 gene a decade ago, the molecular function of its
encoded protein, merlin, is not yet known. Merlin is a
member of the ERM (ezrin, radixin, and moesin) family
of proteins that link the actin cytoskeleton to various
membrane-associated proteins (Bretscher et al. 2002; Sun
et al. 2002). Like the ERM proteins, merlin localizes to
the membrane:cytoskeleton interface and thus occupies
an unusual physical location for a tumor suppressor.
Merlin has been reported to interact with a number of
protein partners and to inhibit many signaling pathways
when overexpressed (Bretscher et al. 2002; Sun et al.

3Corresponding author.
E-MAIL mcclatch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu; FAX (617) 726-7808.
Article published online ahead of print. Article and publication date are
at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.1054603.

2002). However, it is not clear which, if any, of the prop-
erties of overexpressed merlin are relevant to the tumori-
genic consequences of its loss of function.

Somatic loss of NF2 function is causal to tumor devel-
opment in mice and humans. Therefore, important clues
to the molecular function of merlin can be derived from
an analysis of the cellular and molecular consequences
of NF2 deficiency. Although some properties of human
NF2-deficient tumor cells have been reported, geneti-
cally matched control cells are not readily available for
comparison (Pelton et al. 1998). The consequences of Nf2
deficiency in primary cells have not been examined. We
previously generated Nf2-mutant mice, which are a valu-
able source of primary Nf2-deficient and control cells
(McClatchey et al. 1997; Giovannini et al. 2000). In this
study, we have carefully examined the properties of pri-
mary Nf2-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs)
and found that they are not transformed and, in fact, are
indistinguishable from wild-type MEFs in many ways.
However, unlike wild-type MEFs, Nf2-deficient MEFs do
not undergo contact-dependent inhibition of growth. We
found that in both MEFs and in primary epithelial kera-
tinocytes, Nf2 deficiency leads to defective cadherin-me-
diated cell:cell adhesion. Merlin localizes to adherens
junctions (AJs) and physically interacts with AJ compo-
nents in confluent wild-type cells, suggesting that mer-
lin normally controls AJ assembly and contact-depen-
dent growth inhibition directly from sites of cell:cell

1090

GENES & DEVELOPMENT 17:1090–1100 © 2003 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 0890-9369/03 $5.00; www.genesdev.org

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

contact. These results suggest that loss of AJ function is
the cellular mechanism whereby Nf2 deficiency leads to
tumor and metastasis development.

Results

Heterozygous Nf2-mutant mice develop a variety of tu-
mor types, including fibrosarcomas; therefore, we ini-
tially studied the growth properties of Nf2-deficient pri-
mary mouse embryo fibroblasts. We previously deter-
mined that both the levels and phosphorylation of
merlin are regulated by three conditions in cultured im-
mortalized and primary fibroblasts: high cell density,
growth factor withdrawal, and cell:ECM detachment
(Shaw et al. 1998; data not shown). Therefore, we asked
whether merlin is required for normal growth arrest un-
der these culture conditions. Subconfluent, exponen-
tially growing wild-type and Nf2−/− MEFs exhibited iden-
tical rates of growth and comparable levels of S-phase
entry, suggesting that Nf2 deficiency does not cause an
increase in the rate of proliferation of these cells per se
(Fig. 1A). However, although wild-type MEFs stopped di-
viding after reaching confluence, Nf2−/− MEFs continued
to proliferate without saturating (Fig. 1A). In contrast to
the monolayer formed by confluent wild-type cells,
Nf2−/− cells formed a multilayer that eventually de-
tached from the culture dish, preventing the measure of
later time points. Flow cytometry confirmed that in con-
trast to wild-type MEFs, a significant percentage of
Nf2−/− MEFs continued to enter S phase after reaching
confluence (Fig. 1B). Thus, Nf2−/− MEFs do not undergo
contact-dependent inhibition of proliferation.

Merlin controls adherens junction establishment

Further study revealed that Nf2-deficient MEFs are not
generally defective in their ability to arrest growth. Both
wild-type and Nf2−/− cultures underwent complete
growth arrest after 8 h insuspension or 120 J of UVC
irradiation (Fig. 1B). In fact, although a role for merlin
function in cell:ECM adhesion has been proposed
(Obremski et al. 1998; Shaw et al. 1998; Gutmann et al.
1999; Fernandez-Valle et al. 2002; Johnson et al. 2002),
we could not detect obvious cell:ECM adhesion defects
in Nf2−/− MEFs. Thus, both wild-type and Nf2−/− MEFs
attach to and spread on various ECM substrates with
comparable kinetics; similarly, focal adhesion formation
and density are grossly normal in Nf2−/− MEFs (data not
shown). This is consistent with our observation that
Nf2−/− MEFs are not transformed and cannot form colo-
nies in soft agar or tumors in nude mice (I. Saotome and
A. McClatchey, unpubl.). Interestingly, Nf2−/− MEFs also
did not undergo complete growth arrest when serum-
starved. Instead, they continued to proliferate slowly,
surviving for 2–3 wk without added growth factors (data
not shown). Together these data suggest that merlin nor-
mally mediates growth arrest specifically under condi-
tions of growth-factor deprivation and cell:cell contact.
The primary phenotype exhibited by Nf2−/− MEFs was
a failure to undergo contact-dependent growth arrest. Ex-
amination of key mitogenic signaling pathways in wild-
type and Nf2−/− MEFs at low and high cell density pro-
vided a molecular correlation of this growth advantage.
As expected given their similar rates of growth, equiva-
lent levels and/or phosphorylation of many signaling
proteins were detected in exponentially growing wild-
type and Nf2−/− MEFs (data not shown). In contrast,

Figure 1. Nf2−/− MEFs do not undergo con-
tact-dependent inhibition of proliferation. (A)
Wild-type and Nf2−/− MEFs cultured in the
presence of growth factors were counted daily
for 5 d. (B) Growth arrest of Nf2−/− MEFs by
high density but not loss of adhesion or UVC-
irradiation is impaired. Subconfluent, conflu-
ent, suspended, or UVC-treated wild-type and
Nf2−/− MEFs were labeled with BrdU and ana-
lyzed by fluorescent-activated cell sorting
(FACs) analysis. The graph displays the rela-
tive reduction in S phase of wild-type and
Nf2−/− MEFs compared with subconfluent
MEFs of the same genotype. Equivalent per-
centages of wild-type and Nf2−/− cells re-
mained viable in these experiments (data not
shown). FACs analysis also revealed that
wild-type and Nf2−/− MEFs have equivalent
cell volumes (data not shown). (C) The level
and phosphorylation of key mitogenic signal-
ing molecules were examined in confluent
(unstarved) wild-type and Nf2−/− MEFs by
Western blot. Elevated levels of cyclin D, c-
jun, and phosphorylated (active) ERK1/2, JNK
persist in confluent Nf2−/− MEFs.

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

1091

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Lallemand et al.

whereas the levels and/or phosphorylation of key signal-
ing proteins markedly diminished after wild-type cells
reached confluence, they remained elevated in confluent
Nf2−/− cells, consistent with their persistent prolifera-
tion. For example, the levels of cyclin D1, c-jun, phos-
phorylated ERK1/2, and phosphorylated JNK remained
elevated in Nf2−/− MEFs after reaching confluence (Fig.
1C). Thus, Nf2-deficient cells fail to down-modulate mi-
togenic signaling and continue to proliferate at high cell
density.

The ability of confluent Nf2−/− MEFs to pile up on top
of one another, apparently failing to recognize their im-
mediate neighbors, is apparent upon visual inspection
(Fig. 2A). Several studies detail a direct role for AJs in
contact-dependent inhibition of epithelial cell prolifera-
tion (for reviews, see Nollet et al. 2000; Cavallaro and
Christofori 2001). Cadherin family adhesion proteins
mediate homotypic interaction between adjacent cells
and are central to the assembly and function of AJs. Cad-
herins cluster and recruit intracellular proteins such as
catenins (␣-catenin, ␤-catenin, and p120) and the actin
cytoskeleton to AJs (for reviews, see Nagafuchi 2001;
Perez-Moreno et al. 2003). AJs have also been identified
and studied in fibroblasts by both immunologic and elec-
tron microscopic criteria (Yonemura et al. 1995; Glou-
shankova et al. 1998). To determine whether merlin is
involved in the establishment or maintenance of these
structures, we examined the expression of AJ compo-
nents and the assembly of AJs in confluent, wild-type,
and Nf2−/− MEFs. Indeed, both wild-type and Nf2−/−
MEFs express equivalent levels of the core AJ compo-
nents N-cadherin, ␣-catenin, and ␤-catenin (Fig. 2B). Low
levels of E-cadherin were also detected in both wild-type,
and Nf2−/− MEFs (data not shown). In wild-type fibro-
blasts, indirect immunofluorescence revealed the punc-
tate localization of ␤-catenin along boundaries of cell–
cell contact as has been described (Fig. 2C; Yonemura et
al. 1995; Gloushankova et al. 1998). Other AJ compo-
nents, including N-cadherin, exhibited identical staining
(data not shown). In contrast, we never observed AJ-like
structures in Nf2−/− MEFs; instead, all AJ components
examined were diffusely localized throughout the mem-
brane despite extensive areas of contact between cells
(Fig. 2C, right; data not shown).

To establish that the loss of contact-dependent inhibi-
tion of proliferation and loss of AJs were a direct result of
the loss of merlin function, we examined the conse-
quences of merlin reintroduction into these cells. We
previously found that phosphorylation of C-terminal
residue S518 leads to relocalization and inactivation of
merlin, whereas an unphosphorylatable mutant (S518A)
version functions as a constitutively active protein
(Shaw et al. 2001). In MEFs, both endogenous and exog-
enous merlin are predominantly hyperphosphorylated,
suggesting that the availability of active, hypophos-
phorylated merlin is tightly controlled (data not shown).
To ensure that reintroduction of active merlin was
achieved, we infected Nf2−/− MEFs with an adenovirus
expressing Nf2S518A (Ad-Nf2S518A). As shown in Figure
2C, Nf2S518A expression restored both contact-depen-

1092

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

Figure 2. Loss of AJs in Nf2−/− MEFs. (A) Wild-type and Nf2−/−
MEFs were cultured in the presence of growth factors for 4 d
after reaching confluence and photographed by phase contrast.
(B) Expression of ␤-catenin, ␣-catenin, and N-cadherin in con-
fluent wild-type and Nf2−/− MEFs was analyzed by Western blot
analysis. (C) Wild-type and Nf2−/− MEFs were grown to conflu-
ence and starved for 48 h. Immunofluorescent localization of
␤-catenin revealed punctate staining along cell:cell boundaries
in wild-type but not Nf2−/− MEFs. The lower panels show the
rescue of both contact-dependent inhibition of proliferation
(left) and AJ formation (right) by reintroduction of active merlin
(Nf2S518A). Expression of Nf2S518A detected by Western blot is
shown below.

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

dent inhibition of proliferation and AJ formation to
Nf2−/− MEFs.

To further test the dependency of AJ formation on
merlin function we expressed a dominant-negative form
of merlin known as the “Blue Box” mutant (Nf2⌬BB) in
wild-type MEFs (LaJeunesse et al. 1996). We found that
confluent Nf2⌬BB-expressing MEFs piled up on top of one
another and no longer exhibited punctate localization of
AJ components at cell:cell boundaries (Fig. 3A). As pre-
dicted of a true dominant negative, Nf2⌬BB expression
had no detectable effect on the phenotype of Nf2−/− MEFs
(data not shown). Thus, expression of a dominant-nega-
tive version of merlin mimics Nf2 deficiency and interferes
with the ability of wild-type cells to assemble AJs, confirm-
ing the specificity of merlin function in this process.

It has recently been reported that merlin controls con-
tact inhibition of rat schwannoma cells through interac-
tion with CD44 (Morrison et al. 2001). To explore the
relationship between merlin and CD44 in MEFs, we
measured the ability of cd44−/− MEFs to undergo con-
tact-dependent inhibition of proliferation. In contrast to
Nf2−/− MEFs, cd44−/− MEFs stopped proliferating upon

Merlin controls adherens junction establishment

reaching confluence with a saturation density similar to
that of wild-type MEFs (Fig. 3B). Moreover, ␤-catenin
localization to cell:cell boundaries in cd44−/− MEFs was
indistinguishable from wild type (Fig. 3A). Therefore, the
loss of contact-dependent growth arrest in Nf2−/− MEFs
appears to be CD44-independent.

Finally, to verify that the loss of contact-dependent
growth arrest and absence of AJs in Nf2−/− cells is not
simply an indirect consequence of increased mitogenic
signaling, we examined MEFs lacking the NF1 tumor
suppressor, which is a negative regulator of ras signaling
(Cichowski and Jacks 2001). As in other cell types, Nf1
deficiency in MEFs leads to a proliferative advantage that
is likely caused by increased ras signaling (Cichowski et
al. 2003; D. Lallemand and A. McClatchey, unpubl.).
However, Nf1−/− MEFs do undergo contact-dependent in-
hibition of growth and form numerous AJs along cell:cell
boundaries (Fig. 3A,B). This is consistent with the obser-
vation that ras-transformed Rat-1 fibroblasts also form
AJs (Gloushankova et al. 1998). Thus, the lack of AJ for-
mation is specific to loss of merlin function.

Most reports of merlin localization to areas of cortical

Figure 3. Expression of dominant-nega-
tive merlin (Nf2⌬BB) disrupts ␤-catenin lo-
calization in wild-type MEFs. (A) Immu-
nofluorescence staining of ␤-catenin in
confluent, serum-starved cd44−/− MEFs,
Nf1−/− MEFs, or wild-type MEFs infected
with an adenovirus expressing Nf2⌬BB. Ex-
pression of dominant-negative merlin dis-
rupts ␤-catenin localization in wild-type
cells (top right). In contrast, ␤-catenin lo-
calizes normally in cd44−/− (bottom left ) or
Nf1−/− (bottom right) MEFs. Expression of
Nf2⌬BB in Nf2−/− MEFs was demonstrated
by Western blot using an anti-merlin anti-
body (right). (B) cd44−/− and Nf1−/− MEFs
exhibit contact-dependent inhibition of
growth. cd44−/− (two independently pre-
pared populations, A and B) and Nf1−/−
MEFs were seeded at a subconfluent den-
sity in the presence of growth factors and
counted daily. After 4–5 d, MEFs of both
genotypes reached saturation and stopped
proliferating.

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

1093

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Lallemand et al.

cytoskeletal remodeling such as membrane ruffles de-
scribe studies performed in subconfluent cells (Sun et al.
2002); however, merlin also localizes to areas of cell:cell
contact in vivo in Drosophila and in cultured mamma-
lian cells (McCartney and Fehon 1996; Maeda et al.
1999). To determine whether the lack of AJs in Nf2−/−
MEFs is a direct consequence of the absence of merlin
from that location, we examined the localization of mer-
lin in confluent wild-type MEFs by immunofluores-
cence. We detected precise colocalization of endogenous
merlin with several AJ components, including ␤-catenin,
N-cadherin, and ␣-catenin in punctate structures along
borders of cell:cell contact (Fig. 4A; data not shown).

The possibility that merlin physically associates with
AJ components was tested by immunoprecipitating mer-
lin from confluent wild-type MEFs using two different
anti-merlin antibodies; subsequent Western blotting re-
vealed coimmunoprecipitation of ␤-catenin with merlin
using either antibody (Fig. 4B, lanes 2,3). It is notable
that these proteins were coimmunoprecipitated from the
soluble membrane fraction, which contains only a small
pool of merlin (Fig. 5A). We were unable to develop sat-
isfactory conditions for immunoprecipitating merlin
from the Triton-insoluble membrane fraction. In fact, we
would predict that active hypophosphorylated merlin,
which is underrepresented in the soluble fraction, pref-
erentially interacts with ␤-catenin. Thus the data shown

in Figure 4B may substantially underrepresent the mag-
nitude of association between these two proteins. Nota-
bly, although merlin has been reported to interact with
paxillin (Fernandez-Valle et al. 2002), we could not de-
tect colocalization, cofractionation, or coimmunopre-
cipitation of merlin with paxillin in MEFs (Fig. 5A; data
not shown). Together these data indicate that merlin as-
sociates with ␤-catenin at sites of cell:cell contact; loss
of merlin from this location may directly impair the for-
mation or stability of AJs, leading to loss of contact-
dependent inhibition of growth.

To explore the mechanistic relationship between mer-
lin and AJs, we examined the subcellular distribution of
AJ components in Nf2−/− MEFs. We found that the dis-
tribution of AJ components among cytosolic, soluble
membrane and insoluble membrane compartments was
unaltered in Nf2−/− MEFs (Fig. 5A). In fact, core AJ com-
plexes can be immunoprecipitated from the membrane
of Nf2−/− cells at wild-type levels and stoichiometry (Fig.
5B). However, under conditions in which the cytosolic
compartment has been depleted and membranes have
been preserved, immunofluorescent localization of these
components reveals diffuse distribution throughout the
membrane of Nf2−/− cells (Figs. 2C, 3A). Therefore, loss
of merlin does not prevent membrane localization or re-
tention of the AJ core complex; instead, merlin appears to
be required to assemble or stabilize the final AJ structure.

Figure 4. Merlin and ␤-catenin colocalize and associ-
ate with AJ components. (A) Localization of merlin (red)
in confluent wild-type MEFs along a boundary of cell:
cell contact (arrows; 20× magnification). Nuclei are
stained with DAPI (blue). (B) Colocalization of merlin
(red, arrows in left panel) and ␤-catenin (green, middle)
in confluent wild-type MEFs at sites of cell:cell contact
(merge, right panel; 40× magnification). This staining is
not detectable in Nf2−/− MEFs (data not shown). (C) Im-
munoprecipitation of ␤-catenin (lane 1) and merlin (N-
terminal epitope, lanes 2,4; C-terminal epitope, lanes
3,5) from the membrane soluble fraction of wild-type
(left panel) and Nf2−/− (right panel) MEFs, followed by
Western blot (WB) analysis using anti-␤-catenin (upper
panel I) or anti-merlin (lower panel II) antibodies. (Lane
6) Total membrane soluble fraction from Nf2−/− MEFs.
In wild-type MEF membranes, ␤-catenin coimmunopre-
cipitates with merlin using both anti-merlin antibodies.
As expected, ␤-catenin was not detected when immu-
noprecipitations from Nf2−/− membranes were per-
formed using anti-merlin antibodies (lanes 4,5).

1094

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Merlin controls adherens junction establishment

nents along developing and mature cell:cell boundaries
(Fig. 6B).

To determine whether localization to AJs is critical for
the tumor suppressor function of merlin, we expressed a
version of merlin carrying a rare patient-derived mis-
sense mutation (GFP-Nf2L64P) in primary keratinocytes.
This mutation is known to abrogate the growth-sup-
pressing function of merlin; however, the subcellular lo-
calization of Nf2L64P has not been evaluated (Gutmann
et al. 1998; Morrison et al. 2001). In striking contrast to
wild-type merlin, GFP-Nf2L64P exhibited a strong punc-
tate distribution throughout the cytoplasm (Fig. 6C,
right). Interestingly, at early time points after transfec-
tion (12 h), a small fraction of GFP-Nf2L64P did localize
to cell:cell boundaries, suggesting that the mutation
does not lead to gross mislocalization of merlin but,
rather, prevents retention of merlin to AJs (Fig. 6C, left).
Notably, AJs form normally in wild-type keratinocytes
that produce GFP-Nf2L64P (data not shown); thus, GFP-
Nf2L64P does not function as a dominant-negative ver-
sion of merlin. Together, these data suggest that stable
localization to cell:cell boundaries is important for the
growth-suppressing function of merlin.

Finally, we examined the formation of AJs in Ad-
Cre-infected primary keratinocytes
from newborn
Nf2flox2/flox2 mice. After Ad-Cre infection (3 d), cells
were switched to high calcium to stimulate AJ forma-
tion. In wild-type cells at early time points after calcium
induction (3–6 h), actin-containing zipper-like structures
formed along cell:cell boundaries as has been described
(Vasioukhin et al. 2000). These structures subsequently
resolved into continuous zones of adhesion containing
actin and AJ components (Fig. 6D). In contrast, Ad-Cre-
infected keratinocytes did not form adhesion zippers at
early time points after calcium induction (data not
shown). Instead, they became misshapen, losing the in-
tegrity of the cortical actin ring and exhibiting diffuse
membrane localization of AJ components. Even 20 h af-
ter calcium induction, zones of adhesion were rarely, if
ever, apparent in Nf2−/− keratinocytes, despite extensive
physical contact between cells (Fig. 6D). Thus, as in fi-
broblasts, merlin function is required for the formation
or stabilization of AJs in primary epithelial cells.

Discussion

Recent studies suggest that inactivation of the NF2 tu-
mor suppressor merlin plays a broad role in cancer de-
velopment and progression in humans and in mice (Mc-
Clatchey et al. 1998). Insight into the basis of this awaits
the definition of the molecular function of merlin. Here,
we provide the first analysis of the phenotype associated
with Nf2 loss of function in primary cells. We found that
the primary phenotypic consequence of Nf2 deficiency is
loss of contact-dependent inhibition of growth. Several
lines of evidence suggest that this phenotype is due to a
lack of AJ formation or maintenance. First, Nf2−/− MEFs
do not form AJs, despite normal expression and mem-
brane localization of AJ components. Second, reintroduc-
tion of active merlin restores both contact-dependent in-

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

1095

Figure 5. Core AJ complexes form in Nf2−/− MEF membranes.
(A) Merlin and AJ component distribution in cytosolic (C),
membrane soluble (S), and membrane insoluble (I) fractions
from confluent, serum-starved wild-type (left) and Nf2−/− (right)
MEFs. The distribution of AJ components is identical in wild-
type and Nf2−/− MEFs. Merlin is largely insoluble and cofrac-
tionates with ␤-catenin but not paxillin. (B) Equivalent levels of
␤-catenin coimmunoprecipitate with N-cadherin, E-cadherin,
␤-catenin, p120 catenin, or ␣-catenin from confluent wild-type
and Nf2−/− membranes.

Although their existence has been well documented in
fibroblasts, AJ formation has been more thoroughly stud-
ied in epithelial cells. We therefore asked whether mer-
lin is also required for AJ formation in primary epithelial
mouse keratinocytes in which AJ assembly and disas-
sembly can be controlled by modulating extracellular
calcium levels (Vasioukhin et al. 2000). As shown in Fig-
ure 6A, in high Ca2+-containing medium, endogenous
merlin precisely colocalizes with AJ components along
cell:cell boundaries in these cells. To examine the local-
ization of merlin in real time, we transfected wild-type
primary keratinocyte cultures with a plasmid expressing
a GFP-merlin fusion protein (GFP-Nf2wt). Like endog-
enous merlin, GFP-Nf2wt colocalizes with AJ compo-

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Lallemand et al.

Figure 6. Merlin localization in primary keratino-
cytes. (A) Confluent wild-type keratinocytes were cul-
tured in the presence of 2 mM CaCl2 for 20 h to stimu-
late the formation of AJs. Immunostaining revealed per-
fect colocalization of endogenous merlin (red) and
␤-catenin (green; merge, yellow). (B) A GFP-Nf2 (wild-
type) fusion protein (green; middle) colocalizes with E-
cadherin (red) to a region of nascent cell:cell contact in
wild-type primary keratinocytes (merge, yellow). Trans-
fection of the GFP-Nf2-expressing plasmid and calcium
induction were carried out simultaneously; 24 h later,
cells were fixed, permeabilized, and processed for im-
munofluorescence. (C) A mutant GFP-Nf2L64P version
of merlin exhibits
limited localization to cell:
cell boundaries at early times (12 h) after transfection,
but at late times (48 h) after transfection, GFP-Nf2L64P
exhibits only punctate, cytoplasmic localization. Nu-
clei are stained with DAPI (blue). (D) In a wild-type
keratinocyte monolayer (upper panels), ␤-catenin local-
izes precisely to cell:cell boundaries (right panel). In
in Nf2−/− keratinocytes (bottom panels),
contrast,
␤-catenin is diffusely localized throughout the cell. In
addition, rhodamine-phalloidin staining (left panels) re-
veals that the cortical actin ring is malformed and badly
disorganized in Nf2−/− keratinocytes.

hibition of growth and AJ formation to Nf2−/− MEFs.
Third, a dominant-negative version of merlin confers
loss of AJ formation to wild-type MEFs. Fourth, merlin
colocalizes and associates with AJ components. Finally,
a patient-derived missense mutation abolishes both the

growth-suppressing function and AJ localization of mer-
lin. The importance of merlin function in AJ establish-
ment was confirmed in primary epithelial keratinocytes,
a prototypical system for the study of AJs. Importantly,
loss of contact-dependent inhibition of growth and lack

1096

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

of AJs appear to be signatures of Nf2 deficiency as these
properties are also exhibited by primary Nf2−/− mouse
osteoblasts, which are target cells for tumor develop-
ment in Nf2+/− mice (A.I. McClatchey, D. Lallemand,
and M. Loeffler, unpubl.).

Our data suggest a model whereby merlin stabilizes
the link between the AJ and the actin cytoskeleton. It
has been demonstrated that prior to AJ assembly, core AJ
complexes, many of which are already tethered to the
actin cytoskeleton, are diffusely localized throughout
the plasma membrane (Adams et al. 1998; Sako et al.
1998). Upon heterotypic interaction, cadherin complexes
cluster via
concomitant with
strengthened cytoskeletal interaction. The presence of
apparently normal levels of diffusely localized core AJ
complexes in the membranes of Nf2−/− cells suggests
that merlin is required for this late step in assembling or
stabilizing the final AJ structure.

lateral movement,

The establishment and maturation of AJs has been
best studied in epithelial cells, where it is clear that this
is a complex and dynamic process that begins with the
initial establishment of contact between adjacent mem-
branes. A nascent AJ then serves as a nucleus from
which the development of new AJs progresses outward,
sealing the two membranes (Vasioukhin et al. 2000;
Ehrlich et al. 2002). The actin cytoskeleton is required
for this process (Angres et al. 1996; Vaezi et al. 2002). In
epithelial cells, interdependency between the cortical ac-
tin ring and AJ establishment has been demonstrated
(Adams et al. 1998; Quinlan and Hyatt 1999). We show
here that merlin localizes to AJs and associates with AJ
components. Merlin has also been reported to physically
interact with and stabilize actin filaments in vitro (James
et al. 2001). Thus, merlin may function to locally stabi-
lize actin filaments at the site of AJs. Consistent with
this idea, we found that loss of merlin in primary kera-
tinocytes led to disruption of the cortical actin ring and
disruption of AJs.

We have recently demonstrated a reciprocal relation-
ship between merlin and Rac, a member of the Rho fam-
ily of GTPases, key regulators of the actin cytoskeleton
(for review of Rho GTPases, see Hall 1998; Shaw et al.
2001). Thus, Rac activation leads to phosphorylation and
inactivation of merlin; conversely, active merlin can
negatively regulate Rac-induced signaling and cell trans-
formation (Shaw et al. 2001). Several studies establish a
dynamic relationship between Rac activity and AJ as-
sembly and stabilization (Fukata and Kaibuchi 2001;
Lambert et al. 2002; Yap and Kovacs 2003). It has re-
cently been demonstrated that Rac is physically re-
cruited to sites of nascent AJ assembly and then is re-
moved quickly as maturation proceeds (Ehrlich et al.
2002). In contrast, both constitutively active (S518A) and
inactive (S518D) forms of merlin can localize to AJs (D.
Lallemand and A. McClatchey, unpubl.). Therefore, Rac
may be transiently recruited to nascent AJs to locally
inhibit merlin function and facilitate actin remodeling at
developing AJs. Subsequent loss of Rac-mediated inhibi-
tion of merlin, together with reactivation, perhaps via
the activity of a phosphatase, would stabilize the final AJ

Merlin controls adherens junction establishment

structure. Active AJ-associated merlin would then main-
tain low local levels of active Rac. This is consistent
with our observation that the levels of active hypophos-
phorylated merlin are markedly increased in confluent
fibroblasts (Shaw et al. 1998). This model predicts that in
the absence of merlin, AJs would not be stabilized.

Consistent with the idea that merlin stabilizes the in-
teraction between the AJ and actin cytoskeleton, there
are striking similarities between merlin and ␣-catenin.
Deletion of ␣-catenin in murine keratinocytes leads to
defective AJ formation, loss of contact-dependent inhi-
bition of proliferation, and the development of tumor-
like lesions in vivo (Vasioukhin et al. 2001). In fact, as in
Nf2−/− cells, AJ components do exhibit membrane local-
ization in ␣-catenin-null keratinocytes; like Nf2−/− cells,
␣-catenin-null cells also exhibit altered actin organiza-
tion (Vasioukhin et al. 2001). Merlin, like ␣-catenin, may
be a key element linking cadherin-containing complexes
to the actin cytoskeleton. Actin-controlled assembly of
macromolecular complexes at the cell periphery repre-
sents a novel mechanism of tumor-suppressor function.
It has recently been proposed that metastatic potential
may be conferred by the nature of early or initiating tu-
mor mutations rather than by secondary mutation of
metastasis-specific genes (Bernards and Weinberg 2002).
Nf2 is a clear example of a gene that, when mutated, can
contribute to both tumor initiation and progression, de-
pending on the tumor type. Schwannomas are generally
slow-growing, benign tumors that rarely metastasize, re-
gardless of their genotype. In contrast, Nf2+/− mice de-
velop a variety of tumors that are highly metastatic (Mc-
Clatchey et al. 1998). Loss of AJ function has been firmly
linked to both tumor development and tumor invasion
in many systems (for review, see Cavallaro and Christo-
fori 2001). Finally, the ability of Nf2−/− cells to grow
slowly in the absence of added growth factors may pro-
vide a unique advantage for successful late-stage meta-
static colonization. We suggest that the unique cocktail
of growth advantages exhibited by NF2-deficient cells
explains the tumorigenic and often metastatic conse-
quences of its loss. Merlin function is critical in many
cell types in the mouse, suggesting that merlin inactiva-
tion by genetic or other means may be a key step in the
development of many types of cancer.

Materials and methods

Cell culture

We examined the consequences of both constitutional and
acute deletion of Nf2 in MEFs by harvesting primary MEF
populations from either embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) chimeric
Nf2−/−:+/+ embryos or Nf2flox2/flox2 embryos. Selection of Nf2−/−
MEFs from chimeric embryos has been described (Shaw et al.
2001). Wild-type MEF populations selected from chimeric em-
bryos partially composed of neomycin-resistant wild-type cells
were used as controls. Alternatively, Nf2flox2/flox2 MEFs were
infected with an adenovirus expressing the Cre recombinase
(Ad5CMV-Cre). Mock-infected Nf2flox2/flox2 MEFs were pro-
cessed in parallel. Greater than 90% recombination efficiency
was achieved as assessed by Western blot and PCR analysis

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

1097

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Lallemand et al.

(data not shown). Wild-type (un-Cre-able) MEFs infected with
Ad-Cre did not exhibit a detectable phenotype in our assays
(data not shown). After establishing that Nf2−/− MEFs isolated
by either method exhibited identical growth properties, we used
Ad-Cre and mock-infected Nf2flox2/flox2 MEFs for subsequent
experiments. Primary MEFs were used between passages 2 and
5. cd44−/− and Nf1−/− MEFs were isolated from E12.5 cd44−/− or
Nf1−/− embryos.

The protocol for mouse keratinocyte preparation was kindly
provided by Stuart Yuspa (NCI) and modified slightly. Briefly,
after sacrifice, newborn (P1–P2) mouse skin was removed and
placed into calcium-free trypsin overnight (4°C). The following
day, the epidermis was separated from the dermis and disaggre-
gated in keratinocyte media (GIBCO-BRL) containing 1.4 mM
CaCl2. After a brief centrifugation, the cells were resuspended
in keratinocyte media containing 4 ng/mL EGF, 25 µg of bovine
pituitary extract, and 0.2 mM CaCl2 and seeded onto coverslips.
The following day, the concentration of calcium in the media
was lowered to 0.05 mM. For AJ induction, calcium was raised
to 2 mM for 20 h. Ad-Cre infection of keratinocytes was per-
formed as for MEFs.

Adenovirus production and infection

Ad5CMV-Cre was purchased from University of Iowa Gene
Transfer Vector Core. The Blue Box (Nf2⌬BB), Nf2S518A, and
Nf2L64P mutants were created by site-directed mutagenesis of
mouse Nf2 isoform 1 (QuikChange, Stratagene) in pcDNA3. All
constructs were sequenced in their entirety. The Nf2⌬BB-ex-
pressing adenovirus was prepared using the Adeasy system
(Stratagene) according to the manufacturer. Infections were per-
formed overnight at a concentration of 50 m.o.i./cell.

GFP-fusion constructs

Wild-type and L64P-containing mouse Nf2 cDNAs were cloned
in-frame into pEGFP-C1 expression vectors to create N-termi-
nal GFP-fusions (Clontech). Keratinocytes were transfected us-
ing Lipofectamine Plus (GIBCO-BRL).

Proliferation analysis

For cell growth curves, 4 × 104 MEFs were seeded in triplicate in
15-mm wells in DME + 10% FBS. Beginning the following day
(day 1), cells were trypsinized and counted daily. Experiments
were repeated at least three times using multiple preparations of
MEFs. For FACs analysis, MEFs were either maintained in
DME + 10% FBS for 48 h after reaching confluence, suspended
in DME + 10% FBS for 16 h, or maintained in DME + 10% FBS
for 24 h after 120 J of UVC, labeled with BrdU (10 mM, 4 h), and
collected and processed according to the manufacturer (Becton-
Dickinson). Briefly, cells were fixed in 70% ethanol and treated
with 2 N HCl in 0.5% Triton X-100. After neutralization with
0.1 M Na2B4O7 (pH 8.5), MEFs were sequentially incubated
with an anti-BrdU antibody (Becton-Dickinson; 30 min) and
FITC-conjugated horse anti-mouse secondary antibody (Vector
Laboratories; 30 min). Cells were resuspended in PBS containing
40 µg/mL propidium iodide and RNAse. Analysis was per-
formed with CellQuest software (Becton-Dickinson).

Protein analysis

Total protein extracts were prepared in modified RIPA lysis
buffer (50 mM Tris at pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 0.5%
sodium deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Na3VO4, 10 mM
NaF, 10 mM ␤-glycerophosphate, 1 mM EDTA at pH 8.0, 1 mM

1098

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

EGTA, and protease inhibitors). For membrane extracts, cells
were lysed by mechanical disruption in cold hypotonic buffer
(10 mM HEPES at pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitors).
Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 750g for 10 min. Fur-
ther centrifugation of the resulting supernatant at 1 × 105g for 1
h led to recovery of the cytosolic fraction (C). The pellet was
extracted with membrane extraction buffer (MEB; 50 mM Tris
at pH 7.4, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM
Na3VO4, and protease inhibitors) and centrifuged at 1 × 105g for
1 h. This supernatant corresponded to the Triton X-100 soluble
membrane extract (S). The final pellet was extracted with modi-
fied RIPA buffer and centrifuged at 1 × 105g for 5 min; this su-
pernatant corresponded to the Triton X-100 insoluble fraction
(I). Equal quantities of protein were separated by SDS-PAGE,
transferred to nitrocellulose membrane, and probed at 4°C over-
night in PBS, 0.05% Tween-20, and 5% nonfat dry milk or 1%
BSA for phospho-specific antibodies.

Antibodies

The primary antibodies used were from Santa Cruz (anti-merlin:
sc331, sc332, 1:500 dilution; anti-JNK1: sc474, 1:1000), Cell Sig-
naling (anti-ERK1/2: 9102; anti-phosphoERK1/2: 9101; anti-
phospho-JNK: 9255, all at a 1:500 dilution), Sigma (anti-tubulin:
T9026), Zymed (anti-E-cadherin: 13-1900), and Transduction
Labs (anti-␤-catenin: C19220; anti-␣-catenin: C21620; anti-N-
cadherin: C70320; anti-paxillin: P13520; anti-P120: P17920).
Antibodies to c-jun and cyclin D1 were gifts from M. Yaniv
(Institute Pasteur, Paris, France) and E. Harlow (Harvard Medi-
cal School, Boston, MA), respectively. HRP-linked secondary
antibodies to rabbit, mouse, or rat were from Amersham.

Indirect immunofluorescence

Confluent, serum-starved wild-type MEFs were simultaneously
permeabilized and fixed as follows: Cells plated on coverslips
were incubated in 1% paraformaldehyde, 0.1% Triton X-100,
0.1% NP-40 in 2.5 mM triethanolamine for 30 min. Cells were
then further permeabilized in 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10
min. Coverslips were blocked in PBS + 0.2% BSA and incubated
with anti-␤-catenin (1:200), anti-merlin (sc332; 1:50), or anti-E-
cadherin (1:250) primary antibodies at 4°C overnight
in
PBS + 0.2% BSA. Coverslips were rinsed five times with PBS
and incubated with secondary antibodies in PBS + 0.2% BSA.
FITC- and rhodamine-conjugated secondary anti-mouse, anti-
rabbit, and anit-rat antibodies were purchased from Calbiochem
or ICN (anti-rat). Coverslips were mounted using Vectashield
(Vector Labs). Photographs were taken at 20× with a Nikon
Microphot epifluorescence microscope.

Immunoprecipitation

For immunoprecipitation, 200 µg of Triton X-100 soluble mem-
brane extract was precleared at 4°C for 1 h with 20 µL of pro-
tein-G Sepharose (Pharmacia) and 2 µg of either mouse or rabbit
nonspecific IgG (Sigma) in a final volume of 500 µL of MEB.
After quick centrifugation, the supernatant was incubated at
4°C for 2 h with 20 µL of protein-GSepharose and 2 µg of
anti-merlin (sc331, sc332), anti-␤-catenin, anti-␣-catenin, P120,
anti-E-cadherin, or anti-N-cadherin antibodies. The beads were
washed five times in cold MEB and resuspended in 50 µL of 1×
Laemmli SDS sample buffer.

Acknowledgments

We thank Nick Dyson, Spyros Artavanis-Tsakonas, and Jeff
Settleman for critical reading of the manuscript, Jim Rocco and

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

members of his laboratory for help with adenovirus preparation,
Ivan Stamenkovic for the cd44−/− mice, and Brett Johnson and
Raphaella Sordella for useful discussions and reagents. We
thank Stuart Yuspa and Ulriche Lichti for helpful advice in
isolating and culturing primary murine keratinocytes. We grate-
fully acknowledge members of the McClatchey laboratory for
helpful discussions throughout. This study was supported by
the American Cancer Society, the Department of Defense Neu-
rofibromatosis Program (A.I.M.), Ligue Contre le Cancer (M.G.),
and the National Neurofibromatosis Foundation and Associa-
tion pour la Recherche Contre le Cancer (D.L.).

The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby
marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 USC section
1734 solely to indicate this fact.

References

Adams, C.L., Chen, Y.T., Smith, S.J., and Nelson, W.J. 1998.
Mechanisms of epithelial cell:cell adhesion and cell compac-
tion revealed by high-resolution tracking of E-cadherin-
green fluorescent protein. J. Cell Biol. 142: 1105–1119.

Angres, B., Barth, A., and Nelson, W.J. 1996. Mechanism for
transition from initial to stable cell–cell adhesion: Kinetic
analysis of E-cadherin-mediated adhesion using a quantita-
tive adhesion assay. J. Cell Biol. 134: 549–557.

Bernards, R. and Weinberg, R.A. 2002. A progression puzzle.

Nature 418: 823.

Bretscher, A., Edwards, K., and Fehon, R.G. 2002. ERM proteins
and merlin: Integrators at the cell cortex. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 3: 586–599.

Cavallaro, U. and Christofori, G. 2001. Cell adhesion in tumor
invasion andmetastasis: Loss of the glue is not enough. Bio-
chim. Biophys. Acta 1552: 39–45.

Cichowski, K. and Jacks, T. 2001. NF1 tumor suppressor gene

function: Narrowing the GAP. Cell 104: 593–604.

Cichowski, K., Santiago, S., Jardim, M., Johnson, B.W., and
Jacks, T. 2003. Dynamic regulation of the Ras pathway via
proteolysis of the NF1 tumor suppressor. Genes & Dev.
17: 449–454.

Ehrlich, J.S., Hansen, M.D.H., and Nelson, J.W. 2002. Spatio-
temporal regulation of Rac1 localization and lamellipodial
dynamics during epithelial cell:cell adhesion. Dev. Cell
3: 259–270.

Fernandez-Valle, C., Tang, Y., Ricard, J., Rodenas-Ruano A.,
Taylor, A., Hackler, E., Biggerstaff, J., and Iacovelli, J. 2002.
Paxillin binds schwannomin and regulates its density-depen-
dent localization and effect on cell morphology. Nat. Genet.
3: 354–362.

Fukata, M. and Kaibuchi, K. 2001. Rho-family GTPases in cad-
herin-mediated cell–cell adhesion. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
2: 887–896.

Giovannini, M., Robanus-Maandag, E., van der Valk, M., Niwa-
Kawakita, M., Abramowski, V., Goutebroze, L., Woodruff,
J.M., Berns, A., and Thomas, G. 2000. Conditional biallelic
Nf2 mutation in the mouse promotes manifestations of hu-
man neurofibromatosis type 2. Genes & Dev. 14: 1617–1630.
Gloushankova, N.A., Krendel, M.F., Alieva, N.O., Bonder, E.M.,
Feder, H.H., Vasiliev, J.M., and Gelfand, I.M. 1998. Dynam-
ics of contacts between lamellae of fibroblasts: Essential role
of the actin cytoskeleton. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 4362–
4367.

Gutmann, D.H. 1997. Molecular insights into neurofibromato-

sis 2. Neurobiol. Dis. 3: 247–261.

Gutmann, D.H., Geist, R.T., Xu, H.-M., Kim, J.S., and Saporito-

Merlin controls adherens junction establishment

Irwin, S. 1998. Defects in Neurofibromatosis 2 protein func-
tion can arise at multiple levels. Hum. Mol. Genet. 7: 335–345.
Gutmann, D.H., Sherman, L., Seftor, L., Haipek, C., Hoang,
L.K., and Hendrix, M. 1999. Increased expression of the NF2
tumor suppressor gene product, merlin, impairs cell motil-
ity, adhesion and spreading. Hum. Mol. Genet. 8: 267–275.
Hall, A. 1998. Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton. Science

279: 509–514.

James, M.F., Manchanda, N., Gonzalez-Agosti, C., Hartwig,
J.H., and Ramesh, V. 2001. The Neurofibromatosis 2 protein
product merlin selectively binds F-actin but not G-actin, and
stabilizes the filaments through a lateral association. Bio-
chem. J. 356 (Pt2): 377–386.

Johnson, K.C., Kissil, J.L., Fry, J.L., and Jacks, T. 2002. Cellular
transformation by a FERM domain mutant of the Nf2-tumor
suppressor gene. Oncogene 21: 5990–5997.

Kalamarides, M., Niwa-Kawakita, M., Leblois, H., Abramowski,
V., Perricaudet, M., Janin, A., Thomas, G., Gutmann, D.H.,
and Giovannini, M. 2002. Nf2 gene inactivation in arachnoi-
dal cells is rate-limiting for meningioma development in the
mouse. Genes & Dev. 16: 1060–1065.

LaJeunesse, D.R., McCartney, B.M., and Fehon, R.G. 1996.
Structural analysis of Drosophila merlin reveals functional
domains important for growth control and subcellular local-
ization. J. Cell Biol. 141: 1589–1599.

Lambert, M., Choquet, D., and Mege, R.-M. 2002. Dynamics of
ligand-induced, Rac1-dependent anchoring of cadherins to
the actin cytoskeleton. J. Cell Biol. 157: 469–479.

Maeda, M., Matsuim, T., Imamuram, M., Tsukitam, S., and
Tsukita, S. 1999. Expression level, subcellular distribution
and ␳-GDI binding affinity of merlin in comparison with
ezrin/radixin/moesin proteins. Oncogene 18: 4788–4797.

McCartney, B.M. and Fehon, R.G. 1996. Distinct cellular and
subcellular patterns of expression imply distinct functions
for the Drosophila homologues of moesin and the neurofi-
bromatosis 2 tumor suppressor, merlin.
J. Cell Biol.
133: 843–852.

McClatchey, A.I., Saotome, I., Ramesh, V., Gusella, J.F., and
Jacks, T. 1997. The Nf2 tumor suppressor gene product is
essential
immediately
prior to gastrulation. Genes & Dev. 11: 1253–1265.

for extraembryonic development

McClatchey, A.I., Saotome, I., Mercer, K., Crowley, D., Gusella,
J.F., Bronson, R.T., and Jacks, T. 1998. Mice heterozygous for
a mutation at the Nf2 tumor suppressor locus develop a
range of highly metastatic tumors. Genes & Dev. 12: 1121–
1133.

Morrison, H., Sherman, L.S., Legg, J., Banine, F., Isacke, C., Hai-
pek, C.A., Gutmann, D.H., Ponta, H., and Herrlich, P. 2001.
The NF2 tumor suppressor gene product, merlin, mediates
contact inhibition of growth through interactions with
CD44. Genes & Dev. 15: 968–980.

Nagafuchi, A. 2001. Molecular architecture of AJs. Curr. Opin.

Cell Biol. 13: 600–603.

Nollet, F., Berx, G., and van Roy, F. 2000. The role of the E-
cadherin/catenin adhesion complex in the development and
progression of cancer. Mol. Cell. Biol. Res. Comm. 2: 77–85.
Obremski, V.J., Hall, A.M., and Fernandez-Valle, C. 1998. Mer-
lin, the neurofibromatosis type 2 gene product, and ␤1 inte-
grin associate in isolated and differentiating Schwann cells.
J. Neurobiol. 37: 487–501.

Pelton, P.D., Sherman, L.S., Rizvi, T.A., Marchionni, M.A.,
Wood, P., Friedman, R.A., and Ratner, N. 1998. Ruffling
membrane, stress fiber, cell spreading and proliferation ab-
normalities in human Schwannoma cells. Oncogene 17:
2195–2209.

Perez-Moreno, M., Jamora, C., and Fuchs, E. 2003. Sticky busi-

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

1099

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Lallemand et al.

ness. Orchestrating cellular signals at adherens junctions.
Cell 112: 535–548.

Quinlan, M.P. and Hyatt, J.L. 1999. Establishment of the cir-
cumferential actin filament network is a prerequisite for lo-
calization of the cadherin–catenin complex in epithelial
cells. Cell Growth Diff. 10: 839–854.

Sako, Y., Nagafuchi, A., Tsukita, S., Takeichi, M., and Kasumi,
A. 1998. Cytoplasmic regulation of the movement of E-cad-
herin on the free cell surface as studied by optical tweezers
and single particle tracking: Corralling and tethering by the
membrane skeleton. J. Cell Biol. 140: 1227–1240.

Shaw, R.J, McClatchey, A.I., and Jacks, T. 1998. Regulation of
the neurofibromatosis type 2 tumor suppressor protein, mer-
lin, by adhesion and growth arrest stimuli. J. Biol. Chem.
273: 7757–7764.

Shaw, R.J. Paez, J.G., Curto, M., Yaktine, A., Pruitt, W.M., Sao-
tome, I., O’Bryan, J.P., Gupta, V., Ratner, N., Der, C.J., et al.
2001. The Nf2 tumor suppressor, merlin, functions in Rac-
dependent signaling. Dev. Cell 1: 63–72.

Sun, C.-X., Robb, V.A., and Gutmann, D.H. 2002. Protein tumor
suppressors: Getting a FERM grip on growth regulation. J.
Cell Sci. 115: 3991–4000.

Vaezi, A., Bauer, C., Vasioukhin, V., and Fuchs, E. 2002. Actin
cable dynamics and Rho/Rock orchestrate a polarized cyto-
skeletal architecture in the early steps of assembling a strati-
fied epithelium. Dev. Cell 3: 367–381.

Vasioukhin, V., Bauer, C., Yin, M., and Fuchs, E. 2000. Directed
actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell–
cell adhesion. Cell 100: 209–219.

Vasioukhin, V., Bauer, C., Degenstein, L., Wise, B., and Fuchs, E.
2001. Hyperproliferation and defects in epithelial polarity
upon conditional ablation of ␣-catenin in skin. Cell 104:
605–617.

Yap, A.S. and Kovacs, E.M. 2003. Direct cadherin-activated cell
signaling: A view from the plasma membrane. J. Cell Biol.
160: 11–16.

Yonemura, S., Itoh, M., Nagafuchi, A., and Tsukita, S. 1995.
Cell-to-cell adherens junction formation and actin filament
organization: Similarities and differences between non-po-
larized fibroblasts and polarized epithelial cells. J. Cell Sci.
108: 127–142.

1100

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

 deficiency promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis by

NF2
destabilizing adherens junctions 
  
Dominique Lallemand, Marcello Curto, Ichiko Saotome, et al. 
  
Genes Dev. 
Access the most recent version at doi:

10.1101/gad.1054603
 

2003, 

 17:

References
  
License
  
Email Alerting
Service

This article cites 39 articles, 18 of which can be accessed free at:
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/17/9/1090.full.html#ref-list-1
 
  

Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top
right corner of the article or 
  

click here.

 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

