Developmental Cell, Vol. 1, 63–72, July, 2001, Copyright 2001 by Cell Press

The Nf2 Tumor Suppressor, Merlin, Functions
in Rac-Dependent Signaling

Reuben J. Shaw, 1,6,7 J. Guillermo Paez,2,7
Marcello Curto,2 Ann Yaktine,2
Wendy Morse Pruitt,3 Ichiko Saotome,2
John P. O’Bryan,3 Vikas Gupta,1 Nancy Ratner,4
Channing J. Der,3 Tyler Jacks,1
Andrea I. McClatchey2,5
1 Department of Biology and
Center for Cancer Research and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
2 MGH Cancer Center and
Harvard Medical School Department of Pathology
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129
3 Department of Pharmacology
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599
4 Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology,

and Anatomy

College of Medicine
University of Cincinnatti
Cincinnatti, Ohio 45267

Summary

Mutations in the neurofibromatosis type II (NF2) tumor
suppressor predispose humans and mice to tumor
development. The study of Nf2ⴙ/⫺ mice has demon-
strated an additional effect of Nf2 loss on tumor me-
tastasis. The NF2-encoded protein, merlin, belongs to
the ERM (ezrin, radixin, and moesin) family of cytoskel-
eton:membrane linkers. However, the molecular basis
for the tumor- and metastasis- suppressing activity of
merlin is unknown. We have now placed merlin in a
signaling pathway downstream of the small GTPase
Rac. Expression of activated Rac induces phosphory-
lation and decreased association of merlin with the
cytoskeleton. Furthermore, merlin overexpression in-
hibits Rac-induced signaling in a phosphorylation-
dependent manner. Finally, Nf2⫺/⫺ cells exhibit charac-
teristics of cells expressing activated alleles of Rac.
These studies provide insight into the normal cellular
function of merlin and how Nf2 mutation contributes
to tumor initiation and progression.

Introduction

Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is a familial cancer syn-
drome that features the development of tumors of the

5 Correspondence: mcclatch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu
6 Present address: Division of Signal Transduction, Beth Israel Dea-
coness Medical Center, and Department of Cell Biology, Harvard
Medical School, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts
02115
7 These authors contributed equally to this work.

nervous system, particularly schwannomas and menin-
giomas (Gutmann et al., 1997). The disease is caused
by inherited mutation of the NF2 tumor suppressor gene;
sporadically occurring tumors of these types frequently
exhibit inactivation of both NF2 alleles. In addition, NF2
mutations are found in malignant mesotheliomas (Gu-
sella et al., 1999). Mice heterozygous for an Nf2 mutation
are predisposed to developing osteosarcomas, fibrosar-
comas, and hepatocellular carcinomas that have lost
the wild-type Nf2 allele. Strikingly, most tumors arising
in Nf2⫹/⫺ mice metastasize, which sharply contrasts with
the generally rare incidence of metastasis in the mouse.
Indeed, experimental evidence supports a role for Nf2
loss in metastatic progression (McClatchey et al., 1998).
The NF2-encoded protein, merlin, is highly related to
the cytoskeleton:membrane linking proteins ezrin, ra-
dixin, and moesin (the ERM proteins). Although the func-
tion of the ERM proteins is not well understood, the
study of merlin function has largely paralleled that of
the ERMs (reviewed in Bretscher et al., 2000). There are
important distinctions and similarities between merlin
and the ERMs. Merlin and the ERM proteins share similar
subcellular localization to regions of dynamic cytoskele-
tal remodeling such as membrane ruffles, actin-con-
taining microspikes, and the cleavage furrow (Gusella
et al., 1999). All four proteins interact with membrane-
associated partners via an amino-(N)-terminal domain
and with cytoskeletal components via a carboxyl-(C)-
terminal domain (Bretscher et al., 2000). However, the
ERMs interact directly with actin via a domain that is
not conserved in merlin. In fact, the ERM proteins are
more closely related to each other than to merlin. Merlin
does share binding partners with the ERM proteins, in-
cluding the hyaluronic acid receptor CD44, NHE-RF/
EBP50, and RhoGDI (Sainio et al., 1997; Murthy et al.,
1998; Maeda et al., 1999). However, the functional con-
sequences of interaction of the ERMs or merlin with
these proteins remains unclear.

The membrane:cytoskeletal linking activity of the ERM
proteins appears to be regulated through intra- and per-
haps intermolecular association of their N- and C-termi-
nal domains (Bretscher et al., 2000). Phosphorylation
and phospholipid binding weaken self-association of
the ERM proteins, stimulating their ability to link mem-
brane proteins and F-actin into dynamic actin structures
such as microvilli, membrane ruffles, and uropods
(Bretscher et al., 2000). Recent studies suggest that
merlin is also regulated by self-association, and can
form homo- and heterodimers with ERM family members
(Sherman et al., 1997; Huang et al., 1998; Gronholm et
al., 1999; Nguyen et al., 2000).

Recently, we and others have shown that the small
GTPase RhoA is an important regulator of the ERM pro-
teins. The Rho family of GTPases affects reorganization
of the actin cytoskeleton and regulates such cellular
activities as motility,
invasiveness, and proliferation
through the regulation of several signaling pathways (for
review see Zohn et al., 1998; Van Aelst and D’Souza-
Schorey, 1997). RhoA activity was found to be necessary
and sufficient for the phosphorylation of a conserved

Developmental Cell
64

residue (T558 in moesin) in the F-actin binding domain
of the ERM proteins and the subsequent formation of
ERM-containing apical microvilli (Shaw et al., 1998a;
Matsui et al., 1998; Oshiro et al., 1998). Phosphorylation
of T558 inhibits the association of the N- and C-terminal
domains of moesin in vitro, unmasking its F-actin and
membrane protein binding potential (Matsui et al., 1998;
Simons et al., 1998; Huang et al., 1999). Both Rho-kinase
and phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase have
been implicated in affecting this activation of the ERM
proteins in vivo (Matsui et al., 1999). Importantly, while
the sequence surrounding this site is well conserved in
all three ERM proteins, it is quite distinct in merlin.

Merlin is also phosphorylated on serine/threonine res-
idues in response to a variety of conditions in culture
(Shaw et al., 1998b). The simplest interpretation of the
available data is that phosphorylation inactivates merlin.
High levels of a hypophosphorylated form of merlin are
associated with conditions of growth arrest by serum
deprivation, increased cell density, and loss of adhesion.
Interestingly, these are all conditions under which Rho
GTPase signaling is downregulated (Kjoller and Hall,
1999; Ren et al., 1999). Given the links between RhoA
and ERM phosphorylation, merlin phosphorylation and
growth control, and loss of merlin function leading to
metastatic tumors in mice, we have investigated
whether merlin is also regulated by members of the Rho
family of GTPases. In this study, we find that merlin is
targeted by and is a regulator of the Rac/Cdc42-path-
way, providing a framework for understanding how mer-
lin normally functions as a tumor and metastasis sup-
pressor.

Results

Merlin Is Phosphorylated in a
Rac/Cdc42-Dependent Manner
By SDS-PAGE, merlin migrates as a doublet, represent-
ing hyper- and hypophosphorylated forms of the protein
(Shaw et al., 1998b). Phosphoamino acid analysis and
two-dimensional phosphopeptide mapping experi-
ments revealed that merlin is phosphorylated at multiple
sites, predominantly on serine residues, but also on at
least one threonine residue (Shaw et al., 1998b; see
Supplemental Figure S1 at http://www.developmental.
com/cgi/content/full/1/1/63/DC1). To address whether
Rho GTPase activation affects merlin phosphorylation,
NIH3T3 cells were transfected with wild-type merlin and
either activated or dominant-negative alleles of the Rho
family members RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42Hs. Importantly,
the pattern of phosphorylation of exogenous merlin un-
der various conditions in culture is comparable to that
of endogenous merlin (see Figure 1A, first two lanes;
Shaw et al., 1998b). For example, in serum-starved cells
(Figure 1A, second lane) the ratio of the faster migrating,
hypophosphorylated form to the hyperphosphorylated
form of exogenous merlin is high. Strikingly, while coex-
pression of activated Rho did not significantly affect
merlin phosphorylation, expression of two different acti-
vated alleles of Rac (RacV12, RacL61) strongly in-
creased it. An activated allele of Cdc42 (Cdc42V12) also
induced merlin phosphorylation (Figure 1A), which may
reflect the activity of a common effector pathway or the

Figure 1. Activation of Rac or Cdc42, but Not Rho, Induces Merlin
Hyperphosphorylation
(A) Wild-type merlin was transiently transfected with or without myc-
tagged activated and dominant negative alleles of Rac, Rho, or
Cdc42, as indicated, in NIH3T3 cells, then analyzed by immunoblot-
ting with anti-merlin (sc331) antisera. All GTPases were expressed
in serum-starved cells. First and second lanes show merlin phos-
phorylation in cycling (ser) and serum starved (ss) cells. Equivalent
levels of activated and dominant negative GTPases were confirmed
by anti-myc immunoblotting (data not shown).
(B) Wild-type HA-merlin was transfected with activated Rac, immu-
noprecipitated with anti-HA antisera, and treated with calf intestinal
phosphatase (CIP), with CIP buffer alone or boiled in sample buffer
as indicated. Merlin was detected by anti-HA immunoblotting.
(C) Wild-type merlin was transfected with Tiam1, Dbl, Lsc, or acti-
vated Rac as indicated and analyzed as above.
(D) Wild-type merlin or HA-tagged Pak1 were transfected with Rac
effector mutants. Merlin was analyzed as above; Pak1 hyperphos-
phorylation resulting in a mobility shift detected by anti-HA immu-
noblotting indicates that RacV12A37 but not RacV12C40 activates
Pak1.

sequential activation of Rac by Cdc42 (Nobes and Hall,
1995). A third merlin species with even slower mobility
was also noted in the presence of activated Rac or
Cdc42; this band may represent a super-phosphory-
lated form of merlin. Phosphatase treatment of immuno-
precipitated merlin from Rac-transfected cells demon-
strated that the Rac-induced mobility shift is due to
phosphorylation (Figure 1B).

To examine whether activation of endogenous
GTPases modulates merlin phosphorylation, merlin was
transfected with members of the Dbl family of guanine
nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), each of which acti-
vates a subset of Rho GTPases in vivo. For example,
Dbl activates Rac, Rho, and Cdc42 while Tiam-1 and
Lsc are specific activators of Rac and Rho, respectively
(Van Aelst and D’Souza-Schorey, 1997). As shown in
Figure 1C, overexpression of either Tiam-1 or Dbl in-
duced merlin phosphorylation, while expression of Lsc

The Nf2 Tumor Suppressor and Rac Signaling
65

Identification of Rac-Dependent Phosphorylation Sites

Figure 2.
(A) A series of HA-tagged merlin truncations were transfected with
and without activated Rac and analyzed by immunoblotting. Resi-
dues contained within each truncation are indicated below the cor-
responding lanes.
(B) Amino acid sequence of the C-terminal half of merlin, with serine
or threonine residues matching known kinase phosphorylation mo-
tifs or conserved in Drosophila numbered above the sequence.
(C) Potential phosphorylation sites were mutated individually (or in
the case of 377 and 380, in combination), to alanine in the context
of full-length HA-tagged merlin. These constructs were then trans-
fected with activated Rac and analyzed by immunoblotting.

had no effect (Figure 1C). These results suggest that
activation of endogenous Rac, and perhaps Cdc42, can
mediate merlin phosphorylation.

Many serine/threonine kinases are known to be acti-
vated by Rac and/or Cdc42, and are thus candidates
for mediating the effect of Rac activation on merlin phos-
phorylation (Aspenstrom, 1999). However, neither of two
well-characterized Rac effector mutants (RacV12A37,
RacV12K40) was capable of stimulating merlin phos-
phorylation (Figure 1D). As most known Rac effector
pathways can be activated by one of these two effector
mutants (Westwick et al., 1997; Lamarche et al., 1996;
Joneson et al., 1996), this result suggests that multiple
effector pathways are required for merlin hyperphos-
phorylation or that an uncharacterized pathway that is
dependent upon both amino acids 37 and 40 of Rac is
responsible for this effect.

Identification of Rac-Induced Phosphorylation Sites
To identify Rac-induced sites of phosphorylation in mer-
lin, we transfected activated Rac with a series of epi-
tope-tagged merlin truncation mutants and examined
their phosphorylation by electrophoretic mobility shift
(Figure 2A). As described previously, the N-terminal half

of merlin (residues 1–352) migrates as a single species
(Shaw et al., 1998c); activated Rac had no additional
effect on the mobility of this fragment. In contrast, the
C-terminal half of merlin (residues 352–595) migrates as
a doublet; introduction of activated Rac increased the
amount of the upper species. Further deletion mapping
narrowed the Rac-responsive region to residues 476–
537 (Figure 2A). Orthophosphate labeling experiments
revealed that although both the N- and C-terminal halves
of merlin are phosphorylated in serum-starved cells, the
introduction of activated Rac leads to increased incor-
poration of radioactive label in the C-terminal half only
(data not shown). These data suggest that while there
may be many phosphorylation sites in merlin, the Rac-
responsive site(s) lie in the C-terminal half.

Within this region are ten serine/threonine residues,
eight of which are surrounded by consensus kinase rec-
ognition motifs (Figure 2B). Each candidate residue was
individually mutated to alanine in the context of the full-
length molecule and transfected with and without acti-
vated Rac, to determine whether loss of any one site
could affect Rac-dependent phosphorylation. As shown
in Figure 2C, conversion of T577 to alanine did not effect
basal or Rac-induced merlin phosphorylation; T577 is
analogous to T558 of moesin, which is a target of RhoA-
induced phosphorylation (Matsui et al., 1998, 1999). This
is consistent with our observation that Rho activation
had no effect on merlin phosphorylation. Instead, muta-
tion of S518 had an appreciable effect on Rac-stimu-
lated phosphorylation. In fact, the S518A mutant is not
phosphorylated in response to serum and migrates as
a single species. Orthophosphate labeling and phos-
phopeptide mapping experiments revealed that the
while the S518A mutant is still phosphorylated in cells,
prominent phosphopeptides are absent (see Supple-
mental Figure S1). A synthetic peptide containing resi-
due S518, but not one containing a S518A substitution,
can be phosphorylated in vitro in a Rac-dependent man-
ner, indicating that S518 is phosphorylated directly (J.
Kissil and T.J., unpublished data).

Effect of S518 Phosphorylation on Merlin Function
We next investigated whether Rac-induced phosphory-
lation of merlin regulates its activity. Phosphorylation of
the ERM proteins inhibits self-association and promotes
their ability to link membrane and cytoskeletal partners.
Thus, we investigated the effect of Rac-dependent
phosphorylation on the ability of the N- and C-terminal
halves of merlin to interact. First, the epitope-tagged,
N-terminal half of merlin was transfected into NIH3T3
cells together with untagged versions of either full-
length merlin or the C-terminal half. Immunoprecipita-
tion of the N-terminal portion followed by immunoblot-
ting for the C-terminal half revealed the association of
the two (Figure 3A). Mutation of S518 to aspartic acid,
which is predicted to mimic phosphoserine, inhibited the
interaction of either the full-length or C-terminal forms of
merlin with the N-terminal half. In contrast, mutation of
S518 to alanine in the context of either the full-length
or C-terminal half of merlin resulted in a stronger associ-
ation with the N-terminal half. These data imply that
the S518A mutant is not stably “closed” and therefore
unavailable for interaction with the HA-N-terminal por-
tion. This idea is supported by the recent demonstration

Developmental Cell
66

Figure 3. Rac Regulates the Intramolecular and Cytoskeletal Asso-
ciation of Merlin
(A) Untagged full-length or C-terminal merlin fragments were trans-
fected with HA-tagged N-terminal merlin. Bound merlin was visual-
ized by immunoprecipitation with anti-HA-antisera and immunoblot-
ting with anti-merlin antisera directed against the final 20 amino
acids of the protein (sc332). Five percent of the total cell extracts
were immunoblotted to confirm equivalent expression of wild-type
and mutant merlin isoforms. Control experiments indicate that mer-
lin is not nonspecifically associating with the HA-antisera or protein
A beads (data not shown).
(B) HA-tagged merlin or HA-tagged ezrin was transfected with or
without activated Rac into NIH3T3 cells, which were then serum-
starved. Triton X-100 soluble and insoluble fractions were then pre-
pared and analyzed by anti-HA immunoblotting.
(C) Full-length wild-type, S518A- or S518D-expressing plasmids
were transfected into NIH3T3 cells in 15% serum; Triton X-100 solu-
ble and insoluble fractions were prepared and analyzed by immu-
noblotting with an anti-merlin antibody.

that association of the N- and C-terminal halves of merlin
is a weaker and more dynamic interaction than that of
the ERM proteins (Nguyen et al., 2000). We also exam-
ined these interactions directly by mixing 35S-labeled in
vitro-translated versions of full-length merlin with the
HA-tagged N-terminal half of merlin and immunoprecipi-
tating using anti-HA antisera; these experiments gave
similar results (data not shown). These data suggest
that phosphorylation of S518 disrupts merlin self-asso-
ciation, and perhaps oligomerization.

Given the distinct localization of merlin to areas of
dynamic actin reorganization and its potential to interact
with membrane and cytoskeleton proteins, localization
is likely to be critical for its function. Thus, we examined
the effect of Rac-dependent phosphorylation on the de-
tergent-solubility of merlin. In serum-starved cells both

hyper- and hypophosphorylated merlin species were
found in the detergent insoluble fraction (Figure 3B).
When activated Rac was introduced, a significant
amount of hyperphosphorylated merlin appeared in the
soluble fraction. In contrast, activated Rac had no effect
on ezrin solubility (Figure 3B). Consistent with this obser-
vation, examination of the detergent-solubility of ex-
pressed full-length S518A and S518D mutants revealed
the relative insolubility of S518A and solubility of S518D
compared to wild-type (Figure 3C). Together, these re-
sults suggest that Rac-induced phosphorylation of mer-
lin weakens both its head-to-tail interaction and associ-
ation with the cytoskeleton.

Overexpression of Merlin Blocks Rac-Mediated
Transformation and Signaling
Overexpression of activated Rac can transform fibro-
blasts in vitro, and Rac activity is required for Ras-
induced transformation (Khosravi-Far et al., 1995; Qiu
et al., 1995). It has been previously reported that merlin
overexpression can block Ras-induced transformation
(Tikoo et al., 1994). We have confirmed this result and
also examined the ability of merlin to block Rac-induced
anchorage-independent growth in soft agar as a mea-
sure of transformation. We found that full-length merlin
efficiently inhibited Rac-induced colony formation in this
assay (Figure 4A).

We next examined the effect of merlin overexpression
on signaling pathways that are activated downstream
of Rac. A major downstream target of Rac is activation
of the c-jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) (Coso et al., 1995;
Minden et al., 1995). We measured the effect of merlin
overexpression on endogenous JNK activity by transfect-
ing fibroblasts with full-length merlin along with a GFP-
expressing plasmid. We analyzed basal JNK activity
specifically in the transfected cells by fluorescence-acti-
vated cell sorting (FACS) and replating of the GFP-
expressing cells. The levels of JNK activity were mea-
sured using an antibody that specifically recognizes
phosphorylated (active) JNK. We found that merlin over-
expression significantly reduced the level of phosphory-
lated JNK in cycling cells (Figure 4B, middle). Under
these conditions, merlin overexpression had a negligible
effect on the levels of phosphorylated extracellular regu-
lated kinase (ERK) in these cells (Figure 4B, bottom).

A well-established consequence of JNK activation is
increased activity of the AP-1 transcription factor, com-
posed of heterodimeric combinations of jun and fos
family members (Ip and Davis, 1998). After first ascer-
taining that merlin could also specifically block Rac-
induced AP-1 activity, we asked whether this ability was
dependent on merlin’s phosphorylation state (Figure
4C). Our studies of merlin phosphorylation predict that
hypophosphorylated merlin is the active, tumor sup-
pressor form of the protein and that hyperphosphoryla-
tion inactivates it. To link merlin phosphorylation to its
ability to block Rac signaling, we asked whether phos-
phorylation-defective (S518A) or phosphorylation-mim-
icking (S518D) forms of merlin could also block Rac-
induced signaling. Strikingly, we found that while the
S518A mutant inhibited Rac-induced activation of AP-1
reporter activity as well or better than the wild-type
protein, S518D was clearly compromised in its ability to
block Rac-induced signaling relative to wild-type (Figure

The Nf2 Tumor Suppressor and Rac Signaling
67

Inhibits Rac-Dependent

Figure 4. Merlin
Transformation and Signaling
(A) NIH3T3 cells stably expressing activated
Rac with or without wild-type merlin were as-
sayed for their ability to proliferate under an-
chorage-independent conditions. Cells were
seeded in growth medium containing 0.3%
agar, and colonies were visualized and quan-
titated after 14 days (top). Total cell lysates
were immunoblotted using anti-merlin (sc331)
or anti-Rac antisera to ensure expression of
wild-type merlin (bottom) and Rac (data not
shown). Experiment shown is representative
of three independent experiments done in
triplicate.
(B) Immortalized fibroblasts were transfected
with a GFP-expression plasmid, with or with-
out untagged or myc-tagged wild-type mer-
lin, lacZ, or HA-tagged ezrin. GFP-positive
cells were isolated by FACS and replated in
15% serum for 24 hr prior to harvesting. Total
cell
lysates were then immunoblotted with
anti-merlin (sc331), anti-phospho-JNK, anti-
phospho-ERK, or anti-JNK antibodies as indi-
cated.
(C) Cells were transfected with the AP-1 re-
porter plasmid with or without an EF1␣-GST-
RacV12 expression plasmid and 50 ng of
wild-type or mutant merlin expression plas-
mid, as indicated. Total cell lysates were im-
munoblotted with anti-merlin (sc331; below)
or anti-GST (not shown) antibodies.

4C). Immunoblotting confirmed that equivalent levels of
wild-type and mutant merlin protein were expressed in
these cells (Figure 4C). These results are consistent with
the possibility that Rac-induced phosphorylation inacti-
vates merlin.

Examination of Rac-Dependent Signaling
in Nf2-Deficient Fibroblasts
Given a link between Rac signaling and merlin phosphor-
ylation and regulation, we wanted to examine the integ-
rity of Rac signaling in the absence of Nf2. We previously
generated a Nf2 mutant strain of mice and found that
Nf2 homozygous mutant embryos fail at gastrulation,
precluding the isolation of embryo-derived fibroblasts
directly (McClatchey et al., 1997). Therefore, we gener-
ated primary Nf2⫺/⫺ fibroblasts from chimeric embryos
composed of both wild-type and Nf2⫺/⫺ cells (see Exper-
imental Procedures). In addition, several spontaneously
immortalized fibroblast lines were generated for each
genotype; these cells were used where indicated.

First, we compared the levels of phosphorylated (ac-
tive) JNK in wild-type and Nf2⫺/⫺ fibroblasts by Western
blot analysis. As shown in Figure 5A (left), we found that
basal JNK activity was elevated approximately 4-fold in
cycling Nf2⫺/⫺ fibroblasts and was further induced upon
stimulation with serum or UV treatment. The same re-
sults were obtained by kinase assay (Figure 5A, right)
and in Nf2⫺/⫺ ES cells (data not shown).

To determine whether AP-1 activity was also upregu-
lated in these cells, we introduced an AP-1 luciferase
reporter into wild-type and Nf2⫺/⫺ immortalized fibro-
blasts. As seen in Figure 5B, basal AP-1 activity was
indeed increased in Nf2⫺/⫺ fibroblasts. Moreover, rein-
troduction of Nf2 expression into Nf2⫺/⫺ fibroblasts re-
sulted in a dose-dependent decrease in basal AP-1 ac-
tivity to the levels of wild-type cells (Figure 5C). Taken
together these results support the conclusion that loss
of merlin function is responsible for deregulated AP-1
activity in Nf2⫺/⫺ cells.

In nearly every cell system examined, Rac plays a
central role in the formation of membrane ruffles during
cell spreading, cell motility, and growth factor stimula-
tion (reviewed in Kjoller and Hall, 1999). To address the
effects of merlin deficiency on this classic cytoskeletal
response, we plated primary fibroblasts on coverslips
and examined cell spreading by immunostaining for
F-actin and the ERM proteins, which highlight the dy-
namic cortical cytoskeleton. In contrast to wild-type
cells, at one hour post-plating, Nf2⫺/⫺ cells demon-
strated prominent membrane ruffles rich in F-actin and
ERM proteins (Figure 6A). At this time point, wild-type
cells exhibited abundant apical microvilli, but few pe-
ripheral membrane ruffles. Notably, in addition to mem-
brane ruffles, increased vesicles are also seen in the
Nf2⫺/⫺ cells (see Figure 6A). Both of these phenotypes
are observed in cells overexpressing activated Rac (Van
Aelst and D’Souza-Schorey, 1997).

Developmental Cell
68

Figure 5. Nf2 Deficient Fibroblasts Show Increased JNK and AP-1
Activity
(A) Cycling immortalized wild-type and Nf2⫺/⫺ fibroblasts were stim-
ulated with serum or UV (80 J) for 30 min. Levels of activated JNK
were evaluated by immunoblotting using an antibody that recog-
nizes phosphorylated JNK (left). The corresponding levels of total
JNK are shown below. In vitro kinase assay (right) yielded similarly
elevated basal JNK activity in Nf2⫺/⫺ cells.
(B) An AP-1 luciferase reporter was transfected into wild-type and
Nf2⫺/⫺ immortalized fibroblasts and basal luciferase activity was
measured.
(C) The same AP-1 reporter was transfected into Nf2⫺/⫺ fibroblasts
alone or with 50, 100, 250, or 500 ng of wild-type Nf2 expression
plasmid and resulting luciferase activity was measured. The data
shown in (B) and (C) are representative of twelve independent exper-
iments carried out using four different immortalized cell lines.

To examine whether Nf2-deficiency affected Rac-
mediated cytoskeletal changes in another setting, we
“scrape-wounded” confluent monolayers of wild-type
and Nf2⫺/⫺ primary fibroblasts with a plastic pipette tip
and then treated them with PDGF. As shown in Figure
6B, fifteen minutes after wounding and PDGF treatment,
dramatic membrane ruffling was seen at the leading
edge of the wounded Nf2⫺/⫺ monolayer. At this time
point, wild-type cells at the leading edge of the “wound”
displayed little membrane ruffling.

A positive role for Rac signaling in cell motility is well
established. The link between merlin function and Rac
signaling together with the metastatic nature of murine
Nf2⫺/⫺ tumors suggested that Nf2-deficient cells may
have enhanced motility. Thus, monolayers of wild-type
and Nf2⫺/⫺ MEFs growing in serum were wounded and
followed by phase contrast microscopy over the next
36 hr (Figure 6C). Strikingly, Nf2⫺/⫺ cells migrated to
close the wound approximately two to three times as
fast as wild-type cells (ⵑ15 vs ⵑ36 hr). Similarly, Nf2⫺/⫺
immortalized fibroblasts migrate faster than wild-type
fibroblasts in transwell chamber assays (data not
shown). A recent analysis of
the function of Rho
GTPases in wound-healing of fibroblast monolayers re-
vealed that while Rho activity was needed to maintain
adhesion, Rac and Cdc42 activity were more critical in

promoting motility (Nobes and Hall, 1999). Therefore,
the behavior of Nf2-deficient cells is most consistent
with increased Rac- or Cdc42-dependent motility.

Discussion

Cloning of the NF2 gene several years ago revealed that
its encoded protein, merlin, is a member of a family of
cytoskeleton:membrane linkers whose function is not
well understood. Thus, merlin occupies an intriguing
subcellular location for a tumor suppressor. The genera-
tion and study of Nf2-mutant mice confirmed its role as
a tumor suppressor and suggested an additional role
as a metastasis suppressor (McClatchey et al., 1998).
Nevertheless, the molecular basis for the growth sup-
pressing function of merlin remains elusive. We now
provide several lines of evidence linking merlin function
to signaling by the small GTPase Rac. Given the large
body of evidence linking Rac activation to cell transfor-
mation, cell motility and invasion, these results suggest
a mechanism whereby merlin exerts its tumor and me-
tastasis suppressing activities.

Our results indicate that merlin is regulated by Rac.
Although phosphopeptide mapping experiments indicate
that merlin phosphorylation is complex (see Supple-
mental Figure S1), the existing data suggest that Rac-
induced phosphorylation inactivates merlin. Phosphory-
lation of the Rac-responsive S518 residue inhibits merlin
self-association, weakens its association with the cy-
toskeleton, and compromises its ability to inhibit Rac-
mediated signaling. This suggests that the closed or
oligomerized form of merlin is the active, growth sup-
pressing form. This is consistent with the observations
of Gutmann and colleagues, who found that the same
amino acid residues necessary for self-association were
also required for the growth- and motility- suppressing
function of merlin in schwannoma cells (Sherman et al.,
1997; Gutmann et al., 1999). Importantly, Rac is acti-
vated by growth factor stimulation and matrix adhesion,
conditions which also stimulate endogenous merlin
phosphorylation (reviewed in Kjoller and Hall, 1999;
Shaw et al., 1998b). Our finding that merlin is phosphory-
lated in response to activation of Rac/ Cdc42 and not
Rho would indicate that merlin and the ERMs are regu-
lated in distinct ways. Together with the observation
that merlin can heterodimerize with ERM proteins (Gron-
holm et al., 1999; Huang et al., 1998), this suggests that
this family of proteins could serve to coordinate the
activities of these GTPases.

The observation that merlin is phosphorylated in re-
sponse to Rac activation might have suggested that
merlin is an effector of Rac and thus required for some
downstream functions of Rac. Instead, our results are
consistent with a model wherein merlin normally acts to
attenuate Rac signaling. First, overexpression of merlin
inhibits JNK activity as well as Rac-induced AP-1 activity
and transformation. Second, Nf2-deficient cells exhibit
phenotypes that are consistent with hyperactivation of
Rac signaling including increased activation of JNK, AP-1,
membrane ruffling, and motility. Notably, a recent study
also demonstrated that overexpression of merlin inhib-
ited cell spreading and motility (Gutmann et al., 1999).
Together these observations are consistent with a

The Nf2 Tumor Suppressor and Rac Signaling
69

Figure 6. Nf2-Deficient Cells Exhibit
In-
creased Ruffling in Response to PDGF and
Substrate Reattachment and Exhibit
In-
creased Rates of Migration during Wound
Healing
(A) Serum-starved primary fibroblasts were
plated on glass coverslips and fixed 1 hr post-
plating. Cells were then processed for immu-
nocytochemistry using a pan-ERM antibody
to detect endogenous ERM protein localiza-
tion. The ERM proteins are particularly con-
centrated in membrane ruffles in the Nf2⫺/⫺
fibroblasts.
(B) Monolayers of wild-type and Nf2⫺/⫺ pri-
mary fibroblasts were wounded and treated
with 6 ng/ml PDGF. Increased protrusive ruf-
fling is observed in the Nf2⫺/⫺ cells.
(C) Monolayers of wild-type and Nf2⫺/⫺ pri-
mary fibroblasts in full serum were wounded
and examined by phase contrast microscopy
for the next 36 hr. Photos shown were taken
at the time points indicated. Nf2⫺/⫺ cells
closed the wound 2–3⫻ faster than their wild-
type counterparts. Results shown are repre-
sentative of three independent experiments.

model
in which merlin functions as a sensor of Rac
signaling. Phosphorylation of merlin in response to Rac
activation or other stimuli
inactivates merlin, thereby
potentiating Rac signaling; dephosphorylation would re-
store its inhibitory function. This type of mechanism is
analogous to the “feed-forward” mechanism of cell cy-
cle progression established via inactivation of the cell
cycle inhibitor p27 by cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (cdk2)-
dependent phosphorylation and subsequent degrada-
tion (Vlach et al., 1997).

Several recent reports have demonstrated that the
ERM proteins can similarly both regulate the activity of
RhoA and be regulated by phosphorylation downstream
of RhoA. As described above, RhoA-induced phosphor-
ylation of the ERM C terminus is necessary and sufficient
for the formation of apical microvilli (Matsui et al., 1999;
Oshiro et al., 1998; Shaw et al., 1998a). Conversely, a
role for the ERM proteins upstream of the Rho GTPases
has emerged from several studies (Takahashi et al.,
1998; Lamb et al., 2000). In fact, the ERM proteins can
directly bind to RhoGDI and Dbl, negative and positive
regulators, respectively, of Rho GTPases (Takahashi et
al., 1997, 1998). Thus the ERM proteins may serve to
localize regulators of the GTPases to particular sites of
action at the membrane.

We propose that merlin functions as a tumor and me-
tastasis suppressor through its ability to inhibit Rac-
dependent signaling. Human NF2 patients are predis-
posed to developing Schwann cell tumors while Nf2⫹/⫺

mice develop a variety of metastatic cancers. Although
little is known about the function of Rho GTPases in
Schwann cells, human schwannoma cells exhibit actin
cytoskeleton defects consistent with increased activity
of these GTPases (Pelton et al., 1998). It is well estab-
lished that Rac activity is necessary and sufficient for
transformation of several other cell types (Zohn et al.,
1998). In addition, a large body of literature indicates
that Rac activity controls cell motility and invasion. For
example, the Rac exchange factor Tiam-1 was identified
in a screen designed to identify genes that promote cell
invasion in vivo (Habets et al., 1994). In addition, several
studies in normal and tumor cells have found that Rac
is a critical determinant of cell motility and invasion
(Keely et al., 1997; Shaw et al., 1997; Nobes and Hall,
1999). Finally, NIH3T3 cells expressing activated Rac
display increased metastatic potential when injected
into mice (del Peso et al., 1997).

The mechanism by which Rac causes transformation
or affects cell motility is not known; however, multiple
downstream targets are likely required for the full trans-
forming properties of Rac (Joneson et al., 1996; La-
marche et al., 1996; Westwick et al., 1997). For example,
AP-1, a key target of Rac signaling, plays an important
role in cell proliferation and cellular invasion. Known
AP-1 targets include members of the matrix metallopro-
teinase family, which have been repeatedly linked to the
process of tumor metastasis, suggesting a mechanism
by which Nf2 loss leads to metastatic tumor formation

Developmental Cell
70

(Ip and Davis, 1998). Alternatively, Nf2 loss may alter the
function of its direct membrane binding partner CD44,
whose function has been linked to metastatic progres-
sion of a wide variety of human tumors (Sherman et al.,
1994). These two hypotheses are not mutually exclusive.
Indeed, CD44 ligation can activate Rac under certain
conditions, perhaps via direct interaction with the Rac-
specific exchange factor Tiam-1 (Oliferenko et al., 2000;
Bourguignon et al., 2000). Thus by directly binding CD44
and negatively regulating Rac signaling and AP-1 tran-
scription, merlin may be uniquely poised to negatively
regulate tumor metastasis.

Our data do not define the mechanism by which merlin
controls Rac signaling. Extensive mutational analysis of
Rac suggests that the downstream effector pathways
controlling cytoskeletal and transcriptional responses
are distinct. Given that overexpression of merlin effects
both (Figure 5, Gutmann et al., 1999), and both are dereg-
ulated in Nf2-deficient cells (Figures 5 and 6), merlin
may act to modulate Rac directly, or to modulate the
activity of one of its enzymatic regulators. We have been
unable to detect appreciably elevated levels of active
Rac-GTP in Nf2⫺/⫺ cells by measuring the amount of
(active) Rac-GTP bound to its effector Pak (data not
shown; Bagrodia et al., 1998; del Pozo et al., 2000). This
may be due to subtle changes in Rac activity coupled
with the relative insensitivity of this assay or to the fact
that merlin actually functions downstream of Rac as
suggested by the data in Figure 4. In fact, like the ERM
proteins, merlin can also bind to RhoGDI (Maeda et al.,
1999). One possibility is that merlin controls the subcel-
lular localization of Rac or RhoGDI. We have not de-
tected alterations in the subcellular distribution of either
Rac or RhoGDI in Nf2⫺/⫺ fibroblasts by crude cell frac-
tionation; however, a higher resolution analysis is neces-
sary before this hypothesis can be ruled out.

It is likely that merlin normally controls Rac signaling
in a context-dependent manner, an idea that is sup-
ported by the relatively modest elevation of JNK activity
in Nf2⫺/⫺ cells (Figure 5A). Interestingly, a recent study
demonstrated that JNK activation by UV and serum is
inhibited by cell confluence (Lallemand et al., 1998).
Disruption of the actin cytoskeleton reversed this effect,
suggesting cytoskeleton-based, confluence-sensitive
regulation of JNK. Because merlin levels and phosphor-
ylation are also regulated by cell confluence (Shaw et
al., 1998b); merlin is therefore a candidate to mediate
this effect. In fact, we have found that Nf2⫺/⫺ fibroblasts
are not contact inhibited, growing to an extremely high
saturation density and forming a multilayer rather than
a monolayer (our unpublished data).

These studies suggest that the molecular basis for
the tumor and metastasis suppressing function of merlin
is at least partly due to its ability to negatively regulate
Rac signaling. This, in turn, suggests many potential
avenues of research and allows us to consider potential
therapeutic strategies targeted specifically to Rac sig-
naling. For example, Rac is posttranslationally modified
by geranylation (Adamson et al., 1992). Thus, by analogy
to the use of farnesyltransferase inhibitors to block post-
translational modification of Ras, newly developed gera-
nylgeranyltransferase inhibitors may show efficacy in
slowing or preventing tumorigenesis and metastasis in
Nf2⫹/⫺ mice, and ultimately in treating tumors in NF2

patients (Sebti and Hamilton, 2000). Finally, these stud-
ies also provide a broad link to the role of the mem-
brane:cytoskeleton interface in tumor development and
progression.

Experimental Procedures

Cell Culture
NIH3T3 cells (ATCC) were grown in DMEM plus 10% calf serum
(Hyclone). To generate primary Nf2⫺/⫺ fibroblasts, we utilized
lacZ⫹;Nf2⫺/⫺, and lacZ⫹;Nf2⫹/⫹ embryonic stem (ES) cell lines gener-
ated de novo from blastocysts isolated from ROSA26;Nf2⫹/⫺ inter-
crosses (McClatchey et al., 1997). ES cells of each genotype were
used to generate chimeric embryos by blastocyst injection. Embry-
onic fibroblasts harvested from E12.5 chimeric embryos were ex-
panded and selected in G418 (400 ␮g/ml) to obtain pure populations
of each genotype. Each Nf2 mutant allele as well as the ROSA26
transgene contains a single copy of the neoR gene. Multiple ES cell
lines of each genotype were used for each experiment. After one
passage in selection an aliquot of cells was taken for PCR analysis
and lacZ staining to determine whether selection was complete
(McClatchey et al., 1997). Primary cells were used between pas-
sages 4 and 8. Spontaneously immortalized cells were also gener-
ated using the 3T9 protocol (Todaro and Green, 1963).

For wounding assays, a pipette tip (p20) was used to scrape a
monolayer wound; 6 ng/ml of PDGF was added immediately at the
time of wounding. For UV treatment, growing cells were treated with
80J UV-C (Stratalinker; Stratagene) after rinsing with PBS. Following
treatment, fresh media was placed back on the cells for the time
indicated (30 min).

Antibodies
sc331 and sc332 antibodies (Santa Cruz) were used at 1:100 to
detect merlin by immunoblotting. Anti-P-JNK, P-ERK, and ERK anti-
sera were all purchased from New England Biolabs and used ac-
cording to manufacturer’s recommendations. Anti-JNK and anti-
GST antisera were purchased from Santa Cruz. Anti-HA (12CA5)
and anti-Rac antisera were purchased from Boehringer Mannheim
and UBI, respectively. Anti-ERM antisera (CR-22) was provided by
S. Tsukita.

Plasmids
Merlin truncations were generated by PCR amplification of the spec-
ified coding region using oligonucleotides containing flanking Sal I
restriction sites. These PCR products were ligated into the Sal I site
of the previously described HA-modified pCDNA3 or pCI-Neo (Shaw
et al., 1998c). Site-directed mutagenesis of merlin and Rac was
performed using the Quickchange kit (Stratagene) according to
manufacturer’s instruction. Each mutant was sequenced in its en-
tirety. pEBG-RacV12 was supplied by J. Blenis (Chou and Blenis,
1996). All other GTPase and merlin constructs were previously de-
scribed (Shaw et al., 1998a, c). CMV-Lsc and CMV-Dbl were supplied
by J. Glaven and R. Cerione (Glaven et al., 1999). CMV-Tiam1 was
supplied by C. Carpenter. CMV-HA-hPAK1 was supplied by J. Chant
(Brown et al., 1996). AP-1 (7X), SRF, CMV-lacZ, and TK-renilla lucifer-
ase reporters were purchased from Stratagene.

Transcriptional Reporters
Nf2-/- and wild-type immortalized cells were transiently transfected
using Lipofectamine Plus (LTI) according to manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. Cells were transfected with the indicated amount of reporter,
a GFP expression plasmid to monitor transfection efficiency, a TK-
renilla luciferase plasmid, and, where indicated, untagged wild-type,
S518A or S518D merlin, and/or GST-RacV12 expression vectors.
Dual
luciferase quantitation was determined using kits from
Promega.

Indirect Immunoflourescence
Cells plated on glass coverslips were rinsed in PBS and fixed in cold
3.7% paraformaldehyde for 15 min. Cells were then permeabilized in
0.2% Triton X-100 for 10 min and processed for indirect immu-
noflourescence as previously described (Shaw et al., 1998c).

The Nf2 Tumor Suppressor and Rac Signaling
71

Protein Analysis
Total cell lysates were made by washing cells in PBS, followed by
addition of boiling SDS-lysis buffer (10 mM Tris 7.5, 1% SDS, 50
mM NaF, 1 mM NaVO4) to the plate. Protein concentration was
calculated using the BCA assay (Pierce) and Western analysis was
performed as previously described (Shaw et al., 1998b).

Phosphorylation Analysis
NIH3T3 cells seeded at a density of ⵑ0.2 ⫻ 106 per 60 mm plate
were transfected using Lipofectamine Plus (LTI) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were placed in DMEM without
serum 18 hr later. Six hours later, cells were washed in PBS and lysed
in boiling SDS lysis buffer. Phosphatase treatment, orthophosphate
labeling, and detergent extraction analysis were performed as pre-
viously described (Shaw et al., 1998a).

In Vitro Kinase Assays
Kinase assays were performed essentially as described (Hibi et
al., 1993). Briefly, total JNK immunoprecipitated with an anti-JNK
antibody and protein A agarose beads (Pierce) was pelleted and
resuspended in 30 ul kinase buffer with 5 ␮g GST-c-jun (Santa Cruz),
20 ␮l ATP, and 5 ␮Ci [␥32P]ATP and incubated at 30⬚C for 20 min.
Samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE, transferred to Immobilon-P
(Millipore), and subject to autoradiography.

Merlin Self-Association Assays
NIH3T3 cells were transfected with 3 ␮g of each construct per 60
mm plate and lysed in cold NP40 lysis buffer (50 mM Hepes [pH
7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 50 nM NaF, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM
Pefabloc and Complete protease inhibitors [Boehringer Mannheim]).
After pelleting insoluble material, lysates were precleared for 1hr
with Protein A-Sepharose (PAS) beads alone. After pelleting, super-
natants were added to 50 ␮l of premixed 12CA5/PAS beads and
incubated at 4⬚C for 2 hr with rocking. Bound material was pelleted
and washed 3⫻ with NP40 lysis buffer prior to boiling in sample
buffer.

Anchorage-Independent Growth Assays
NIH3T3 cells transfected as described were selected in 0.4 mg/ml
G418 (pCDNA3 NF2) and 0.1 mg/ml hygromycin B (pCGN Rac1L61).
Stably expressing cells were pooled and seeded at a density of
7.5 ⫻ 104 cells per 60 mm dish in DMEM containing 0.3% agar and
10% calf serum. Colony number was visualized after 14 days.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Jeff Settleman, Karen Cichowski, and Spyros
Artavanis-Tsakonas for helpful suggestions on the manuscript and
throughout the course of this study. We thank John Chant, Judith
Glaven, Richard Cerione, Chris Carpenter, and John Blenis for kindly
supplying plasmids, and Sachiro Tsukita for the generous gift of
CR22 anti-ERM antisera. A.I.M was supported by a Burroughs Well-
come Career Development Award, the National Neurofibromatosis
Foundation, the Medical Foundation/Harcourt Charitable Trust, and
the American Cancer Society (RPG0031601) during the course of
these studies.

Received April 19, 2000; revised April 27, 2001.

References

Adamson, P., Marshall, C.J., Hall, A., and Tilbrook, P.A. (1992). Post-
translational modification of p21rho proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 267,
20033–20038.
Aspenstrom, P. (1999). Effectors for the Rho GTPases. Curr. Opin.
Cell Biol. 11, 95–102.
Bagrodia, S., Taylor, S.J., Jordan, K.A., Van Aelst, L., and Cerione,
R.A. (1998). A novel regulator of p21-activated kinases. J. Biol.
Chem. 273, 23633–23636.
Bourguignon, L.Y., Zhu, H., Shao, L., and Chen, Y.W. (2000). CD44
interaction with tiam1 promotes Rac1 signaling and hyaluronic acid-
mediated breast tumor cell migration. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 1829–1838.

Bretscher, A., Chambers, D., Nguyen, R., and Reczek, D. (2000).
ERM-merlin and EBP50 protein families in plasma membrane orga-
nization and function. Ann. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 16, 113–143.
Brown, J.L., Stowers, L., Baer, M., Trejo, J., Coughlin, S., and Chant,
J. (1996). Human Ste20 homologue hPAK1 links GTPases to the
JNK, MAP kinase pathway. Curr. Biol. 6, 598–605.
Chou, M..M., and Blenis, J. (1996). The 70kDa S6 kinase complexes
with and is activated by the Rho family G proteins Cdc42 and Rac1.
Cell 85, 573–583.
Coso, O.A., Chiariello, M., Yu, J.C., Teramoto, H., Crespo, P., Xu,
N., Miki, T., and Gutkind, J.S. (1995). The small GTP-binding proteins
Rac1 and Cdc42 regulate the activity of the JNK/SAPK signaling
pathway. Cell 81, 1137–1146.
del Peso, L., Hernandez-Alcoceba, R., Embade, N., Carnero, A.,
Esteve, P., Paje, C., and Lacal, J.C. (1997). Rho proteins induce
metastatic properties in vivo. Oncogene 15, 3047–3057.
del Pozo, M..A., Price, L.S., Alderson, N.B., Ren, X.D., and Schwartz,
M.A. (2000). Adhesion to the extracellular matrix regulates the cou-
pling of the small GTPase Rac to its effector PAK. EMBO J. 19,
2008–2014.
Glaven, J.A., Whitehead, I., Bagrodia, S., Kay, R., and Cerione, R.A.
(1999). The Dbl-related protein, Lfc, localizes to microtubules and
mediates the activation of Rac signaling pathways in cells. J. Biol.
Chem. 274, 2279–2285.
Gronholm, M., Sainio, M., Zhao, F., Heiska, L., Vaheri, A., and Carpen,
O. (1999). Homotypic and heterotypic interaction of the neurofibro-
matosis 2 tumor suppressor protein merlin and the ERM protein
ezrin. J. Cell Sci. 112, 895–904.
Gusella, J.F., Ramesh, V., MacCollin, M., and Jacoby, L. (1999).
Merlin: the neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor. Biochem. Bio-
phys. Acta 1423, M29–36.
Gutmann, D..H., Aylsworth, A., Carey, J.C., Korf, B., Marks, J., Pyer-
itz, R.E., Rubenstein, A., and Viskochil, D. (1997). The diagnostic
evaluation and multidisciplinary management of neurofibromatosis
1 and neurofibromatosis 2. JAMA 278, 51–57.
Gutmann, D..H., Sherman, L., Seftor, L., Haipek, C., Hoang Lu, K.,
and Hendrix, M. (1999). Increased expression of the NF2 tumor
suppressor gene product, merlin, impairs cell motility, adhesion and
spreading. Hum. Mol. Genet. 8, 267–275.
Habets, G.G., Scholtes, E.H., Zuydgeest, D., van der Kammen, R.A.,
Stam, J.C., Berns, A., and Collard, J.G. (1994). Identification of an
invasion-inducing gene, Tiam-1, that encodes a protein with homol-
ogy to GDP-GTP exchangers for Rho-like proteins. Cell 77, 537–549.
Hibi, M., Lin, A., Smeal, T., Minden, A., and Karin, M. (1993). Identifi-
cation of an oncoprotein- and UV-responsive protein kinase that
binds and potentiates the c-Jun activation domain. Genes & Dev.
7, 2135–2148.
Huang, L., Ichimaru, E., Pestonjamasp, K., Cui, X., Nakamura, H.,
Lo, G.Y., Lin, F.I., Luna, E.J., and Furthmayr, H. (1998). Merlin differs
from moesin in binding to F-actin and in its intra- and intermolecular
interactions. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 248, 548–553.
Huang, L., Wong, T.Y., Lin, R.C., and Furthmayr, H. (1999). Replace-
ment of Threonine 558, a Critical Site of Phosphorylation of Moesin
in Vivo, with Aspartate activates F-actin Binding of Moesin. Regula-
tion by conformational change. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 12803–12810.
Ip, Y.T., and Davis, R.J. (1998). Signal transduction by the c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK)- from inflammation to development. Curr.
Opin. Cell Biol. 10, 205–219.
Joneson, T., McDonough, M., Bar-Sagi, D., and Van Aelst, L. (1996).
RAC regulation of actin polymerization and proliferation by a path-
way distinct from Jun kinase. Science 274, 1374–1376. Erratum:
Science Apr 11;276, 1997.
Keely, P.J., Westwick, J.K., Whitehead, I.P., Der, C.J., and Parise,
L.V. (1997). Cdc42 and Rac1 induce integrin-mediated cell motility
and invasiveness through PI(3)K. Nature 390, 632–636.
Khosravi-Far, R., Solski, P.A., Clark, G., Kinch, M., and Der, C. (1995).
Activation of Rac1, RhoA, and Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases
is required for Ras transformation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15, 6443–6453.

Developmental Cell
72

Kjoller, L., and Hall, A. (1999). Signaling to Rho GTPases. Exp. Cell.
Res. 253, 166–179.
Lallemand, D., Ham, J., Garbay, S., Bakiri, L., Traincard, F.,
Jeannequin, O., Pfarr, C.M., and Yaniv, M. (1998). Stress-activated
protein kinases are negatively regulated by cell density. EMBO J.
17, 5615–5626.
Lamarche, N., Tapon, N., Stowers, L., Burbelo, P.D., Aspenstrom,
P., Bridges, T., Chant, J., and Hall, A. (1996). Rac and Cdc42 induce
actin polymerization and G1 cell cycle progression independently of
p65PAK and the JNK/SAPK MAP kinase cascade. Cell 87, 519–529.
Lamb, R.F., Roy, C., Diefenbach, T.J., Vinters, H.V., Johnson, M.W.,
Jay, D.G., and Hall, A. (2000). The TSC1 tumour suppressor hamartin
regulates cell adhesion through ERM proteins and the GTPase Rho.
Nat. Cell Biol. 2, 281–287.
Maeda, M., Matsui, T., Imamura, M., Tsukita, S., and Tsukita, S.
(1999). Expression level, subcellular distribution and rho-GDI bind-
ing affinity of merlin in comparison with Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin pro-
teins. Oncogene 18, 4788–4797.
Matsui, T., Maeda, M., Doi, Y., Yonemura, S., Amano, M., Kaibuchi,
K., Tsukita, S., and Tsukita, S. (1998). Rho-kinase phosphorylates
COOH-terminal threonines of ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins
and regulates their head-to-tail association. J. Cell Biol. 140,
647–657.
Matsui, T., Yonemura, S., Tsukita, S., and Tsukita, S. (1999). Activa-
tion of ERM proteins in vivo by Rho involves phosphatidyl-inositol
4-phosphate 5-kinase and not ROCK kinases. Curr. Biol. 9, 1259–
1262.
McClatchey, A.I., Saotome, I., Mercer, K., Crowley, D., Gusella, J.F.,
Bronson, R.T., and Jacks, T. (1998). Mice heterozygous for a muta-
tion at the Nf2 tumor suppressor locus develop a range of highly
metastatic tumors. Genes Dev. 12, 1121–1133.
McClatchey, A.I., Saotome, I., Ramesh, V., Gusella, J.F., and Jacks,
T. (1997). The Nf2 tumor suppressor gene product is essential for
extra embryonic development immediately prior to gastrulation.
Genes Dev. 11, 1253–1265.
Minden, A., Lin, A., Claret, F., Abo, A., and Karin, M. (1995). Selective
activation of the JNK signaling cascade and c-Jun transcriptional
activity by the small GTPases Rac and Cdc42Hs. Cell 81, 1147–1157.
Murthy, A., Gonzalez-Agosti, C., Cordero, E., Pinney, D., Candia, C.,
Solomon, F., Gusella, J., and Ramesh, V. (1998). NHE-RF, a regula-
tory cofactor for Na(⫹)-H⫹ exchange, is a common interactor for
merlin and ERM (MERM) proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 1273–1276.
Nguyen, R., Reczek, D., and Bretscher, A. (2000). Hierarchy of merlin
and ezrin N- and C-terminal domain interactions in homo- and het-
erotypic associations and their relationship to binding of scaffolding
proteins EBP50 and E3KARP. J. Biol. Chem., in press.
Nobes, C.D., and Hall, A. (1995). Rho, rac, and cdc42 GTPases
regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated
with actin stress fibers, lamellipodia, and filopodia. Cell 81, 53–62.
Nobes, C.D., and Hall, A. (1999). Rho GTPases Control Polarity,
Protrusion, and Adhesion during Cell Movement. J. Cell Biol. 144,
1235–1244.
Oliferenko, S., Kaverina, I., Small, J.V., and Huber, L.A. (2000). Hya-
luronic acid (HA) binding to CD44 activates rac1 and induces lamelli-
podia outgrowth. J. Cell Biol. 148, 1159–1164.
Oshiro, N., Fukata, Y., and Kaibuchi, K. (1998). Phosphorylation of
moesin by rho-associated kinase (Rho-kinase) plays a crucial role
in the formation of microvilli-like structures. J. Biol. Chem. 273,
34663–34666.
Pelton, P.D., Sherman, L., Rizvi, T., Marchionni, M., Wood, P., Fried-
man, R., and Ratner, N. (1998). Ruffling membrane, stress fiber, cell
spreading and proliferation abnormalities in human schwannoma
cells. Oncogene 17, 2195–2209.
Qiu, R.G., Chen, J., Kirn, D., McCormick, F., and Symons, M. (1995).
An essential role for Rac in Ras transformation. Nature 374, 457–459.
Ren, X.D., Kiosses, W.B., and Schwartz, M.A. (1999). Regulation
of the small GTP-binding protein Rho by cell adhesion and the
cytoskeleton. EMBO J. 18, 578–585.

Sainio, M., Zhao, F., Heiska, L., Turunen, O., den Bakker, M., Zwar-
thoff, E., Lutchman, M., Rouleau, G.A., Jaaskelainen, J., Vaheri, A.,
and Carpen, O. (1997). Neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor pro-
tein colocalizes with ezrin and CD44 and associates with actin-
containing cytoskeleton. J. Cell Sci. 110, 2249–2260.
Sebti, S.M., and Hamilton, A.D. (2000). Farnesyltransferase and gera-
nylgeranyltransferase I inhibitors in cancer therapy: important mech-
anistic and bench to bedside issues. Expert Opin.Investig. Drugs.
9, 2767–2782.
Shaw, L.M., Rabinovitz, I., Wang, H.H., Toker, A., and Mercurio, A.M.
(1997). Activation of phosphoinositide 3-OH kinase by the alpha6-
beta4 integrin promotes carcinoma invasion. Cell 91, 949–960.
Shaw, R.J., Henry, M., Solomon, F., and Jacks, T. (1998a). RhoA-
dependent phosphorylation and relocalization of ERM proteins into
apical membrane/actin protrusions in fibroblasts. Mol. Biol. Cell 9,
403–419.
Shaw, R.J., McClatchey, A.I., and Jacks, T. (1998b). Regulation of
the neurofibromatosis type 2 tumor suppressor protein, merlin, by
adhesion and growth arrest stimuli. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 7757–7764.
Shaw, R.J., McClatchey, A.I., and Jacks, T. (1998c). Localization
and functional domains of the neurofibromatosis type II tumor sup-
pressor, merlin. Cell Growth Diff. 9, 287–296.
Sherman, L., Sleeman, J., Herrlich, P., and Ponta, H. (1994). Hyaluro-
nate receptors: key players in growth, differentiation, migration and
tumor progression. Curr. Op. Cell Biol. 6, 726–733.
Sherman, L., Xu, H.M., Geist, R.T., Saporito-Irwin, S., Howells, N.,
Ponta, H., Herrlich, P., and Gutmann, D.H. (1997). Interdomain bind-
ing mediates tumor growth suppression by the NF2 gene product.
Oncogene 15, 2505–2509.
Simons, P.C., Pietromonaco, S.F., Reczek, D., Bretscher, A., and
Elias, L. (1998). C-terminal threonine phosphorylation activates ERM
proteins to link the cell’s cortical lipid bilayer to the cytoskeleton.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 253, 561–565.
Takahashi, K., Sasaki, T., Mammoto, A., Takaishi, K., Kameyama,
T., Tsukita, S., and Takai, Y. (1997). Direct interaction of the Rho
GDP dissociation inhibitor with ezrin/radixin/moesin initiates the ac-
tivation of the Rho small G protein. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 23371–23375.
Takahashi, K., Sasaki, T., Mammoto, A., Takaishi, K., Imanura, H.,
Nakano, K., Kodama, A., and Takai, Y. (1998). Interaction of radixin
with Rho small G protein GDP/GTP exchange protein Dbl. Oncogene
16, 3279–3284.
Tikoo, A., Varga, M., Ramesh, V., Gusella, J., and Maruta, H. (1994).
An anti-Ras function of neurofibromatosis type 2 gene product (NF2/
Merlin). J. Biol. Chem. 269, 23387–23390.
Todaro G.J., and Green H. (1963). Quantitative studies of the growth
of mouse embryo cells in culture and their development into estab-
lished lines. J. Cell Biol. 17, 299–313.
Van Aelst, L., and D’Souza-Schorey, C. (1997). Rho GTPases and
signaling networks. Genes Dev. 11, 2295–2322.
Vlach, J., Hennecke, S., and Amati, B. (1997). Phosphorylation-
dependent degradation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p27. EMBO J. 16, 5334–5344.
Westwick, J.K., Lambert, Q.T., Clark, G.J., Symons, M., Van Aelst, L.,
Pestell, R.G., and Der, C.J. (1997). Rac regulation of transformation,
gene expression, and actin organization by multiple, PAK-indepen-
dent pathways. Mol. Cell. Biol. 17, 1324–1335.
Zohn, I.M., Campbell, S.L., Khosravi-Far, R., Rossman, K.L., and
Der, C.J. (1998). Rho family proteins and Ras transformation: the
RHOad less traveled gets congested. Oncogene 17, 1415–1438.

