81

REVIEW

Guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of individuals with
neurofibromatosis 1
Rosalie E Ferner, Susan M Huson, Nick Thomas, Celia Moss,
Harry Willshaw, D Gareth Evans, Meena Upadhyaya,
Richard Towers, Michael Gleeson, Christine Steiger, Amanda Kirby
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

This article is available free on JMG online
via the JMG Unlocked open access trial,
funded by the Joint Information Systems
Committee. For further information, see
http://jmg.bmj.com/cgi/content/full/42/
2/97

J Med Genet 2007;44:81–88. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.045906

Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) is a common neurocutaneous
condition with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.
The complications are diverse and disease expression varies,
even within families. Progress in molecular biology and
neuroimaging and the development of mouse models have
helped to elucidate the aetiology of NF1 and its clinical
manifestations. Furthermore, these advances have raised the
prospect of therapeutic intervention for this complex and
distressing disease. Members of the United Kingdom
Neurofibromatosis Association Clinical Advisory Board
collaborated to produce a consensus statement on the current
guidelines for diagnosis and management of NF1. The
proposals are based on published clinical studies and on the
pooled knowledge of experts in neurofibromatosis with
experience of providing multidisciplinary clinical and molecular
services for NF1 patients. The consensus statement discusses the
diagnostic criteria, major differential diagnoses, clinical
manifestations and the present strategies for monitoring and
management of NF1 complications.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

dating

D escriptions of individuals purported to have

neurofibromatosis have been discovered in
manuscripts
from 1000 AD.1
However,
it was not until 1881 that von
Recklinghausen coined the term ‘‘neurofibroma’’
when he observed that this benign tumour arose
from the peripheral nerve sheath.2 His colleagues
honoured his contribution by naming the condi-
tion von Recklinghausen’s disease. However, the
different
forms of neurofibromatosis were not
separated and delineated until the latter part of
the twentieth century (tables 1, 2). The National
Institutes of Health Consensus Development
Conference formulated the diagnostic criteria for
neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1), underlining the pivotal
involvement of the skin, bone and the nervous
system in the condition (table 1).3 In 1990, the NF1
gene was cloned on chromosome 17q11.2.4 5
Neurofibromin, the gene product, is ubiquitously
expressed at high levels in the nervous system and
functions as a tumour suppressor.6–8 Loss of
neurofibromin through mutation leads to an
increased risk of developing benign and malignant
tumours in affected individuals.

See end of article for
authors’ affiliations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Correspondence to:
Dr Rosalie E Ferner,
Department of Neurology,
Guy’s Hospital, St Thomas’
St, London SE1 9RT, UK;
rosalie.ferner@kcl.ac.uk

Received 15 August 2006
Revised 14 October 2006
Accepted 16 October 2006
Published Online First
14 November 2006
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

DIAGNOSIS OF NF1
NF1 has a birth incidence of 1 in 2500 to 1 in 3000,
the diagnosis is based on clinical assessment and
two or more of the features in table 1 are required.3 9
These diagnostic criteria are robust and have
stood the test of time well. Clinicians should be
aware that some individuals with mosaic/segmental
NF1 fulfil the diagnostic criteria as they present
with six or more cafe´ au lait patches with skin-fold
freckling or neurofibromas. However,
the skin
manifestations are in a restricted segment of the
body (see section on differential diagnosis).10
Approximately half of NF1 sufferers are the first
in their family to have the condition.11 Children
with six cafe´ au lait patches alone and no family
history should be followed up as if they have the
disease, as 95% of
them will develop NF1.12
Occasionally, other signs of NF1 may not develop
until late teens or early twenties and slit lamp
examination for Lisch nodules might be helpful in
these children. NF1 mutational analysis clarifies the
diagnosis in some uncertain cases and in indivi-
duals contemplating prenatal diagnosis (see section
on prenatal diagnosis). However, genetic testing is
not advocated routinely and expert consultation is
advised before it
is undertaken. Furthermore,
biopsy of asymptomatic cutaneous neurofibromas
should not be undertaken for diagnostic purposes in
individuals with clearcut NF1.

Hyperintense lesions on T2 weighted brain MRI
(formerly called UBOs) are probably caused by
aberrant myelination or gliosis, and are pathogno-
monic of NF1.13 They occur most commonly in
children of 8–16 years old, tend to disappear in
adulthood and have a tenuous link with cognitive
impairment (see section on cognitive impair-
ment).14–16 The presence of these lesions can assist
the diagnosis of NF1 but MRI under anaesthetic is
not warranted for this purpose in young children.17

Differential diagnosis of NF1
The differential diagnoses of NF1 include other
forms of neurofibromatosis, conditions with cafe´
au lait patches or with pigment changes confused
with cafe´ au lait patches. Likewise, tumours or
localised body overgrowth can be mistaken for
neurofibromas (table 2).18–24

Abbreviations: MPNST, malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumours; NF1, NF2, neurofibromatosis 1, 2; OPG, optic
pathway gliomas

www.jmedgenet.com

82

Ferner, Huson, Thomas, et al

Table 1 Diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1)

(NIH consensus development conference 1988)3

l 6 or more cafe´ au lait macules (.0.5 cm in children or .1.5 cm in

adults)

l 2 or more cutaneous/subcutaneous neurofibromas or one plexiform

neurofibroma

l Axillary or groin freckling
l Optic pathway glioma
l 2 or more Lisch nodules (iris hamartomas seen on slit lamp examination)
l Bony dysplasia (sphenoid wing dysplasia, bowing of long bone ¡

pseudarthrosis)

l First degree relative with NF1

It should be emphasised that one or two cafe´ au lait patches
occur in 10% of the general population. Children with 3–5 cafe´
au lait patches but no other signs of NF1 should be followed up
in a specialist neurofibromatosis clinic as they might have
mosaic NF1 or neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2). Mosaic NF1 occurs
as a result of a somatic mutation in the NF1 gene, the
proportion of the body affected depending on the time of the
mutation in embryonic development.10 The importance of
making the diagnosis is that NF1 complications are relatively
infrequent in segmental NF1 and there is a much lower risk of
recurrence in offspring. Homozygotes for one of the genes
causing hereditary non-polyposis cancer of the colon have cafe´
au lait patches and an affected first degree relative. However,
the affected relative is a sibling and the parents are normal.19
The only subtype of NF1 that is distinct and has a uniform
phenotype in families is Watson syndrome. It is characterised
by pulmonary stenosis, cognitive impairment, cafe´ au lait
patches and few, if any, cutaneous neurofibromas.18 There is no
clear evidence that neurofibromatosis–Noonan syndrome exists
as a distinct phenotype with features of both syndromes. It is
likely that some individuals with NF1 simply have facial
features akin to those of Noonan syndrome and these
characteristics are not consistent within families. Molecular
studies indicate that neurofibromatosis–Noonan syndrome is
caused by mutations of the NF1 gene, some of which have been
identified in patients with classical NF1.20

It

NF2 is an autosomal dominant neurocutaneous disease that
is clinically and genetically distinct from NF1 and occurs in
approximately 1 in 25 000 individuals.21
is caused by
inactivating mutations on chromosome 22q11.2 and is char-
acterised by bilateral vestibular schwannomas.22 23 Affected
individuals also develop schwannomas on other cranial, spinal,
peripheral and cutaneous nerves. Cafe´ au lait patches are less
numerous than in NF1 and the skin lesions are predominantly
schwannomas. Central nervous system meningiomas and
gliomas are observed and slit lamp examination reveals juvenile
subcapsular lens opacities in the majority of patients.23

Subcutaneous, peripheral nerve and spinal schwannomas
develop in schwannomatosis without vestibular schwannomas
or the ophthalmological features of NF2.24

Multiple lipomas occur primarily on the trunk, proximal
thighs and distal arms, and are inherited in an autosomal
dominant fashion. Biopsy is sometimes necessary to differ-
entiate cutaneous neurofibromas from schwannomas and
lipomas.

ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF CLINICAL
PROBLEMS
Once the diagnosis is considered, referral should be made to
any clinician skilled in the diagnosis of NF1,
including
geneticists, paediatricians, neurologists or dermatologists.
Routine screening investigations are not recommended for the

www.jmedgenet.com

Table 2 Differential diagnosis of neurofibromatosis 1
(NF1)10 18–24

Other forms of neurofibromatosis
l Segmental/mosaic NF1
l Watson syndrome
l Autosomal dominant multiple cafe´ au lait patches alone (some allelic

with NF1)

l Neurofibromatosis 2
l Schwannomatosis
Other conditions with cafe´ au lait patches
l McCune–Albright syndrome
l DNA repair syndromes
l Homozygosity for one of the genes causing hereditary non-polyposis

cancer of the colon.

Conditions with pigmented macules confused with NF1
l LEOPARD syndrome
l Neurocutaneous melanosis
l Peutz–Jeghers syndrome
l Piebaldism
Localised overgrowth syndromes
l Klippel–Trenauny–Weber syndrome
l Proteus syndrome
Conditions causing tumours confused with neurofibromas
l Lipomatosis
l Banayan–Riley–Ruvalcuba syndrome
l Fibromatoses
l Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B

(see

pathway

section on optic

detection of the majority of complications associated with the
condition. However, visual assessment should be performed in
young children because they do not complain of visual
impairment
glioma).
Furthermore, given the high frequency of
learning and
behavioural problems in NF1 children, monitoring is essential
(see section on cognitive impairment). Baseline brain and spine
MRI, and routine imaging of the chest and abdomen to identify
asymptomatic tumours, do not influence management and
should not be undertaken.

The mainstay of management is age specific monitoring of
disease manifestations and patient education. At all ages it is
most likely that severe disease complications such as malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumours
(MPNST) will become
symptomatic between appointments. NF1 individuals need to
be encouraged to seek review of any unusual symptoms and ask
if they are related to NF1. All children with uncomplicated
disease need to be assessed once a year (table 3), ideally by one
paediatrician in each area to facilitate coordinated care. Older
adults should be offered the opportunity of attending the clinic
on an annual basis. Young adults aged 16–25 years are at a
vulnerable stage of life and require education about NF1 and its
possible complications. Counselling about disease inheritance
and psychological support are advised, particularly as neurofi-
bromas often start to develop in late adolescence.

Monitoring after

the mid-twenties depends on patient
preference and disease severity. Adults with severe disease
have usually been identified by this stage and require lifelong
monitoring in an NF1 clinic. Adults with mild disease have a
much lower risk of complications. If they elect not to attend a
specialist NF1 clinic, they should be fully conversant with the
problems that they might encounter. The minimum require-
ment for an asymptomatic adult is to have annual blood
pressure measurement and to be aware of unusual symptoms,
particularly the clinical features of malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumours and of spinal cord compression (see MPNST
and neurological complications). Currently, the few specialist
services for adults with NF1 are run by geneticists and
neurologists. Further support is available through a small
network of neurofibromatosis specialist advisors developed by
the Neurofibromatosis Association and part funded by the

Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of neurofibromatosis 1

83

Table 3 Assessment of children with neurofibromatosis 1

The following should be recorded at each annual visit

l Development and progress at school
l Visual symptoms, visual acuity and fundoscopy until age 7 years (optic pathway glioma*, glaucoma)
l Head circumference (rapid increase might indicate tumour or hydrocephalus)
l Height (abnormal pubertal development)
l Weight (abnormal pubertal development)
l Pubertal development (delayed/precocious puberty due to pituitary/hypothalamic lesion)
l Blood pressure (consider renal artery stenosis, phaeochromocytoma)
l Cardiovascular examination (congenital heart disease, especially pulmonary stenosis)
l Evaluation of spine (scoliosis ¡ underlying plexiform neurofibromas)
l Evaluation of the skin (cutaneous, subcutaneous and plexiform neurofibromas)
l System examination if specific symptoms

*Asymptomatic children should also have one baseline assessment of colour vision and visual fields at the appropriate
developmental age.

National Health Service. The advisors have a nursing or social
work background and act as patient advocates, providing
support on medical, educational and emotional
issues and
coordinating with other professionals. An expansion of the
specialist neurofibromatosis clinics and the specialist advisor
network would enhance the provision of a cohesive pattern of
care throughout the UK.

The manifestations of NF1 are widespread and affect many of

the body systems (table 4)12

The skin
Cafe´ au lait patches and skin-fold freckling do not usually cause
complications; however, some patients are distressed by the
appearance of this pigmentation and may be helped by skin
camouflage advice. There is no evidence to support the routine
use of laser treatment for cafe´ au lait patches.

Hypopigmented macules may coexist with cafe´ au lait spots

in NF1 and are found in a similar distribution.

Naevus anaemicus and benign cherry angiomas (Campbell
de Morgan spots) are observed more frequently in NF1 than in
the general population, irrespective of age. Juvenile xantho-
granulomas are benign orange papules that appear transiently
on the head and trunk in 1% of young children. It has been
suggested that there is an increased risk of chronic myeloid
leukaemia in children with NF1 and xanthogranulomas.
However, routine haematological testing is not warranted in
this group and a recent follow-up study did not reveal any
haematological malignancies in 14 children with NF1 and
xanthogranulomas.25

Neurofibromas
Neurofibromas are benign peripheral nerve sheath tumours
that are focal cutaneous or subcutaneous, or diffuse or nodular
plexiform lesions. Cutaneous neurofibromas are found in the
majority of NF1 individuals, usually develop in the late teens or
early twenties but occasionally emerge in early childhood.12 26
Initially, some lesions have a purplish tinge and may become
pedunculated as they grow. The number of neurofibromas
varies between individuals and within families.12 26 There have
been no reports of these skin tumours undergoing malignant
change but they often catch on clothing and cause cosmetic
problems, transient stinging and itching. Irritation does not
usually respond to antihistamines and the benefit of mast cell
stabilisers is uncertain; excessive heat should be avoided and
the use of emollients is advised.

Cutaneous neurofibromas can be removed if they cause any
of the problems mentioned above. Referral to surgeons skilled
in the removal of neurofibromas is advocated and plastic
surgeons should be consulted for neurofibromas on the face
and neck. There is no proven benefit of carbon dioxide laser
treatment over surgical removal of troublesome neurofibromas
but laser may be helpful for some small lesions. There is a risk
of hypertrophic scarring and of recurrence of neurofibromas
after removal.

Subcutaneous neurofibromas are evident on palpation of the
skin, may be tender to touch and cause tingling in the
distribution of the affected nerve.26 Malignant change rarely
occurs and if removal is contemplated, expert advice should be

Table 4 Frequency and age of onset of major clinical manifestations of neurofibromatosis 1

Clinical manifestation

Frequency (%)

Age of onset

Cafe´ au lait patches
Skin-fold freckling
Lisch nodules
Cutaneous neurofibromas
Plexiform neurofibromas
Disfiguring facial plexiform neurofibromas
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour
Scoliosis
Scoliosis requiring surgery
Pseudarthrosis of tibia
Renal artery stenosis
Phaeochromocytoma
Severe cognitive impairment (IQ ,70)
Learning problems
Epilepsy
Optic pathway glioma
Cerebral gliomas
Sphenoid wing dysplasia
Aqueduct stenosis

.99
85
90–95
.99
30 (visible) –50 (on imaging)
3–5
2–5 (8–13% lifetime risk)
10
5
2
2
2
4–8
30–60
6–7
15 (only 5% symptomatic)
2–3
,1
1.5

Birth to 12 y
3 y to adolescence
.3 y
.7 y (usually late adolescence)
Birth to 18 y
Birth to 5 y
5–75 y
Birth to 18 y
Birth to 18 y
Birth to 3 y
Lifelong
.10 y
Birth
Birth
Lifelong
Birth to 7 y (up to 30 y)
Lifelong
Congenital
Lifelong

www.jmedgenet.com

84

Ferner, Huson, Thomas, et al

sought from NF1 specialists or soft tissue tumour/peripheral
nerve surgeons as removal occasionally results in neurological
deficit.

Plexiform neurofibromas cause significant morbidity because
they are diffuse, grow along the length of a nerve and may
involve multiple nerve branches and plexi.26 The lesions can be
nodular, and multiple discrete tumours may develop on nerve
trunks. Plexiform neurofibromas infiltrate surrounding soft
tissue and bony hypertrophy is evident in some instances.26 A
large area of pigmentation often betrays the presence of a deep
seated neurofibroma. The growth rate is unpredictable and
there may be periods of
rapid growth, particularly in
adolescence, followed by periods of relative inactivity. Facial
plexiform neurofibromas causing disfigurement appear during
the first three years of life if they are to develop at all.12 Removal
of benign plexiform neurofibromas is frequently very difficult
due to encroachment of the tumour on surrounding structures
and nerves and its inherent vascular nature. Life threatening
haemorrhage can occur, particularly with facial plexiform
neurofibromas. Expert advice from experienced soft tissue
tumour or plastic surgeons is essential before removal. A
number of agents (including farnesyl transferase inhibitors,
antiangiogenesis drugs and fibroblast inhibitors) are being used
in clinical trials to assess their therapeutic effect on growth of
plexiform neurofibromas.27 Currently,
there is insufficient
evidence to support the use of any of these drugs in patients
with symptomatic plexiform neurofibromas, and radiotherapy
is contraindicated in benign tumours because of the risk of
malignancy.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours
There is an 8–13% lifetime risk of developing MPNST in NF1,
predominantly in individuals aged 20–35 years.28 These cancers
are hard to detect, metastasise widely and often augur a poor
prognosis.29 MPNST usually, but not invariably, arise in pre-
existing plexiform neurofibromas. NF1 patients should seek an
urgent expert opinion from specialist neurofibromatosis clinics
or soft tissue tumour units if they develop any of the following
in association with a subcutaneous or plexiform neurofibroma:
persistent pain lasting for longer than a month or pain that
disturbs sleep; new or unexplained neurological deficit or
sphincter disturbance; alteration in the texture of a neurofi-
broma from soft to hard; and rapid increase in the size of a
neurofibroma.29 Clinicians should be aware that occasionally
symptoms arise from a plexiform neurofibroma that is not
visible or palpable.

Individuals who have been treated with radiotherapy, have a
personal or family history of cancer, optic pathway glioma,
whole gene deletion, multiple subcutaneous neurofibromas or
neurofibromatous neuropathy might have an increased risk of
developing MPNST and require careful clinical monitoring.29–33
18Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography allows the
visualisation and quantification of glucose metabolism in cells
and is a useful diagnostic tool
in differentiating benign
plexiform neurofibromas from MPNST.34 The aim of treatment
is complete removal of the lesion with tumour free margins.29
Adjuvant radiotherapy has a role in treating MPNST larger than
5 cm, high grade lesions and incompletely excised tumours.29
Ifosfamide and doxorubicin are administered as palliative
therapy in patients with metastatic disease and to reduce the
size of a tumour with the aim of making it amenable to
surgery.29

Glomus tumours
An association has been reported recently between glomus
tumours and NF1.35 Glomus bodies are small, dermal,
encapsulated arteriovenous anastomoses, commonest in the
fingertips where they regulate peripheral blood flow and hence

www.jmedgenet.com

body temperature. The glomus tumour is usually solitary but
multiple lesions have been observed in NF1 individuals.35 The
lesion is located most frequently under the fingernail and
presents with pain, cold sensitivity and excruciating very
localised tenderness. The symptoms should be differentiated
from those caused by subcutaneous neurofibromas and the
treatment is local excision of the tumour.

Neurological problems
Neurological examination should be undertaken during annual
assessment. Any unexplained neurological signs and symptoms
merit referral to a neurologist. Urgent advice is mandatory if
individuals experience acute or progressive sensory disturbance,
motor deficit and incoordination or sphincter disturbance
which could be indicative of an intracranial lesion or spinal
cord compression. Headaches on waking, morning vomiting
and altered consciousness are suggestive of raised intracranial
pressure and constitute a neurological emergency.

Neurological complications develop from tumours and
malformations, including aqueduct stenosis.12 36 Skull defor-
mity due to sphenoid wing dysplasia leads to pulsating
exophthalmos as the temporal lobe herniates into the orbit.12
Severe scoliosis deforms
the spine and results in cord
compression and respiratory compromise.12 Neurological seque-
lae are the consequence of pressure on peripheral and spinal
nerves and the spinal cord. Epilepsy is usually mild, occurs in
approximately 6–7% of NF1 individuals and is likely to be
related to an underlying cortical dysgenesis.37 Cerebrovascular
disease, including carotid artery stenosis/occlusion, haemor-
rhage and aneurysm is part of the spectrum of NF1 vasculo-
pathy.38 The causes of cognitive impairment, neurofibromatous
neuropathy and multiple sclerosis in NF1 remain unclear.33 39 40

Cognitive problems and behavioural difficulties
Cognitive problems are the commonest neurological complica-
tion in NF1 individuals and usually present as an IQ in the low
average range; severe intellectual deficit with an IQ ,70 is
rare.39 41 42 Specific learning problems have been observed in 30–
60% of NF1 children.39 41–43 A child with a specific learning
difficulty will fail to achieve his or her full academic potential,
regardless of cultural or socioeconomic background, and in the
absence of overt neurological, genetic or general medical
problems. The disorder may be evident despite a normal or,
more rarely, above average intelligence and includes clumsi-
spatial problems,
ness,
deficits.
working memory
attention
Behavioural problems comprise sleep disturbance,
impaired
socialisation, low self esteem and poor interpretation of social
cues. There is an increased frequency of attention deficit
hyperactivity and of autistic spectrum disorders.44 45

reading/writing difficulties, visual

impairment

and

Ideally a detailed developmental assessment should be
performed as soon as possible and definitely before school.
Progress at school should be ascertained as part of the yearly
assessment with enquiries about the child’s sleep patterns,
ability to focus on an activity, distractibility, social interaction
and fine and gross motor skills. NF1 children frequently have
difficulty in dressing, holding a pencil, hopping, running and
riding a bike compared with non-affected peers. Ligament
laxity can contribute to delay in acquiring fine and gross motor
skills. A special educational needs coordinator needs to be
involved at an early stage and an educational statement should
be prepared if appropriate. Close liaison between teachers,
educational psychologists, occupational therapists and commu-
nity paediatricians ensures that the child receives the optimum
assessment and remedial support. Children with attention
deficit
to methylphenidate under
experienced supervision, and cognitive behavioural therapy
can be helpful.41 45 The benefit of
the systematic use of

frequently respond well

Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of neurofibromatosis 1

85

methylphenidate in NF1 adults with attention deficit disorder
has not been investigated.

The underlying pathogenesis of cognitive impairment in NF1
has not been determined and there is no consensus concerning
the causative role of T2 hyperintensities in the brain.41 42 45 A
recent study on a mouse model for NF1 has shown that
attention deficits and visual spatial impairment are reversed by
lovostatin, which is a specific inhibitor of HMG-CoA, the rate
limiting enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis.46 Current clinical
studies are investigating the safety profile and tolerability of
statin drugs in children with NF1. At present there is no
justification for the use of these drugs in the treatment of
cognitive impairment in NF1 individuals.

Although clumsiness improves with age, overall cognitive
impairment remains stable in adulthood. Adults should be
asked about their literacy and numeracy as impairment of these
skills reduces clinic attendance and understanding of informa-
tion about their condition. Referral to adult literacy classes
might be appropriate in some instances. Clinic visits should be
followed where possible by a telephone call to ascertain that the
individual understands his/her care plan.

Central nervous system tumours
Glioma is the predominant tumour type in NF1 and occurs in all
parts of the nervous system, with a predilection for the optic
pathways, brainstem and cerebellum.36 Brainstem gliomas
manifest as diffuse or focal tumours and frequently have a
more indolent course in NF1 than in the general population
although occasionally
aggressively.36 47
Symptomatic and progressive tumours are higher grade
astrocytomas than pilocytic astrocytomas which have a more
benign outcome.36 47 A recent study indicated that symptomatic
tumours, those with adult onset and gliomas situated outside
the optic pathway are associated with reduced survival.
Meningiomas and vestibular schwannomas are the hallmark
of NF2 and do not occur with increased frequency in NF1.

can behave

they

Optic pathway gliomas
Optic pathway gliomas (OPG) are grade 1, pilocytic astro-
cytomas and occur in about 15% of children with NF1.48 They
are often asymptomatic and more indolent than their counter-
parts in the general population. However, some tumours
produce impaired visual acuity, abnormal colour vision, visual
field loss, squint, pupillary abnormalities, pale optic disc,
proptosis and hypothalamic dysfunction. The risk of sympto-
matic OPG is greatest in children under 7 years, and older
individuals
require medical
intervention.48 49

rarely develop tumours

that

Young children do not complain of visual impairment until it
is advanced and sometimes only when they have bilateral
visual loss. Parents need to be alert to possible pointers of visual
problems: failure to pick up small toys and bumping into
objects. Visual assessment
is often problematic in young
children and those with cognitive deficits. Recognition of visual
acuity can be assessed at a developmental age of 3 years, colour
vision at 5 years and visual fields at age 8 years. In the UK we
have not yet detected an asymptomatic child on screening who
later required treatment. None the less, the greatest risk of
developing OPG is in young children, and those under 7 years
should have annual visual acuity and fundoscopy looking for
optic disc pallor and elevation. One baseline assessment of
colour vision and visual fields should be undertaken when the
child is mature enough to cope with the test. Brain MRI
screening for OPG is not indicated as treatment is not required
in the absence of progressive visual disturbance or proptosis.
Diffusion tensor imaging has proved useful for detecting OPG
in a mouse model and might be a valuable screening tool in
children in the future.50

is usually with vincristine

Specialist advice is essential for the management of OPG and
therapy
and cisplatinum.51
Occasionally surgery is warranted to deal with severe proptosis
or to debulk extensive chiasmal gliomas. Radiotherapy is not
advocated in young children because of potential second
malignancy, neuropsychological, vascular and endocrine con-
sequences. Rapamycin reduces astrocyte growth in vitro and
might have a future therapeutic role in the management of
OPG.52

Neurofibromas cause neurological symptoms through pres-
sure on peripheral nerves, spinal nerve roots and on the spinal
cord. Neurofibromas in the high cervical region appear to have
a high risk of causing cord compression although the reason is
not clear. None the less, many individuals with radiological
cord compression have no neurological deficit and do not
always require surgery. Hence referral to a tertiary centre is
advocated for specialist advice.

Orthopaedic problems
Approximately 2% of individuals with NF1 develop bowing of
the long bones, particularly the tibia and/or pseudarthrosis (a
false joint in a long bone).12 The disorder is caused by an
intrinsic defect of bone formation and bowing is apparent in
the first few months of life. Fracture often occurs sponta-
neously or after trivial injury and there is delayed healing.
Surgery is usually necessary and amputation of the affected
limb is required in some cases. Infants should be examined for
the presence of bowing of the long bone and clinicians should
consider the possibility of pseudarthrosis when assessing young
children for possible non-accidental injury.

is earlier

NF1 children need yearly assessment of the spine, and
individuals with clinical evidence of scoliosis should be referred
for expert orthopaedic advice and imaging. NF1 causes
disruption of bone maintenance and reduced bone mineral
density.53 Scoliosis most commonly involves the lower cervical
and upper thoracic spine and is either idiopathic or dys-
trophic.12 54 Dystrophic curves are associated with additional
kyphosis and onset
than in idiopathic cases.
Dystrophic scoliosis typically involves 4–6 segments, causes
distortion of the vertebral bodies and ribs and is rapidly
progressive, requiring early spinal fusion. It can be associated
with underlying plexiform neurofibroma and in severe cases
results in respiratory compromise. Disturbed sleep and exces-
sive snoring can indicate impaired respiratory function and
people with severe scoliosis require regular pulmonary function
tests. Surgeons conversant with NF1 should perform spinal
surgery, as intrinsic abnormalities of bone make instrumenta-
tion difficult in this group. Clinicians need to be vigilant about
the possibility of osteoporosis and have a low threshold for
performing dexa scans.

Non-ossifying fibromas have been observed in association
with NF1 and are benign lesions of the tubular long bones.55
Occasionally they cause pain and pathological fracture and
need to be distinguished from malignant bone tumours.

Cardiovascular problems
Congenital heart disease, especially pulmonary stenosis, and
hypertension are observed in NF1.38 A careful examination of
the heart should be undertaken and if an unexplained murmur
is present the child should be referred for a cardiology opinion
and echocardiograph. Blood pressure must be checked annually
and should be less than 140/90 mm Hg and less than 130/
85 mm Hg in individuals with end organ damage or diabetes
mellitus. If the blood pressure is found to be high during a
clinic visit it should be checked three times in one month to
verify the findings. Some adults are happy to monitor their own
blood pressure using portable machines at home. Coarctation of

www.jmedgenet.com

86

Ferner, Huson, Thomas, et al

the aorta can be detected by checking the blood pressure in the
upper and lower limbs.

Renal artery stenosis occurs in approximately 2% of the NF1
population and the diagnosis should be considered in hyper-
tensive children, young adults and pregnant women, refractory
hypertension in older individuals and those with an abdominal
bruit.12 38 Renal artery stenosis may be bilateral and is produced
by stenosis of small or large vessels, aneurysm formation or
extrinsic compression by an adjacent
tumour. Individuals
require evaluation at a specialist centre and treatment includes
antihypertensives, percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and
surgery. The outcome is variable as a result of recurrent stenosis
following surgery.56

Phaeochromocytoma occurs in approximately 2% of NF1
individuals and about 12% of tumours are malignant.57 Clinical
presentation includes hypertension/paroxysmal hypertension,
palpitations, headache, dizziness or sweating. The 24 hour
urinary catecholamines should be checked and if there are
associated symptoms, it is advisable to commence the urine
collection when the patient is symptomatic. Where there is a
high index of suspicion, referral
to specialist centres for
evaluation and management
is recommended. Treatment
involves alpha and beta blockade before surgery and duodenal
carcinoid may coexist with phaeochromocytoma.12 Treatment of
essential hypertension is the same as in the general population.

a

Gastrointestinal problems
Abdominal bloating, pain, dyspepsia, haemorrhage and con-
stipation may denote
gastrointestinal neurofibroma.
Carcinoid tumours have a predilection for the duodenum
where they give rise to facial flushing, diarrhoea, right sided
cardiac lesions, facial telangiectasiae and bronchoconstriction.58
Increased urinary levels of the serotonin metabolite 5-hydro-
xyindoleacetic acid confirm the diagnosis. Gastrointestinal
stromal tumours, the commonest mesenchymal tumours of
the gastrointestinal
tract, have been observed recently in
association with NF1.59 Patients present with anaemia and
gastrointestinal bleeding but
the majority of NF1 related
tumours have a good prognosis.

Psychological problems
Psychological problems stem from disfigurement caused by
neurofibromas and from the complex and unpredictable nature
of
the disease. Symptoms of anxiety and depression are
common and there are reported instances of attempted suicide,
psychosis and sociopathic behaviour.39 60 Anxiety and depres-
sion usually respond to a combination of antidepressants and
counselling. NF1 specialist advisors, psychiatrists and counsel-
lors all play a role in managing psychological complications.

Contraception and pregnancy
Recent research has shown that 75% of neurofibromas carry
progesterone receptors.61 However, there has been no confirma-
tion that the combined oral contraceptive pill or the progester-
one only pill contributes to neurofibroma growth.62 One study
has reported an increased risk of perinatal complications in
NF1, with a higher stillbirth rate, intrauterine growth retarda-
tion and caesarean section rate.63 Hence close liaison between
the obstetrician and neurofibromatosis clinician is important
when caring for pregnant
individuals with NF1. During
pregnancy, neurofibromas may grow in size and number and
clinicians need to be aware of the risk of cord compression if
spinal plexiform neurofibromas expand.64 Obstetricians should
ensure pelvic neurofibromas do not impede delivery of the
baby. Hypertension requires careful evaluation (see section on
cardiovascular disease). Monitoring of anticonvulsant medica-
tion is essential and patients should be informed of the
potential teratogenic effects of antiepileptic drugs and given

www.jmedgenet.com

advice on breastfeeding. Patients on anticonvulsants need folic
acid 5 mg daily before conception, where possible, and vitamin
K is administered to the mother for one month before delivery
and to the infant at birth.

The child requires assessment at birth for possible early
complications of NF1 and at least yearly review until the
disease status is clarified. If there are no features by the age of
2 years, NF1 is unlikely but one final review at 5 years is
advised.

GENETIC COUNSELLING
An individual with NF1 has a 50% risk of passing on the
condition to an offspring but the clinical problems cannot be
predicted, even within families.18 When the complications that
cause lifelong morbidity or early mortality are considered, the
risk of having a severely affected child is about 1 in 12.

It

is imperative to examine the parents for cutaneous
stigmata or for Lisch nodules in the 50% of individuals who
are the first in the family to be affected. Occasionally, a parent
will be found to have a segmental/mosaic form of NF1.
Although the parent might have few health problems he or
she would have an increased risk of having a child with
classical NF1. In the absence of clinical signs of NF1, the risk to
the parent of having another child with NF1 is extremely small
and less than 1%.

The NF1 gene mutation is found in approximately 85–95% of
cases using a combination of molecular techniques, including
dHPLC, direct sequencing, FISH, MLPA and array CGH.65 66 All
Wales Medical Genetic Services at the Institute of Medical
Genetics in Cardiff offers a clinical mutation testing service that
takes approximately 8 weeks to produce a result. Mutational
analysis of the entire NF1 coding region and flanking splice
sites has been performed on 169 individuals in the past 2 years.
Prenatal testing is possible by direct mutation testing of fetal
DNA extracted from chorionic villous sampling or
from
amniocentesis. Alternatively, DNA markers in families with
two or more affected individuals can be used for this purpose.
However, many do not
take up the option of prenatal
assessment because of
the inability to determine disease
severity. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis is also available
and gives a further option for couples wishing to avoid
therapeutic termination of pregnancy.67 The diagnosis is
ascertained using single cells removed from 3 day old embryos,
and those that do not carry the NF1 mutation are transferred to
the mother. Genetic counselling prior to conception is advised
in all NF1 individuals.

SPECIALIST NF1 CLINICS
It is recommended that multidisciplinary neurofibromatosis
clinics include a lead clinician, named consultants who are
experts in their field and a specialist nurse. Ideally,
the
disciplines of neurology, paediatrics, genetics, ophthalmology,
neurosurgery, plastic surgery, orthopaedics, soft tissue tumour
surgery, psychiatry, dermatology, radiology and pathology
should be represented. The role of the specialist clinic is to
diagnose NF1 in difficult cases, monitor and manage complex
disease, and educate and support the patient and family. The
specialist service also provides a forum for clinical audit and
academic interaction through multidisciplinary meetings and
video conferencing.

CONCLUSIONS
Close collaboration between NF1 clinicians will facilitate a
uniform approach to the diagnosis and management of NF1
and its complications. Reliable clinical and radiological assess-
ment will be helpful in determining the value of potential
therapeutic agents. Furthermore, the formation of a standar-

Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of neurofibromatosis 1

87

dised UK database will facilitate the evaluation of care and long
term response to treatment for this complex neurocutaneous
disease.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to the following for their advice and support: Robert
Listernick, Linda Partridge, and The UK Neurofibromatosis Association.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Authors’ affiliations
R E Ferner, Department of Neurology, Guy’s and St Thomas’ Hospitals,
London, UK
S M Huson, D G Evans, Department of Medical Genetics, St Mary’s
Hospital, Manchester, UK
N Thomas, Department of Neurosurgery, Kings College Hospital, London,
UK
C Moss, Department of Dermatology, Birmingham Children’s Hospital, UK
H Willshaw, Department of Ophthalmology, Birmingham Children’s
Hospital, UK
M Upadhyaya, Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Wales College
of Medicine, Cardiff, UK
R Towers, Royal Marsden Hospital London, UK
M Gleeson, Department of ENT, Guy’s Hospital London, UK
C Steiger, Department of Community Paediatrics, Alder Hey Children’s
Hospital, Liverpool, UK
A Kirby, Dyscovery Centre, University of Wales, Newport, UK

Competing interests: None.

Contact addresses: The Neurofibromatosis Association, 38 High St,
Kingston on Thames KT1 1HL, UK; Tel 020 8439 1234, Fax 020 8439
1200; registered charity number 1078790. The Neurofibromatosis
specialist advisors are based around the UK and can be contacted via
the Neurofibromatosis Association.

For information on Genetic Units see: http://www.gig.org.uk/services.html

Neurofibromatosis specialist centres: Dr Rosalie Ferner, Department of
Neurology, Guy’s Hospital, St Thomas St, London SE1 9RT, UK, Tel 020
7188 3970 (Guy’s and St Thomas’ specialist neurofibromatosis nurse:
Melissa Vann-Blockley, Tel 0207 188-3971); Professor Gareth Evans and
Dr Susan Huson, University Department of Medical Genetics and Regional
Genetics Service, St Mary’s Hospital, Hathersage Rd, Manchester M13
0JH, UK, Tel 0161 276 6264.

REFERENCES
1 Zanca A, Zanca A. Antique illustrations of neurofibromatosis. Int J Dermatol

1980;19:55–8.

2 von Recklinghausen FD. U¨ber die Multiplen Fibrome der Haut und Ihre

Beziehung zu den Multiplen Neuromen. Berlin: Hirschwald A, 1882.

3 National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference Statement:

Neurofibromatosis. Arch Neurol Chicago 1988;45:575–8.

4 Viskochil D, Buchberg AN, Xu G, Cawthon RM, Stevens J, Wolff RK, Culver M,

Carey JC, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, White R, O’Connell P. Deletions and a
translocation interrupt a cloned gene at the neurofibromatosis type 1 locus. Cell
1990;62:1887–92.

5 Wallace MR, Marchuk DA, Anderson LB, Letcher R, Odeh HM, Saulino AM,
Fountain JW, Bereton A, Nicholson J, Mitchell AL, Brownstein BH, Collins FS.
Type 1 neurofibromatosis gene; identification of a larger transcript disrupted in
three NF1 patients. Science 1990;24:181–6.

6 Xu GF, O’Connell P, Viskochil D, Cawthon R, Robertson M, Culver M, Dunn D,

Stevens J, Gesteland R, White R, Weiss R. The neurofibromatosis type 1 gene
encodes a protein related to GAP. Cell 1990;62:599–608.

7 Gutmann DH, Wood DL, Collins FS. Identification of the neurofibromatosis 1

gene product. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991;88:9658–72.

8 Daston MM, Scrable H, Nordlund M, Sturbaum AK, Nissen LM, Ratner N. The

protein product of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene is expressed at highest
abundance in neurons, Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes. Neuron
1992;8:415–28.

9 Huson SM, Compston DAS, Clark P, Harper PS. A genetic study of von

Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis in south east Wales. 1. Prevalence, fitness,
mutation rate, and effect of parental transmission on severity. J Med Genet
1989;26:704–11.

10 Ruggierei M, Huson SM. The clinical and diagnostic implications of mosaicism in

the neurofibromatoses. Neurology 2001;56:1433–43.

11 Huson SM, Harper PS, Compston DAS. Von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis:

clinical and population study in south east Wales. Brain 1988;111:55–81.

12 Korf BR. Diagnostic outcome in children with multiple cafe´ au lait spots. Pediatrics

1992;90:924–7.

13 DiPaolo DP, Zimmerman RA, Rorke LB, Zackai EH, Bilaniuk LT, Yachnis AT.

Neurofibromatosis type 1: pathologic substrate of high-signal-intensity foci in the
brain. Radiology 1995;195:721–4.

14 Bognanno JR, Edwards MK, Lee TA, Dunn DW, Roos KL, Klatte EC. Cranial

imaging in neurofibromatosis. Am J Radiol 1988;151:381–8.

15 Ferner RE, Chaudhuri R, Bingham J, Cox T, Hughes RAC. The nature and

evolution of increased intensity T2 weighted lesions and their relationship to
intellectual impairment. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1993;56:492–5.

16 North K, Joy P, Yuille D, Cocks N, Mobbs E, Hutchins P, McHugh K, deSilva M.
Specific learning disability in children with neurofibromatosis type 1: significance
of MRI abnormalities. Neurology 1997;44:878–83.

17 DeBella K, Poskitt K, Szudek J, Friedman JM. Use of ‘‘unidentified bright objects’’

on brain MRI for diagnosis of neurofibromatosis 1 in children. Neurology
2000;55:1067–8.

18 Korf BR, Huson SM. The Phakamatoses. In: Rimoin D, Connor JM, Pyeritz RE,
Korf BR, eds. Principles and practice of medical genetics, 5th edn. Edinburgh:
Churchill Livingstone, 2006: 2817–50.

19 Bandipalliam P. Syndrome of early onset colon cancer, haematological

malignancy and features of neurofibromatosis in HNPCC families with
homozygous mismatch repair gene mutations. Fam Cancer 2005;4:323–33.
20 De Luca A, Bottiloo I, Sarkozy A, Carta C, Neri C, Bellacchio E, Schirinzi A,

Conti E, Zampino G, Battaglia A, Majore S, Rinaldi MM, Carella M, Marino B,
Pizzuti A, Digilio MC, Tartaglia M, Dallapiccola B. NF1 gene mutations represent
the major molecular event underlying neurofibromatosis–Noonan syndrome.
Am J Med Genet 2005;77:1092–1101.

21 Evans DGR, Moran A, King A, Saeed S, Gurusinghe N, Ramsden R. Incidence of

vestibular schwannoma and neurofibromatosis 2 in the north west of England
over a 10-year period: higher incidence than previously thought. Otol Neurotol
2005;26:93–7.

22 Trofatter J, MacCollin M, Rutter JL, Murrell JR, Duyao MP, Parry DM, Eldridge R,

Kley N, Menn AG, Pulaski K, Haase VH, Ambrose CM, Munroe D, Bove C,
Haines JL, Martuza RL, MacDonald ME, Seizinger BR, Short MP, Buckler AJ,
Gusella JF. A novel moesin–esrin–radixin-like gene is a candidate for the
neurofibromatosis 2 tumours suppressor. Cell 1993;72:791–800.

23 Evans DGR, Huson SM, Donnai D, Neary W, Blair V, Newton V, Harris R. A

clinical study of type 2 neurofibromatosis. Q J Med 1992;84:603–18.

24 MacCollin M, Chiocca EA, Evans DG, Friedman JM, Horvitz R, Jaramillo D,

Lev M, Mautner VF, Nimura M, Plotkin SR, Sang CN, Stemmer-Rachamimov A,
Roach ES. Diagnostic criteria for schwannomatosis. Neurology
2005;64:1838–45.

25 Cambiaghi S, Restano L, Caputo R. Juvenile xanthogranuloma associated with
neurofibromatosis 1: 14 patients without evidence of haematologic malignancies.
Paediatr Dermatol 2004;21:97–101.

26 Korf BR. Plexiform neurofibromas. Am J Med Genet 199, 89:31–7.
27 Packer RJ, Gutmann DH, Rubenstein A, Viskochil D, Zimmerman RA, Verzina G,
Small J, Korf B. Plexiform neurofibromas in NF1: toward biologic-based therapy.
Neurology 2002;58:1461–70.

28 Evans DG, Baser ME, McGaughran J, Sharif S, Howard E, Moran A. Malignant

peripheral nerve sheath tumours in neurofibromatosis 1. J Med Genet
2002;39:311–14.

29 Ferner RE, Gutmann DH. International consensus statement on malignant

peripheral nerve sheath tumours in neurofibromatosis 1. Cancer Res
2002;62:1573–7.

30 Sharif S, Ferner R, Birch JM, Gillespie JE, Gattamaneni HR, Baser ME, Evans DG.
Second primary tumours in neurofibromatosis 1 patients treated for optic glioma:
substantial risks after radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol 2006;24:2570–5.

31 De Raedt T, Brems H, Wolkenstein P, Vidaud D, Pilotti S, Perrone F, Mautner V,

Frahm S, Sciot R, Legius E. Elevated risk for MPNST in NF1 microdeletion
patients. Am J Hum Genet 2003;72:1288–92.

32 Khosrotehrani K, Bastuji-Garin S, Riccardi VM, Birch P, Friedman JM,

Wolkenstein P. Subcutaneous neurofibromas are associated with mortality in
neurofibromatosis 1: a cohort of 703 patients. Am J Med Genet
2005;132:49–53.

33 Ferner RE, Hall SM, Hughes RAC, Upadhyaya M, Johnson MR.

Neurofibromatous neuropathy in neurofibromatosis 1. J Med Genet
2004;41:837–41.

34 Ferner R, Lucas JD, O’Doherty M, Hughes RA, Smith MA, Cronin BF, Bingham J.
Evaluation of 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (18FDG PET)
in the detection of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours arising from within
plexiform neurofibromas in neurofibromatosis 1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
2000;68:353–7.

35 De Smet L, Sciot R, Legius E. Multifocal glomus tumours of the fingers in two

patients with neurofibromatosis type 1. J Med Genet 2002;39:e45.

36 Cre´ange A, Zeller J, Rostaing-Rigattieri S, Brugieres P, Degos JD, Revuz J,
Wolkenstein P. Neurological complications of neurofibromatosis type 1 in
adulthood. Brain 1999;122:473–81.

37 Vivarelli R, Grosso S, Calabrese F, Farnetani M, Di Bartolo R, Morgese G,

Balestri P. Epilepsy in neurofibromatosis 1. J Child Neurol, 18:338–42.

38 Friedman JM, Arbiser J, Epstein JA, Gutmann DH, Huot SJ, Lin AE, McManus B,

Korf BR. Cardiovascular disease in neurofibromatosis 1: a report of the NF1
Cardiovascular Task Force. Genet Med 2003;4:105–11.

39 Ferner RE, Hughes RAC, Weinman J. Intellectual impairment in

neurofibromatosis. J Neurol Sci 1996;138:125–33.

40 Ferner RE, Hughes RAC, Johnson MR. Neurofibromatosis 1 and multiple

sclerosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1995;56:492–5.

41 North KN, Riccardi VM, Samango-Sprouse C, Ferner R, Moore B, Legius E,

Ratner N, Denckla MB. Cognitive function and academic performance in
neurofibromatosis 1: consensus statement from the NF1 Cognitive Disorders Task
Force. Neurology 1997;48:1121–7.

www.jmedgenet.com

88

Ferner, Huson, Thomas, et al

42 Ozonoff S. Cognitive impairment in neurofibromatosis 1. Am J Med Genet

1999;89:45–52.

43 Hyman SL, Shores A, North KN. The nature and frequency of cognitive deficits in

children with neurofibromatosis type 1. Neurology 2005;11:1037–44.

44 Johnson H, Wiggs L, Stores G, Huson SM. Psychological disturbance and sleep

disorders in children with neurofibromatosis type 1. Dev Med Child Neurol
2005;47:237–42.

45 Mautner VF, Kluwe L, Thakker SD, Leark RA. Treatment of ADHD in

neurofibromatosis 1. Dev Med Child Neurol 2002;44:164–70.

46 Li W, Cui Y, Kushner SA, Brown RA, Jentsch JD, Franklin PW, Cannon TD,

Silva AJ. The HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor lovostatin reverses the learning and
attention deficits in a mouse model of neurofibromatosis 1. Curr Biol
2005;15:1961–7.

47 Pollack IF, Mulvihill JJ. Special issues in the management of gliomas in children

with neurofibromatosis 1. J Neurooncol 1996;28:257–68.

48 Listernick R, Louis DN, Packer RJ, Gutmann DH. Optic pathway gliomas in

children with neurofibromatosis type 1: consensus statement from the NF1 optic
pathway glioma study. Ann Neurol 1997;41:1433–9.

49 Listernick R, Ferner RE, Piersall L, Sharif S, Gutmann DH, Charrow J. Late-onset

optic pathway tumours in children with neurofibromatosis 1. Neurology
2004;63:1944–6.

50 Bajenaru ML, Garbow JR, Perry A, Hernandez MR, Gutmann DH. Natural

history of neurofibromatosis 1-associated optic nerve glioma in mice. Ann Neurol
2005;57:119–27.

51 Packer RJ, Alter J, Allen J, Phillips P, Geyer R, Nicholson HS, Jakacki R,

Kurczynski E, Needle M, Finlay J, Reaman G, Boyett JM. Carboplatin and
vincristine chemotherapy for children with newly diagnosed progressive low-
grade gliomas. J Neurosurg 1997;86:747–54.

52 Dasgupta B, Yi Y, Chen DY, Weber JD, Gutmann DH. Proteomic analysis reveals

hyper-activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway in
neurofibromatosis 1-associated human and mouse brain tumours. Cancer Res
2005;1:2755–60.

53 Lammert M, Kappler M, Mautner VF, Lammert K, Storkel S, Friedman JM,

Atkins D. Decreased bone mineral density in patients with neurofibromatosis 1.
Osteoporos Int 2005;16:1161–6.

54 Crawford AH Jr, Bagamery N. Osseous manifestations of neurofibromatosis in

childhood. J Pediatr Orthop 1986;6:72–88.

55 Howlett DC, Farrugia MM, Ferner RE, Rankin SC. Multiple lower limb non-

ossifying fibromas in siblings with neurofibromatosis. Eur J Radiol 1998;26:3.

56 Booth C, Preston R, Clark G, Reidy J. Management of renal vascular disease in
neurofibromatosis type 1 and the role of percutaneous transluminal angioplasty.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2002;17:1235–40.

57 Bausch B, Borozdin W, Neumann H, European-American Phaeochromocytoma

Study Group. Clinical and genetic characteristics of patients with
neurofibromatosis type 1 and phaeochromocytoma. N Engl J Med
2006;354:2729–31.

58 Hough DR, Chan A, Davidson H. Von Recklinghausen’s disease associated with

gastrointestinal carcinoid tumours. Cancer 1983;51:2206–8.

59 Miettinen M, Fetsch JF, Sobin LH, Lasota J. Gastrointestinal stromal tumours in

patients with neurofibromatosis 1: a clinicopathologic and molecular genetic
study of 45 cases. Am J Surg Pathol 2006;30:90–6.

60 Wolkenstein P, Zeller J, Revuz J, Ecosse E, Leplege A. Quality-of-life impairment
in neurofibromatosis type 1: a cross-sectional study of 128 cases. Arch Dermatol
2001;137:1421–5.

61 McLaughlin ME, Jacks T. Progesterone receptor expression in neurofibromas.

Cancer Res 2003;63:752–5.

62 Lammert M, Mautner VF, Kluwe L. Do hormonal contraceptives stimulate growth

of neurofibromas? A survey of 59 patients. BMC Cancer 2005;5:16.

63 Segal D, Holcberg G, Sapir O, Sheiner E, Mazor M, Katz M. Neurofibromatosis
in pregnancy. Maternal and perinatal outcome. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
1999;84:59–61.

64 Dugoff L, Sujansky E. Neurofibromatosis type 1 and pregnancy. Am J Med

Genet 1996;66:7–10.

65 Griffiths S, Thompson P, Frayling I, Upadhyaya M. Molecular diagnosis of

neurofibromatosis type 1: 2 years experience. Fam Cancer, 2006;Aug 31 (Epub
ahead of print).

66 Messiaen LM, Callens T, Mortier G, Beysen D, Vandenbroucke I, Van Roy N,
Speleman F, Paepe AD. Exhaustive mutation analysis of the NF1 gene allows
identification of 95% of mutations and reveals a high frequency of unusual
splicing defects. Hum Mutat 2000;15:541–5.

67 Verlinsky Y, Rechitsky S, Verlinsky O, Chistokhina A, Saharapova T,

Masciangelo C, Levy M, Kaplan B, Lederer K, Kuliev A. Preimplantation
diagnosis for neurofibromatosis. Reprod Biomed Online 2002;4:218–22.

bmjupdates+

bmjupdates+ is a unique and free alerting service, designed to keep you up to date with the
medical literature that is truly important to your practice.
bmjupdates+ will alert you to important new research and will provide you with the best new
evidence concerning important advances in health care, tailored to your medical interests and
time demands.

Where does the information come from?
bmjupdates+ applies an expert critical appraisal filter to over 100 top medical journals
A panel of over 2000 physicians find the few ’must read’ studies for each area of clinical interest

Sign up to receive your tailored email alerts, searching access and more…

www.bmjupdates.com

www.jmedgenet.com

Copyright of Journal of Medical Genetics is the property of BMJ Publishing Group and its content may not be
copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written
permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

