REVIEWS

TARGETING RAS SIGNALLING
PATHWAYS IN CANCER THERAPY

Julian Downward

The RAS proteins control signalling pathways that are key regulators of several aspects of
normal cell growth and malignant transformation. They are aberrant in most human tumours
due to activating mutations in the RAS genes themselves or to alterations in upstream or
downstream signalling components. Rational therapies that target the RAS pathways might
inhibit tumour growth, survival and spread. Several of these new therapeutic agents are
showing promise in the clinic and many more are being developed.

Normal cellular behaviour in multicellular organisms
is tightly controlled by a complex network of sig-
nalling pathways that ensures that cells proliferate
only when they are required by the body as a whole
— for example, during development or wound heal-
ing. Cancer occurs when normal growth regulation
breaks down, usually because of defects in these sig-
nalling mechanisms. The RAS proteins were some of
the first proteins identified that possessed the ability
to regulate cell growth. They were discovered as pro-
teins encoded by retroviral oncogenes that had been
hijacked from the host genome by the Kirsten and
Harvey rat sarcoma viruses. Searches for transfectable
oncogenes  in  the  genomes  of human  tumours 
also yielded the RAS genes. However, it soon became
clear that these tumour- or retrovirus-derived forms
of the RAS genes encoded proteins that were consti-
tutively active because of point mutations in their
coding sequences1.

RAS proteins have essential roles in controlling
the activity of several crucial signalling pathways that
regulate  normal  cellular  proliferation. However,
human tumours very frequently express RAS proteins
that have been activated by point mutation — ~20%
of all tumours have undergone an activating muta-
tion in one of the RAS genes2. In these tumours, the
activated RAS protein contributes significantly to
several aspects of the malignant phenotype, including
the  deregulation  of
tumour-cell  growth, pro-
grammed cell death and invasiveness, and the ability
to induce new blood-vessel formation3.

Therapies that target the RAS proteins and the sig-
nalling pathways that they control would therefore be
very valuable in treating tumours that have activating
RAS mutations. However, their  potential  might 
be  even  greater, as  many  tumours  that  lack  RAS
mutations have found other ways to activate the same
pathways. The  RAS  signalling  pathways  are  now
understood in great detail at the molecular level — 
as a result of two decades of intense study using
genetics and molecular and cellular biology, and
encompassing  organisms  from  yeast  to  man  via 
slime  mould, worms, flies  and  frogs4. Structural
information  is  also  available  on  most  of the  key 
players, including many binary complexes of inter-
acting  proteins5. This  knowledge  is  now  being 
used  to  design  rational  therapies  that  target  the 
RAS pathways.

There are almost 20 new therapeutic agents in
clinical trials at present, and many more are being
developed. Some of these should ultimately be effec-
tive treatments for some tumour types, particularly
when used in combination with other agents.

So, what other proteins comprise the RAS sig-
nalling pathways, what is their role in normal cell
growth and function, and how do they become acti-
vated  during  tumorigenesis?  Several  therapeutic
agents have already been developed against the vari-
ous components in the RAS pathways, so how suc-
cessful are they in the clinic? Finally, are there less
obvious ways of targeting the pathway that have not
yet been exploited?

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

VOLUME 3 | JANUARY 2003 | 1 1

Cancer Research UK,
London Research Institute,
44 Lincoln’s Inn Fields,
London WC2A 3PX, UK.
e-mail: julian.downward
@cancer.org.uk
doi:10.1038/nrc969

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

R E V I E W S

SH2 DOMAIN
Src homology 2 domain.A protein
domain capable of binding
tyrosine phosphorylated sites.

SH3 DOMAIN
Src homology 3 domain. A
protein domain capable of
binding proline-rich motifs.

Summary 

• RAS proteins, their regulators and the downstream enzymes that they control are activated in many tumour types by a
variety of mechanisms, including oncogenic mutation of RAS genes.
• They are crucial mediators of several of the malignant characteristics of transformed cells and are therefore good
candidates for tumour therapy.
• RAS proteins require post-translational modification by farnesylation to be biologically active. Farnesyl
transferase inhibitors have some antitumour activity in the clinic, but they seem to act through targets other 
than RAS.
• Kinase inhibitors that block either RAF or mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase kinase MEK in the RAF/MAP
kinase pathway downstream of RAS have been developed and show promise in early clinical trials.
• Inhibitors acting on epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor and ERBB2 upstream activators of RAS have been
developed. Antibodies directed against ERBB2 have been licensed for the treatment of breast cancer, whereas
small-molecule EGF receptor inhibitors show potential against lung cancer in clinical trials.
• Other RAS-related therapies are in development, including inhibitors of AKT/PKB kinase activity, which is activated
by RAS oncogenic mutation and by PTEN tumour-suppressor gene loss.

Normal RAS signalling pathways
RAS  proteins:  diversity  and  processing. The  RAS 
proteins are members of a large superfamily of low-
molecular-weight GTP-binding proteins, which can
be  divided  into  several  families  according  to  the
degree of sequence conservation. Different families
are important for different cellular processes — the
RAS family controls cell growth and the RHO family
controls the actin cytoskeleton. Three members of the
RAS family — HRAS, KRAS and NRAS — are found
to be activated by mutation in human tumours6.
These three members are very closely related, having
85% amino acid sequence identity and, although they
function in very similar ways, some indications of
subtle differences between them have recently come to
light. The HRAS, KRAS and NRAS proteins are widely
expressed, with KRAS being expressed in almost all
cell types. Knockout studies have shown that Hras and
Nras, either alone or in combination, are not required
for normal development in the mouse, whereas Kras is
essential7. This might reflect different molecular func-
tions of the three proteins, but is more likely to reflect
the more ubiquitous expression of KRAS.

The normal function of RAS proteins requires
them to be post-translationally modified. The pur-
pose of this is primarily to localize them to the correct
subcellular compartment — principally the inner face
of the plasma membrane. RAS proteins that are mis-
localized at other sites in the cell are inactive, probably
because they cannot recruit their target enzymes. The
fact that correct post-translational modification of
RAS is required for its biological activity has made the
enzymes involved in this processing very attractive
targets for therapeutic intervention8. The steps in the
normal  post-translational  processing  of RAS  are
described in BOX 1 (REFS 9–11).

Signalling upstream of RAS. The activation state of
RAS proteins depends on whether they are bound to
GTP (in which case, they are active and are able to
engage downstream target enzyme) or GDP (in which
case, they are inactive and fail to interact with these

effectors). In normal cells, the activity of RAS proteins
is controlled by the ratio of bound GTP to GDP 4.
In vitro, purified RAS possesses a low level of intrinsic
GTPase activity — bound GTP is slowly converted to
GDP. It also has a slow rate of nucleotide exchange
with the surrounding medium — bound GDP is
gradually replaced by GTP. However, these processes
are  catalysed  within  the  cell  —  the  nucleotide
exchange by guanine nucleotide exchange factors
(GEFs) and the nucleotide hydrolysis by GTPase acti-
vating  proteins  (GAPs). Both  of these  activities
involve large, considerably divergent families of pro-
teins: it is the balance between these proteins that
determines the activation state of RAS and its down-
stream target pathways. As the regulation of RAS has
been  reviewed  in  detail  recently12–14, only  a  brief
overview is provided here.

Several RAS-GEFs have been characterized. Most
work has been done on SOS1 and SOS2, which were
identified as mammalian homologues of the Drosophila
son of sevenless gene product, a genetically identified
RAS activator. Parallel developmental genetic analysis of
RAS regulation in flies and in Caenorhabditis elegans,
and biochemical and cell biological analysis in mam-
malian tissue-culture systems, led to the model of RAS
regulation  that  is  shown  in  FIG. 1. Following  the 
activation of receptor tyrosine kinases such as the epi-
dermal-growth-factor receptor (EGFR), the autophos-
phorylated  receptor  binds  to  the  SH2  DOMAIN of the 
adaptor protein growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2
(GRB2). Through its SH3 DOMAINS, GRB2 is bound to
SOS, so activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase results
in recruitment of SOS to the plasma membrane, where
RAS is also localized as a result of farnesylation. The
increased proximity of SOS to RAS results in increased
nucleotide exchange on RAS, with GDP being replaced
with GTP, which is the predominant guanine nucleotide
in the cytosol. Many other receptor types, including the
G-protein-coupled receptors, can activate RAS through
stimulation of exchange factors. In some cases, this has
been shown to involve transactivation of growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinases15.

12 |  JANUARY 2003 | VOLUME 3

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

Box 1 | Post-translational processing of RAS proteins

Newly synthesized RAS is a cytosolic protein. Farnesyltransferase (FTase) catalyses the
transfer of the 15-carbon isoprenoid chain from farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) to a
cysteine residue that is close to the carboxyl terminus (C186 in human HRAS) (see a).
This results in RAS associating with intracellular membranes via its farnesyl group (F).
Farnesyltransferase inhibitors (FTIs) block this farnesylation, so RAS remains in the
cytosol and is unable to stimulate its downstream targets. However, when FTase is
inhibited, KRAS and NRAS, but not HRAS, can be geranylgeranylated — an alternative
20-carbon isoprenylation is added, and this is catalysed by geranylgeranyltransferase
(GGTase) — resulting in rescue of processing of these RAS isoforms. Following
isoprenylation, several other processing steps occur. An endopeptidase removes the end
three amino acids from the carboxyl terminus of the protein (see b). The new carboxyl
terminus is then methylated by a methyltransferase (see c). Following transportation to
the plasma membrane, a final processing step (see d) occurs for HRAS and NRAS.
Palmitoyltransferase catalyses the addition of two palmitoyl long-chain fatty acid
groups (P) to a cysteine residue that is just upstream of the farnesylated carboxy-
terminal cysteine. This stabilizes the interaction with the membrane. KRAS does not
become palmitoylated, but its interaction with the plasma membrane is promoted by a
group of lysine residues near the carboxyl terminus that interact with the negatively
charged lipid head groups. The greatest drug discovery effort has gone into developing
inhibitors of FTase, but other steps in the pathway might be worth pursuing. The failure
of FTIs to block KRAS processing has proved to be a notable problem as KRAS is the
most commonly mutated RAS isoform in human tumours. It is apparent that the effects
of FTI on KRAS-transformed cells are due to inhibition of other farnesylated proteins,
one of which is probably the RAS relative RHOB41.

Plasma membrane

RAS

C

FTIs

FTase

RAS

C

a
FPP

AAX

S

F

Microsomal membrane

SH

AAX

PP

RAS

C

F

S

Me

d
Palmitoyl
CoA

Palmitoyltransferase

b
CAAX
endopeptidase

c
Methyltransferase

RAS

C

RAS

C

AAX

S

F

SAM

Me

S

F

Although the above model is widely accepted, it is
certainly an over-simplification. Other proteins are
involved in the activation of RAS, such as SHC, which
can  mediate  between  receptors  and  GRB2  (FIG. 1).
Several other non-receptor proteins can also become
tyrosine phosphorylated and act as anchors for GRB2
interaction, and there are several other GEFs for RAS
that are controlled quite differently14,16,17.

The diversity of these exchange factors means that
RAS is activated by a very varied collection of extracellu-
lar stimuli. This activation is opposed by the effects of
the GAPs. These promote the hydrolysis of bound GTP
by RAS by several orders of magnitude and normally
ensure that RAS is rapidly inactivated after stimulation.
Most of the analysis of RAS regulation has concentrated

R E V I E W S

on the control of GEFs, but it is clear that GAPs are
also regulated, at least in some circumstances18. At
least six different GAP proteins exist that are active on
RAS proteins19.

Signalling downstream of RAS. GTP-bound RAS is able
to bind and activate effector enzymes, and it is through
these pathways that RAS controls cell proliferation, sur-
vival and other aspects of cell behaviour that can con-
tribute to the transformed phenotype. Therapeutic
interventions that target these enzymes might therefore
be effective in treating tumours in which RAS is muta-
tionally  activated. The  effectors  of RAS  have  been
reviewed recently in depth3.

The first mammalian effector of RAS to be charac-
terized — and still the most intensively studied — is the
protein serine/threonine kinase RAF. A combination of
genetic and biochemical evidence showed that GTP-
bound RAS binds to, and contributes to the activation
of, the three closely related RAF proteins, c-RAF1, BRAF
and ARAF. This interaction causes RAF to be relocated
to the plasma membrane, which seems to be crucial for
its activation20,21. Downstream of this, activated RAF
phosphorylates and activates mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinases 1 and 2 (MEK1 and MEK2) — dual-
specificity kinases that are capable of phosphorylating
and activating the mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) ERK1 and ERK2 (extracellular signal-regu-
lated kinases 1 and 2). Substrates for ERK1/2 include
cytosolic and nuclear proteins, reflecting the fact that
they can be transported into the nucleus following acti-
vation. The full range of effects of activating these
kinases is yet to be determined, but most attention has,
so far, focused on the regulation of transcription factors.
ERK phosphorylates ETS family transcription factors
such as ELK1, which forms part of the serum response
factor that regulates the expression of FOS; in addition,
ERK phosphorylates c-JUN. This leads to activation of
the AP1  transcription  factor, which  is  made  up  of
FOS–JUN heterodimers22. As a result of stimulating
these transcriptional regulators, key cell-cycle regulatory
proteins, such as D-type cyclins, are expressed, which
enables the cell to progress through the G1 phase of the
cell cycle23. So, RAF activation can promote cell-cycle
progression, at least in conjunction with other signals.

In addition to the RAF/MAPK pathway, RAS has
also been found to activate several other effector path-
ways, the best characterized of which are shown in FIG. 2.
RAS can interact directly with the catalytic subunit of
type I phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks)24,25, lead-
ing to activation of the lipid kinase as a result of its
translocation to the membrane and conformational
changes. PI3K phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol-
4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P2) to produce phos-
phatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P3)
— a second messenger that binds to a large number of
proteins through the pleckstrin homology and other
domains. In this way, PI3K controls the activity of a
large number of downstream enzymes. Much attention
has been paid to the activation of the kinases PDK1
(3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1) and

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

VOLUME 3 | JANUARY 2003 | 1 3

R E V I E W S

GEF

P GRB2

P
SHC

Pi

RAS-GTP

GAP

Active

RAS-GDP

Inactive

Figure 1 | Signalling upstream of RAS. The activation state
of RAS is controlled by the cycle of hydrolysis of bound GTP,
which is catalysed by GTPase activating proteins (GAPs), and
the replacement of bound GDP with fresh GTP, which is
catalysed by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). The
best-studied activation mechanism involves the assembly of
complexes of activated, autophosphorylated growth-factor-
receptor tyrosine kinases with the GEF SOS through the
adaptor protein GRB2, and possibly SHC, resulting in the
recruitment of SOS to the plasma membrane, where RAS is
located. Several other GEFs exist that have distinct regulatory
mechanisms. In addition, a wide range of GAPs have now
been identified for RAS, some of which are also subject to
regulation. RAS is also activated through GEFs in response to
activation of a wide range of G-protein-coupled receptors.

AKT, (also known as PKB). PDK1 is important for
the activation of a large number of protein kinases of
the AGC family, including AKT/PKB, some PKCs, p70S6K
and RSK. AKT/PKB has a strong anti-apoptotic func-
tion by phosphorylating various targets26 and seems
to be an important part of the survival signal that is
generated by RAS27. In addition, PI3K activation
leads to stimulation of RAC, a RHO family protein

that is involved in the regulation not only of the actin
cytoskeleton but also of transcription-factor path-
ways — for example, by activating nuclear factor-κB
(NF-κB). RAC activation seems to be important in
RAS-induced transformation and occurs through
PI3K-dependent and -independent pathways 28,29.

A third well-studied effector family for RAS com-
prises three exchange factors for the RAS-related RAL
proteins: RAL guanine nucleotide dissociation stimula-
tor (RALGDS), RALGDS-like gene (RGL/RSB2) and
RGL2/RLF. Through these proteins, RAS is able to stim-
ulate RAL, resulting in activation of phospholipase D1
and activation of the CDC42/RAC-GAP-RAL binding
protein  1  (RALBP1). The  RALGDS  pathway  con-
tributes, along with AKT/PKB, to the inhibition of the
FORKHEAD transcription factors of the FoxO family30.
These have been implicated in promoting cell-cycle
arrest through induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor KIP1 (also known as p27), and apoptosis
through the expression of BIM and FAS LIGAND.

Phospholipase Cε is another RAS effector that has
been  reported  recently. It  has  two  RAS  association
domains and also a RAS-GEF domain, in addition to its
phospholipase C domain, which promotes the hydrolysis
of PtdIns(4,5)P2 to diacylglycerol and inositol-1,4,5-
trisphosphate (Ins(1,4,5)P3)31. Phospholipase Cε could
link RAS to activation of PKC and calcium mobilization.
Through the combined action of these RAS-respon-
sive signalling pathways, expression of activated mutant
RAS in cells can promote several of the characteristics of
malignant transformation. These include increased 
proliferation due to induction of cell-cycle regulators

AKT/PKB
A family of three closely related
serine/threonine protein kinases
containing amino-terminal
pleckstrin homology domains
that bind to the lipid products of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K). They are activated on
PI3K stimulation and provide
anti-apoptotic signals to the cell.

FORKHEAD
A large superfamily of
transcription factors, of which
one family, FoxO, is
phosphorylated and inhibited by
AKT/PKB.

BIM
A member of the BCL-2 family
of apoptosis regulatory proteins.
BIM induces apoptosis by acting
at mitochondria to promote the
release of cytochrome c into the
cytosol.

FAS LIGAND
An extracellular protein that
binds and activates the death
receptor FAS, also known as
CD95 and APO1, leading to
initiation of apoptosis.

RAS

PI3K

RAC-GEFs

RALGDS

PLCε

AKT

PDK1

RAC

PLD

RAL

FORKHEAD

PKC

Ca2+

GSK3

FORKHEAD

BAD

p70S6K PKC

RAF

MEK

ERK

PLA2

ELK1

RSK

Cell-cycle progression
Transcription

Survival
Transcription
Cytoskeletal signals
Translation

Transcription
Vesicle transport
Cell-cycle progression

Calcium
signalling

Figure 2 | Signalling downstream of RAS. Once in its active, GTP-bound state, RAS will interact with several families of effector
proteins, resulting in stimulation of their catalytic activity. The main effectors are shown here. RAF protein kinases initiate the
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade, which leads to ERK activation. This kinase has numerous substrates both in the
cytoplasm and in the nucleus, including ETS family transcription factors such as ELK1 that regulate cell-cycle progression. Type I
phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) generate second-messenger lipids, such as phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate, which
activate numerous target proteins including the survival signalling kinase AKT/PKB. RALGDS proteins are guanine nucleotide
exchange factors (GEFs) for RAL, a RAS-related protein. Downstream targets include Forkhead transcription factors.
Phospholipase Cε (PLCε) catalyses the hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate to diacylglycerol and inositol
trisphosphate, resulting in protein kinase C (PKC) activation and calcium mobilization from intracellular stores. ERK, extracellular
regulated kinase; GSK3, glycogen synthase kinase 3; MEK, mitogen-activated kinase/ERK kinase; p70S6K, p70 ribosomal protein
S6 kinase; PDK1, phosphatidylinositol trisphosphate-dependent kinase 1; PLA2, phospholipase A2; PLD, phospholipase D; RSK,
p90 ribosomal protein S6 kinase.

14 |  JANUARY 2003 | VOLUME 3

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

Table 1 | Activation of RAS signalling pathways in different tumours 
Frequency (%)
Defect or mutation
90 (K)
RAS mutation
35 (K)

Tumour type
Pancreas
Lung adenocarcinoma
(non-small-cell)
Colorectal
Thyroid (Follicular)
Thyroid
(Undifferentiated 
papillary)
Seminoma
Melanoma
Bladder
Liver
Kidney
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Acute myelogenous leukaemia
Melanoma
Colorectal
Most carcinomas
Breast
Glioblastoma multiforme
Prostate
Pancreas
Ovarian
Pancreas
Ovarian

45 (K)
55 (H, K, N)
60 (H, K, N)

45 (K, N)
15 (N)
10 (H)
30 (N)
10 (H)
40 (N, K)
30 (N)
66
12
>50
30
20–30
20
40
12
10
40

BRAF mutation

EGFR overexpression
ERBB2 amplification
PTEN loss

AKT2 amplification

PI3K amplification
EGFR, epidermal-growth-factor receptor; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. H, K and N refer to
HRAS, KRAS and NRAS, respectively.

R E V I E W S

form. Almost all RAS activation in tumours is accounted
for by mutations in codons 12, 13 and 61 (REF. 2).

GAP deletion. RAS can also be activated in tumours by
loss of GAPs. The most significant known example is the
loss of neurofibromin, which is encoded by the NF1
gene 32, which has all the characteristics of a tumour 
suppressor. One allele is lost in people with type I neu-
rofibromatosis — a dominant syndrome that is charac-
terized by large numbers of benign, and occasionally
malignant, tumours in tissues of neural-crest origin. In
the malignant tumours, both copies of NF1 have been
lost, resulting in activation of RAS.

Growth-factor-receptor activation. RAS signalling path-
ways are also commonly activated in tumours in which
growth-factor-receptor tyrosine kinases have been over-
expressed. The most common examples are EGFR and
ERBB2 (also known as HER2/neu), which are frequently
activated by their overexpression in many types of can-
cer, including breast, ovarian and stomach carcinomas33
(TABLE 1). In addition, a mutation in the EGFR gene
results in the expression of a truncated receptor that
lacks part of the extracellular domain34,and this mutated
receptor is found to be overactivated in a significant pro-
portion of glioblastomas and some other tumour types.
EGFR-family tyrosine kinases are also commonly acti-
vated by the autocrine production of EGF-like factors
such  as  transforming  growth  factor-α (TGF-α)  in
tumours. The exact frequency of this activation is hard to
establish in human tumours, but it seems to be very high
in tumours of epithelial origin.

Mutation or amplification of RAS effectors. Recently, it
has emerged that BRAF is frequently activated by muta-
tion in human tumours (TABLE 1) — in particular, in
melanomas (~70%) and colon carcinoma (~15%).
Mutations in BRAF occur in a very limited number of
residues in the kinase domain, all of which result in
kinase activation. The PI3K pathway is activated as a
result of amplification of the p110α gene in a relatively
small proportion of ovarian tumours, and also by the
amplification of its downstream target AKT2 in ovarian
and breast tumours35 (TABLE 1). However, the most signif-
icant direct activation of this pathway in tumours comes
from deletion of the tumour suppressor gene PTEN
(phosphatase and tensin homologue). This gene encodes
a lipid phosphatase that removes the phosphate from the
3′ position of PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 and PtdIns(3,4)P2, so
reversing the accumulation of these second messengers
that is caused by PI3K. PTEN is deleted in ~30–40% of
human tumours36 (TABLE 1), making it the second most
significant tumour-suppressor gene after TP53 (which
encodes p53 in humans).

Cancer therapeutic agents targeting RAS
Farnesyltransferase inhibitors. The covalent attachment
of the farnesyl isoprenoid group to the HRAS, KRAS and
NRAS proteins is the first step in the carboxy-terminal
post-translational modification of these proteins (BOX 1).
Because this processing — which results in the stable

such as cyclin D1, which leads to inactivation of the
retinoblastoma (RB) pathway, and suppression of cell-
cycle inhibitors such as KIP1. In addition, cells become
desensitized to apoptosis through AKT/PKB signalling
and less well-defined mechanisms that are downstream
of RAF. In addition to effects on cell proliferation and
survival, RAS effector pathways also lead to the induc-
tion of angiogenesis, mainly by means of ERK-mediated
transcriptional upregulation of angiogenic factors, and
to increased invasiveness, through both ERK-mediated
expression of matrix metalloproteinases and RAC-medi-
ated effects on the cytoskeleton. Targeting RAS and its
effector pathways could therefore have a potential impact
on several different aspects of malignancy.

Aberrant RAS signalling in tumours
RAS mutation. Aberrant signalling through RAS path-
ways occurs as the result of several different classes of
mutational damage in tumour cells. The most obvious
of these is the mutation of the RAS genes themselves
(TABLE 1). Some 20% of human tumours have activating
point mutations in RAS, most frequently in KRAS
(about 85% of total), then NRAS (about 15%), then
HRAS (less than 1%). These mutations all compromise
the GTPase activity of RAS, preventing GAPs from 
promoting hydrolysis of GTP on RAS and therefore
causing RAS to accumulate in the GTP-bound, active

p110α
One isoform of the catalytic
subunit of phosphoinositide 3-
kinase (PI3K). Type I PI3Ks are
made up of either α, β, γ or δ
forms of p110, together with a
regulatory p85 subunit (for
p110α, β and δ) or p101 subunit
(for p110γ).

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

VOLUME 3 | JANUARY 2003 | 1 5

CAAX peptidomimetic

SCH66336
(Sarasar)

CAAX peptidomimetic

L778,123

BMS-214662‡

CAAX peptidomimetic
Antisense oligonucleotide ISIS 2503
Antisense oligonucleotide ISIS 5132 
Kinase inhibitor 
(non-ATP site)
Kinase inhibitor 
(ATP site)
Kinase inhibitor 
(ATP site)

ZD1839 
(Iressa)

CI-1040 
(PD184352)
BAY 43-9006

Kinase inhibitor 
(ATP site)
Chimeric antibody

OSI-774 
(Tarceva)
IMC-C225
(Cetuximab, 
Erbitux)
Herceptin 
(Trastuzamab)

HRAS mRNA
c-RAF1 mRNA
MEK

RAF

EGFR

EGFR

EGFR

No effect on colorectal cancer;
no effect on survival in combination
with gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer
No effect on transitional cell cancer;
less effective alone than gemcitabine 
on pancreatic cancer
No benefit on NSCLC;
discontinued due to adverse cardiac 
effects
Some stable disease
No effects
No effects
Some partial responses

Some partial responses

Disappointing results in combination
therapy against NSCLC, despite 
promising single-agent results in 
Phase II
Some responses against NSCLC,
ovarian, and head and neck cancer
Some responses in colorectal cancer

II

II

I
II
II
I

I

III

III

II

R E V I E W S

Table 2 | Selected RAS-directed therapies in clinical trials
Target
RAS processing:
farnesyltransferase
inhibitors

Class
CAAX peptidomimetic 

Drug
R115777*
(Zanestra)

Trial phase Trial results
III

ERBB2

Humanized antibody

III 

Licensed for use on breast cancer

*REF. 86. ‡REF. 87. See text for remaining references. Where not specifically referenced, information is derived from ASCO abstracts
(www.asco.org). EGFR, epidermal-growth-factor receptor; NSCLC, non-small-cell lung cancer.

localization of RAS to the plasma membrane — is essen-
tial for the biological activity of RAS, it was an obvious
early target for the design of new rational therapies
against the RAS pathway.

Several strategies have been developed to inhibit the
farnesylation of RAS, the most common being the
design of compounds that mimic the carboxy-terminal
CAAX motif of RAS and compete for binding to farne-
syltransferase. The earliest of these compounds were
peptides, which were subsequently modified to give bet-
ter drug properties (CAAX peptidomimetics). Another
strategy has been to make compounds that compete
with the farnesyl pyrophosphate group. Yet another
group  of drugs  share  properties  of both  farnesyl
pyrophosphate and CAAX, so mimicking a transition
state in the farnesylation process; these drugs are known
as bisubstrate analogues.

Through a massive effort by many leading pharma-
ceutical companies, a large number of highly effective
farnesyltransferase inhibitors (FTIs) have been identi-
fied, mostly through high-throughput screening of
compound libraries, and developed as potential cancer
therapies37,38. These were shown to efficiently inhibit the
farnesylation of HRAS in cells in culture, which led to
high expectations that they would be effective against the
20% of human tumours that have activating mutations
in RAS genes. In an early experiment, transgenic mice
expressing activated HRAS under the MMTV promoter
were treated with a peptidomimetic FTI. These mice

develop frequent mammary carcinomas, which showed
very impressive reversal by the FTI39. In addition, the FTI
caused little general toxicity. This work showed great
promise for FTIs in the treatment of human cancers.

Unfortunately, this early potential has not been real-
ized. The mode of action of FTIs has become increas-
ingly unclear, and the initial spectacular successes that
were achieved in mouse models have not been repeated
in human patients. The root of the problem lies in the
fact that, although HRAS is exclusively modified by far-
nesyltransferase, KRAS and, to a lesser extent, NRAS can
also be modified by geranylgeranyltransferase (GGT).
This results in the transfer to RAS of a different iso-
prenoid group — with 20 carbon atoms, rather than the
15 that are found in the farnesyl group — that is still
able  to  support  the  biological  activity  of RAS.
Geranylgeranylation  of KRAS  and  NRAS  becomes
important only when farnesylation is blocked. As the
vast majority of RAS mutations in human tumours are
in KRAS, followed by NRAS, with very few in HRAS, it
is likely that inhibition of mutant RAS farnesylation is
not responsible for any antitumour effects of FTIs.
Attempting to inhibit the function of KRAS and NRAS
by using FTIs and GGTIs together has failed because of
the very high toxicity that is associated with this combi-
nation40. Indeed, it is likely that the lack of toxicity of
FTIs is due to the fact that they fail to inhibit effectively
the function of all endogenous RAS proteins, which are
known to be essential for normal cell growth.

16 |  JANUARY 2003 | VOLUME 3

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

The FTIs that have been developed to target RAS also
inhibit the farnesylation of a great many other proteins.
An argument has been put forward repeatedly that the
ability of FTIs to inhibit tumour-cell growth and survival
is due to the induction of aberrant modification of the
RAS-related protein RHOB with geranylgeranyl rather
than farnesyl groups, resulting in an altered function of
this protein41. Although this model has some compelling
features, strong arguments to the contrary have also been
made37, so this issue is still unresolved at present.

Despite uncertainty about their mechanism of func-
tion, FTIs do have marked effects on the growth and sur-
vival of some tumour cell lines in vitro and on xenografts
in nude mice, although not necessarily those expressing
activated RAS. Because FTIs inhibit the growth of some
oncogenic KRAS-expressing human tumour cells as
xenografts in nude mice, despite the fact that KRAS pro-
cessing is not blocked, they clearly have potential as anti-
tumour drugs, even though the mechanism of action is
uncertain. The effects of FTIs in these pre-clinical sys-
tems have been reviewed extensively recently 42,43. These
data have prompted the launch of several clinical trials
using FTIs, even though their real target is still controver-
sial. The success or otherwise of these trials will deter-
mine whether there is a future for the use of FTIs as 
cancer therapy, and for what type of tumours they might
be most suitable. The FTIs for which trials have been
reported so far are listed in TABLE 2.

Despite the rebranding of FTIs as signal-transduc-
tion, rather than RAS-specific, inhibitors, they are yet
to show great promise in the clinic, particularly in
Phase II and III trials on common cancers. However,
some more encouraging results have emerged from
early trials on leukaemias44. It is certainly possible that
they could eventually prove to be beneficial in certain
tumour types or in combination with other agents, but
it seems unlikely that they will live up to the early high
expectations generated by the pre-clinical models.

Antisense oligonucleotides against RAS and RAF. A
different approach to the therapeutic targeting of the
RAS pathways is to inhibit the expression of HRAS
and its downstream target c-RAF1; this strategy has
already reached clinical trials. The inhibition has been
achieved by using short antisense synthetic oligonu-
cleotides that are specific for sequences in the mRNAs
for  these  proteins45. On  binding  to  cRNA, these
oligonucleotides can inhibit protein production by
several mechanisms: one is to promote degradation of
the mRNA by directing RNaseH to the RNA–DNA
duplex; another is to interfere with translation. Early
trials  in  nude  mouse  models  showed  promise  in
reducing  the  growth  of KRAS-transformed  lung
tumour  cells46. Isis  Pharmaceuticals  have  been 
successful in developing several stabilized phospho-
rothioate derivatives of oligonucleotides that effec-
tively  reduce  the  expression  of HRAS (ISIS2503) 
or c-RAF1 (ISIS5132) when added to cells47,48 (TABLE 2).
Several conceptual difficulties exist with the use of
these reagents as cancer therapies. One problem concerns
the very high level of specificity of these agents, which

R E V I E W S

could mean that they do not target the most important
proteins in the tumours — for example, mutation of
HRAS is very rare in tumours, so ‘removing’ its expres-
sion is likely to be less effective than targeting KRAS.
Antisense oligonucleotides against KRAS (ISIS6957) that
are effective in cell culture have been developed, but have
not been taken into clinical trials47. Similarly, c-RAF1
might not be the most important mediator of RAS-
induced ERK/MAPK activation, as this function is effec-
tively provided by BRAF49. Another problem is the chal-
lenge  of effectively  delivering  these  relatively  large
molecules to tumours and ensuring that they are taken
up by the malignant cells. In addition, several problems
with nonspecific toxicity of antisense oligonucleotides
have been encountered.

Despite this, ISIS2503 and ISIS5132 — which target
HRAS and c-RAF1, respectively — are now in Phase II
trials, having been proved to be relatively non-toxic in
Phase I trials. A Phase II trial of ISIS5132 showed no
efficacy  against  non-small-cell  lung  carcinoma
(NSCLC)50, but it has been difficult to achieve a reduc-
tion in target protein levels in peripheral blood lym-
phocytes in these patients. Whether or not antisense
therapy is likely to prove effective as a mainstream
tumour treatment remains unclear.

Kinase inhibitors targeting RAS effector pathways. In
recent years, the pharmaceutical industry has become
increasingly adept at developing effective inhibitors of
protein kinases. The most impressive example of such
inhibitors in the clinic has been imatinib (Glivec) —
the inhibitor of BCR–ABL that has provided a great
leap forward in the treatment of chronic myeloid
leukaemia51. Inhibitors of kinases that are involved in
several  RAS  signalling  pathways  have  been  under
development  for  some  time, and  some  have  now
entered clinical trials. These include inhibitors that tar-
get both upstream regulators of RAS, such as growth-
factor receptors, and downstream effectors, such as the
components of the RAF–MAPK pathway.

Drugs that act downstream of RAS, targeting the
RAF–MAPK pathway at two different points, are in trials
at present. The RAF–MAPK pathway is activated in ~30%
of human tumours, as determined by the phosphoryla-
tion status of the MAPKs ERK1 and ERK2  (REF. 52).
Inhibitors were developed several years ago against
MEK1 and MEK2 — the closely related dual-specificity
kinases that are substrates of RAF and that phosphory-
late and activate ERK1 and ERK2. PD98059 (REF. 53) and
U0126 (REF. 54) are fairly specific, non-ATP-competitive
MEK inhibitors that have been widely used for research
purposes. They effectively inhibit ERK activation and
can inhibit the proliferation, survival and motility of
some tumour cell lines under certain conditions55.
MEK inhibitors have proved to be effective in inhibit-
ing the growth of tumours in immunodeficient mice;
for example, the related inhibitor PD184352 has been
used in a large study of colon carcinomas56. The orally
active PD184352, which has now been redesignated
CI-1040, has recently undergone Phase I clinical trials
(TABLE 2). It seems to be well tolerated at doses that

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

VOLUME 3 | JANUARY 2003 | 1 7

R E V I E W S

Box 2 | Other approaches related to RAS in the clinic

Signalling pathways, by their nature, form interlinked networks. So, defining precisely
what is, and what is not, a RAS signalling pathway is, to some extent, inevitably an issue
of semantics. Although the agents described in the main text target the core of the RAS
signalling module, several other drugs in clinical trials are directed at more peripheral
components of these pathways, or pathways that show significant cross-talk with RAS.
Such drugs include CCI-779 and RAD-001, inhibitors of mTOR — the mammalian
target of rapamycin protein that is activated by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K) pathway, another downstream effector of RAS79. Another is the geldanamycin
derivative 17AAG, which inhibits the heat-shock protein HSP90: this results in the
destabilization of a range of signalling proteins, including AKT/PKB, c-RAF1 and
ERBB2 (REF. 80).

Several therapies target proteins that are transcriptionally induced by activated RAS,
especially through the RAF–mitogen-activated-protein-kinase pathway. For example,
activation of this pathway induces expression of matrix metalloproteinases and
angiogenic factors66. Several inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases have been
developed with the hope of inhibiting tumour invasion and metastasis81. Several
inhibitors of angiogenic signalling, particularly inhibitors of the vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) receptor tyrosine kinase, are also being tested in the clinic82.

Other therapies that are targeted at RAS include gene therapy and immunotherapy

approaches. Gene-replacement therapy has provided few, if any, indications as yet that it
is likely to be effective in the treatment of cancer, although gene-directed enzyme
prodrug therapy, sometimes called suicide gene therapy, shows more promise83. More
excitement has been generated by oncolytic viruses that target cells in which the p53 or
RB pathways have become deregulated84.

inhibit ERK activation in patients’ peripheral-blood
mononuclear  cells. Given  the  large  number  of
tumours that have an activated ERK–MAPK pathway,
it is certainly possible that this drug could prove to be
effective against several tumour types. The results of
further trials will be awaited with interest.

The other drug targeting the ERK–MAPK pathway
that has reached clinical trials is BAY43-9006, an orally
active inhibitor of c-RAF1 that targets the ATP-binding
site57 (TABLE 2). It is also active against BRAF, so it is likely
to be effective at reversing ERK activation that is caused
by RAS or BRAF mutation, which is evident in most
melanomas58. This provides an important advantage
over the exclusive targeting of c-RAF1 that is achieved
by the antisense approach (see above). BAY43-9006 is
well tolerated at doses that result in inhibition of phor-
bol-ester-induced ERK phosphorylation in patients’
peripheral-blood lymphocytes. As with CI-1040, the
performance of this drug in Phase II and III trials will be
of considerable importance.

Kinase inhibitors targeting pathways upstream of RAS.
Even in tumours in which RAS is not mutationally
activated, RAS might well be stimulated by aberrant
activation of upstream signalling pathways. The com-
ponents of the regulatory system for RAS that have
proved most amenable to therapeutic intervention are
the growth-factor-receptor tyrosine kinases. In partic-
ular, the EGFR and its close relative ERBB2 are able to
stimulate RAS through GRB2 and SOS. Targeting
EGFR or ERBB2 might be effective in the types of
tumours that overexpress them, resulting in failure 
to activate endogenous wild-type RAS and several
other downstream proliferative and anti-apoptotic 

IC50
The concentration of a drug
giving a 50% inhibition of the
activity of a target enzyme.

pathways. However, this approach could also have
potential against tumours that carry activating muta-
tions in RAS itself because these cells typically produce
large amounts of autocrine growth factors of the EGF
family as a result of activation of the RAF–ERK path-
way 59. Importantly, these growth factors might be able
to activate other proliferative and anti-apoptotic path-
ways beyond what RAS alone can do. Data from trans-
genic  mice  show  that  skin  tumour  formation  in
response to moderate levels of RAS activation, due to
expression of constitutively activated SOS, is dependent
on autocrine activation of EGFR60.

Several approaches have been used to target the
ERBB family, but by far the most progress has been
made in two areas: small-molecule tyrosine kinase
inhibitors61,62 and humanized antibodies against the
receptor extracellular domains63. At least six small-mol-
ecule inhibitors of EGFR tyrosine kinase activity are
now in clinical trials. These all effectively block the
kinase activity of this receptor and might also inhibit
other members of the ERBB family to some degree,
either as a result of cross-reactivity with their closely
related kinase domains or due to inhibition of their
transphosphorylation by EGFR in heterodimers at the
cell surface. The two drugs in this class that are at the
most  advanced  stage  of development  are  ZD1839
(Iressa) from AstraZeneca and OSI-774 (Tarceva) from
OSI/Genentech (TABLE 2).

ZD1839 has been through several Phase I trials, with
the most common toxic side effect being skin rash and
diarrhoea. Four Phase II trials have also been com-
pleted. Promising single-agent clinical antitumour
activity has been reported in advanced NSCLC, head
and neck cancer and prostate carcinoma64. No effect
was seen against metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. Phase
III randomized trials of ZD1839, in combination with
gemcitabine and cisplatin or with paclitaxel and carbo-
platin, for the treatment of NSCLC proved disappoint-
ing, given the expectations from earlier trials, leading to
re-evaluation of treatment regimens.

OSI-774 is similar to ZD1839 in its pharmacologi-
cal characteristics, with around a tenfold lower IC50
against EGFR kinase activity in vitro 65. The two drugs
had similar toxicities in Phase I studies, whereas Phase
II trials using OSI-774 as a single agent produced
promising results against NSCLC, ovarian, and head
and neck cancer. Other EGFR-directed small-molecule
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in early-stage trials include
PKI116  (Novartis), GW2016  (GlaxoSmithKline),
EKB-569 (Genetics Institute/ Wyeth-Ayerst) and CI-
1033 (previously PD183805; Pfizer). Overall, this class
of drug seems to show real potential, especially in the
treatment of lung cancer. A comparison of clinical
results against RAS gene mutation status has not been
made as yet, although RAS mutations are common in
this type of tumour. It will be interesting to find out
whether tumours with RAS mutations are more or
less sensitive to EGFR inhibitors than tumours with-
out the mutations. An increase in sensitivity would
indicate that autocrine EGF signalling is important in
mutant RAS-driven cancer progression in the clinic.

18 |  JANUARY 2003 | VOLUME 3

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

Box 3 | Survival signals in tumour cells: an Achille’s heel?

R E V I E W S

The issue of the degree of the therapeutic window that will be provided by drugs that target the RAS pathways is a
crucial one. All cells use RAS signalling pathways to some extent, so there is a danger that inhibitors will have severe
effects on normal cells as well as tumour cells. Potent inhibition of RAS function through the expression of dominant-
negative mutants or microinjection of neutralizing antibodies has long been known to block normal cell proliferation.
Although, ultimately, each drug target has to be validated experimentally for its differential effect on tumour versus
normal cells, there are conceptual reasons for believing that certain types of signalling inhibitors, in particular those that
inhibit survival pathways, might selectively disadvantage tumour cells. As represented in the figure by the ‘scales’ of life
and death signals that the cell is experiencing, a normal cell requires a continuous low level of survival signal to remain
alive85. These survival signals emanate from various different sources, including adhesion to extracellular matrix, soluble
factors in the extracellular environment and interactions between cells. Each of these acts to instruct the cell that it is in
an appropriate environment. The cells are also exposed to a low level of cell-death signals, perhaps due to occasional
DNA damage or oxidative stress, but the balance of signals favours survival. In the tumour cells, microevolutionary
processes have led to the selection of cells with greatly increased survival signalling — for example, by the loss of PTEN.
Once a mutation has given a cell a survival advantage, it
is then able to tolerate more death signals. For example,
this allows it to survive notable DNA damage as a result
of loss of cell-cycle control and rapid proliferation, and
to be less easily killed by hypoxia and by immune system
attack; all of these events result in the tumour cell’s
increasingly antisocial behaviour. It can also afford to
dispense with previously required survival signals that
were provided by matrix and other cells and to grow in a
completely independent manner that is characteristic of
tumour cells. This disorganized growth is therefore
occurring at high levels of both apoptotic and survival
signals, with the cells being dependent on one or a few
strongly activated survival pathways, compared with a
more complex pattern of survival signals for the normal
cell. If both cell types are now treated with a survival-
pathway inhibitor that targets the pathway on which the
tumour cell is reliant, rapid death of the tumour cell will
result, driven by the damage it has accumulated and
formerly been able to ignore. The normal cell, by
contrast, might survive, having much lower intrinsic
levels of death signals and receiving a wider range of
survival signals.

Tumour cell

Normal cell

Inhibitor

Life 

Death 

Life 

Death 

The ability of activated RAF to promote cell growth and
survival via autocrine EGF signalling, without the possi-
bility of direct activation of PI3K (which exists for
mutant RAS) 66, might make tumours in which RAF
proteins are activated by mutation attractive targets for
EGFR inhibitor therapy58.

The other important class of therapeutic agent that
is directed against ERBB-family receptors are human-
ized monoclonal antibodies. These agents bind to the
extracellular domain of the receptors, inhibit their acti-
vation by ligand, and promote receptor internalization
and downregulation. In addition, they are thought to
induce  a  cytotoxic  immune  response  against  the
tumour cells67. The most advanced of this drug type
against EGFR is a chimeric antibody — IMC-C225 —
which is developed by ImClone Systems and Bristol-
Myers Squibb (Cetuximab, Erbitux) (TABLE 2). Phase I
trials showed that the drug was reasonably well toler-
ated68, and a Phase II trial showed promising results in
advanced colorectal carcinoma. Unfortunately, widely
reported regulatory difficulties have delayed further
development of this potentially important drug.

The  other  important  anti-receptor  drug  is
trastuzamab (Herceptin), which was developed by
Genentech. This humanized monoclonal antibody
against ERBB2 has proved to be effective against breast
carcinomas in which ERBB2 is highly expressed —
that is, 20–30% of cases of metastatic breast cancer. In
Phase III trials, it extended the median survival of
patients from 20.3 months to 25.1 months69. Despite
some problems with cardiac toxicities, trastuzamab
has now been licensed in the United States and else-
where as a single agent for treating metastatic breast
cancer with ERBB2 overexpression. As RAS mutations
are extremely rare in breast cancer, it is unlikely that
trastuzamab is interfering with a mutant RAS-induced
autocrine loop, although it is certainly capable of
blocking the activation of endogenous wild-type RAS
proteins in the breast cancer cells70,71. Despite the con-
siderable success of antibody-based drugs against
ERBB-family proteins, these agents are likely to remain
expensive relative to small-molecule inhibitors — even
after patent protection expires — due to the difficulty
of making large amounts of proteins for clinical use.

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

VOLUME 3 | JANUARY 2003 | 1 9

R E V I E W S

RNA APTAMER
A synthetic RNA molecule
selected for ability to interact
with a target protein.

Other therapeutic approaches that are more distantly

related to RAS pathways are considered in BOX 2.

New directions in targeting of RAS pathways
A recurrent difficulty with targeting important growth
and survival pathways, such as those controlled by the
RAS signalling pathways, is the achievement of a suffi-
cient therapeutic window to enable the elimination of
tumour cells but not their normal neighbours. The
pathways described above are used by normal cells as
well as by tumour cells, although the tumour cells might
develop a greater reliance on them (see BOX 3). The ideal
cancer therapy would exclusively target transformed
cells without harming normal cells. In practice, this is
very difficult. The only treatments to attempt this for
RAS signalling pathways are immunotherapies that aim
to direct the immune response to cells that express spe-
cific mutations in the RAS oncogene72. However, the
effectiveness of these drugs has yet to be shown.

Several other strategies are being used to inhibit
signalling pathways that commonly show increased
activity in tumours, even if they are also used by nor-
mal cells. The development of kinase inhibitors that
are directed against AKT/PKB is, for example, receiv-
ing much attention. Some inhibitors have already
been reported, although their specificity is unclear73.
They might be very effective at removing the survival
advantage of cells in which PTEN has been deleted or
in which RAS has been activated, but their effect on
normal cells will require further analysis. Along simi-
lar  lines, PI3K  inhibitors  might  also  be  useful,
although given that they act higher up the pathway,
they might have more widespread effects.

Additional approaches that target the post-transla-
tional processing of RAS after isoprenylation are also
being pursued. RCE1, the CAAX endoprotease that
removes the end three amino acids, and isoprenylcys-
teine carboxyl methyltransferase (ICMT), the methyl-
transferase that methylates the new carboxyl terminus
residue, are both required for efficient function of
RAS74. Inhibitors against these enzymes might be useful
for treating tumours with mutant RAS, although exist-
ing RCE1 inhibitors have only modest effects on trans-
formed cell growth. Localization of RAS to the plasma
membrane can also be disrupted by farnesylthiosali-
cylic acid, which seems to remove correctly modified
RAS from the membrane, resulting in reversal of the
transformed phenotype of cultured cells that express
activated RAS75.

Very good structural information about the inter-
action of RAS with its effectors exists, with high-reso-
lution structures being available for complexes of RAS
with RAL, PI3K and RALGDS. This has led to interest
in designing drugs that inhibit these protein–protein
interactions. Early  work  focused  on  the  use  of
peptides, but they yielded little success. More recently,
small-molecule  screens  have  been  carried  out.
However, it is clear that the large size of the interac-
tion site between the two molecules will make this
approach very challenging. An RNA APTAMER has been
reported that will effectively inhibit the interaction of

RAS with RAF, but it remains to be seen whether this
approach has potential for clinical application76. A
small-molecule inhibitor of RAS interaction with RAF
has recently been shown to revert RAS transformation
of cells in culture77.

A further target that might be suitable for thera-
peutic intervention is the GTP-binding site of RAS.
In principle, it should be possible to make small mol-
ecules that bind to this site on RAS and inhibit its
interaction with GTP, while maintaining it in an inac-
tive conformation: this is analogous to the approach
that has been successfully used for the ATP-binding
site of many protein kinases. However, the very high
binding affinity of RAS for GTP and GDP, together
with the high concentration of GTP in the cell, might
make this impractical. A more subtle variation on
this idea is to develop GTP analogues that activated
mutants of RAS can effectively hydrolyse to GDP.
3,4-Diaminobenzophenone-phosphoramidate-GTP
(DABP-GTP) has been shown to be hydrolysed by
codon 12 mutant RAS in vitro several hundred times
more rapidly than GTP78. A further development
could be imagined along these lines: a hypothetical
drug capable of interacting with certain residues
(such as 61) that are involved in the hydrophilic
attack  on  the γ-phosphate  of GTP  could  restore
GTPase activity to the oncogenic RAS protein with-
out affecting any other cellular function. Such a drug
might convert oncogenic RAS proteins into normal
molecules. These types of reagents could eventually
prove suitable for clinical development and have the
advantage of selectively targeting mutant RAS.

Conclusions
Just over 20 years on from the discovery that RAS was
an activated oncogene in human tumours, we have
learnt an enormous amount of molecular detail about
how the RAS proteins function. The signalling net-
work they control is not simple, with multiple points
of bifurcation, cross-talk and feedback. We might be
deluding ourselves in thinking that we have a reason-
able understanding of this system, and surely much is
still to be learnt, but we clearly have a great many leads
that are worth pursuing in the search for effective can-
cer therapies. Issues of specificity will remain impor-
tant: how specific should a drug be for its target, and
can it be too specific, thereby failing to inhibit related
molecules that might compensate for the true target?
More importantly, the issue of how great a therapeutic
window is likely to be offered by many of these ratio-
nally designed drugs remains uncertain. The RAS sig-
nalling pathways, in common with many of the other
signalling pathways that are scrutinized by the phar-
maceutical industry, are fundamental to the existence
of normal as well as tumour cells, even if tumour cells
might be more reliant on them. Even if these drugs
and their successors are effective, the problem of resis-
tance will inevitably arise quite quickly, given the
strong selective pressure applied to the genetically
unstable cancer cells. Ultimately, this is most likely to
be overcome by taking a cue from the battle with

20 |  JANUARY 2003 | VOLUME 3

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

infectious diseases and using many different effective
drugs simultaneously, assuming that we ever have
access to such an arsenal. In terms of the design of
clinical trials, clinicians might need to revise the end
points that are used to determine drug efficacy: if
reduction of tumour mass by single agents is the only
end point used, many useful drugs might be discarded
before they have a chance to show their potential in
combinations. The  development  of appropriate 
surrogate markers to monitor drug action will be 

crucial in this regard. Tumour stratification will also
be important in selecting patients on which to test
these inhibitors if drugs that are effective on relatively
rare tumour types are to be identified. Although we
are still only near the beginning of a very long and
labour-intensive process, there is reason to be cau-
tiously optimistic that eventually some of the drugs
discussed here, or more likely their derivatives, will
form the basis of truly effective treatments for many 
common cancers.

This describes the three-dimensional structure of
RAS in complex with one of its effectors, PI3K. The
size of the interaction interface shows the difficulty
that is likely to face the design of inhibitors of
protein–protein interaction.

26. Datta, S. R., Brunet, A. & Greenberg, M. E. Cellular survival:

a play in three Akts. Genes Dev. 13, 2905–2927 (1999).

45. Crooke, S. T. Potential roles of antisense technology in

cancer chemotherapy. Oncogene 19, 6651–6659
(2000).

46. Mukhopadhyay, T., Tainsky, M., Cavender, A. C. & Roth, J. A.
Specific inhibition of K-ras expression and tumorigenicity of
lung cancer cells by antisense RNA. Cancer Res. 51,
1744–1748 (1991).

27. Khwaja, A., Rodriguez-Viciana, P., Wennstrom, S., Warne, P. H.

47. Chen, G., Oh, S., Monia, B. P. & Stacey, D. W. Antisense

& Downward, J. Matrix adhesion and Ras transformation
both activate a phosphoinositide 3-OH kinase and protein
kinase B/Akt cellular survival pathway. EMBO J. 16,
2783–2793 (1997).

28. Lambert, J. M. et al.Tiam1 mediates Ras activation of Rac

by a PI(3)K-independent mechanism. Nature Cell Biol. 4,
621–625 (2002).

oligonucleotides demonstrate a dominant role of c-Ki-RAS
proteins in regulating the proliferation of diploid human
fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 28259–28265 (1996).

48. Monia, B. P., Johnston, J. F., Geiger, T., Muller, M. & Fabbro, D.

Antitumor activity of a phosphorothioate antisense
oligodeoxynucleotide targeted against C-raf kinase. Nature
Med. 2, 668–675 (1996).

29. Malliri, A. et al. Mice deficient in the Rac activator Tiam1 are

49. Hüser, M. et al. MEK kinase activity is not necessary for Raf-1

resistant to Ras-induced skin tumours. Nature 417,
867–871 (2002).

30. De Ruiter, N. D., Burgering, B. M. & Bos, J. L. Regulation of

the Forkhead transcription factor AFX by Ral-dependent
phosphorylation of threonines 447 and 451. Mol. Cell. Biol.
21, 8225–8235 (2001).

31. Kelley, G. G., Reks, S. E., Ondrako, J. M. & Smrcka, A. V.

Phospholipase Cε: a novel Ras effector. EMBO J. 20,
743–754 (2001).

32. Weiss, B., Bollag, G. & Shannon, K. Hyperactive Ras as a

therapeutic target in neurofibromatosis type 1. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 89, 14–22 (1999).

33. Mendelsohn, J. & Baselga, J. The EGF receptor family as

targets for cancer therapy. Oncogene 19, 6550–6565 (2000).

34. Kuan, C. T., Wikstrand, C. J. & Bigner, D. D. EGF mutant

receptor vIII as a molecular target in cancer therapy. Endocr.
Relat. Cancer 8, 83–96 (2001).

Exp. Cell Res. 264, 29–41 (2001).

37. Sebti, S. M. & Hamilton, A. D. Farnesyltransferase and

geranylgeranyltransferase I inhibitors and cancer
therapy: lessons from mechanism and bench-to-
bedside translational studies. Oncogene 19, 6584–6593
(2000).

function. EMBO J. 20, 1940–1951 (2001).

50. Coudert, B. et al. Phase II trial with ISIS 5132 in patients with
small-cell (SCLC) and non-small cell (NSCLC) lung cancer. A
European Organization for Research and Treatment of
Cancer (EORTC) Early Clinical Studies Group report. Eur. J.
Cancer 37, 2194–2198 (2001).

51. Sawyers, C. L. Rational therapeutic intervention in cancer:

kinases as drug targets. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 12,
111–115 (2002).

52. Hoshino, R. et al. Constitutive activation of the 41-/43-kDa

mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway in
human tumors. Oncogene 18, 813–822 (1999).

53. Dudley, D. T., Pang, L., Decker, S. J., Bridges, A. J. & Saltiel, A.
R. A synthetic inhibitor of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
cascade. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 7686–7689 (1995).

54. Favata, M. F. et al. Identification of a novel inhibitor of

mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 273,
18623–18632 (1998).

55. Sebolt-Leopold, J. S. Development of anticancer drugs

targeting the MAP kinase pathway. Oncogene 19,
6594–6599 (2000).

56. Sebolt-Leopold, J. S. et al. Blockade of the MAP kinase

pathway suppresses growth of colon tumors in vivo. Nature
Med. 5, 810–816 (1999).

57. Lyons, J. F., Wilhelm, S., Hibner, B. & Bollag, G. Discovery of

a novel Raf kinase inhibitor. Endocr. Relat. Cancer. 8,
219–225 (2001).

1.

2.

3.

4.

Barbacid, M. Ras genes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 56, 779–827
(1987).
Bos, J. L. Ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review.
Cancer Res. 49, 4682–4689 (1989).
Shields, J. M., Pruitt, K., McFall, A., Shaub, A. & Der, C. J.
Understanding Ras: ‘it ain’t over ‘til it’s over’. Trends Cell
Biol. 10, 147–154 (2000).
Campbell, S. L., Khosravi-Far, R., Rossman, K. L., Clark, G. J.
& Der, C. J. Increasing complexity of Ras signaling.
Oncogene 17, 1395–1413 (1998).

5. Wittinghofer, A. Signal transduction via Ras. Biol. Chem.

6.

7.

8.

9.

379, 933–937 (1998).
Lowy, D. R. & Willumsen, B. M. Function and regulation of
ras. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 62, 851–891 (1993).
Johnson, L. et al. K-ras is an essential gene in the mouse
with partial functional overlap with N-ras. Genes Dev. 11,
2468–2481 (1997).
Seabra, M. C. Membrane association and targeting of
prenylated Ras-like GTPases. Cell Signal. 10, 167–172 (1998).
Cox, A. D. & Der, C..J. Farnesyltransferase inhibitors and
cancer treatment: targeting simply Ras? Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1333, F51–F71 (1997).

10. Hancock, J. F., Magee, A. I., Childs, J. E. & Marshall, C. J. All

ras proteins are polyisoprenylated but only some are
palmitoylated. Cell 57, 1167–1177 (1989).

11. Hancock, J. F., Paterson, H. & Marshall, C. J. A polybasic

domain or palmitoylation is required in addition to the CAAX
motif to localize p21ras to the plasma membrane. Cell 63,
133–139 (1990).
References 10 and 11 describe the original
characterization of the modification of RAS by
farnesylation and, in the case of HRAS and NRAS, but
not KRAS, palmitoylation.

proteins. Physiol. Rev. 81, 153–208 (2001).

14. Cullen, P. J. & Lockyer, P. J. Integration of calcium and Ras

signalling. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3, 339–348 (2002).
15. Daub, H., Weiss, F. U., Wallasch, C. & Ullrich, A. Role of

transactivation of the EGF receptor in signalling by 
G-protein-coupled receptors. Nature 379, 557–560 (1996).
16. Chiu, V. K. et al. Ras signalling on the endoplasmic reticulum

and the Golgi. Nature Cell Biol. 4, 343–350 (2002).

17. Ebinu, J. O. et al. RasGRP, a Ras guanyl nucleotide-

releasing protein with calcium- and diacylglycerol-binding
motifs. Science 280, 1082–1086 (1998).

18. Downward, J., Graves, J. D., Warne, P. H., Rayter, S. &

Cantrell, D. A. Stimulation of p21ras upon T-cell activation.
Nature 346, 719–723 (1990).

19. Donovan, S., Shannon, K. M. & Bollag, G. GTPase
activating proteins: critical regulators of intracellular
signaling. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1602, 23–45 (2002).

20. Leevers, S. J., Paterson, H. F. & Marshall, C. J. Requirement
for Ras in Raf activation is overcome by targeting Raf to the
plasma membrane. Nature 369, 411–414 (1994).

21. Marais, R., Light, Y., Paterson, H. F. & Marshall, C. J. Ras
recruits Raf-1 to the plasma membrane for activation by
tyrosine phosphorylation. EMBO J. 14, 3136–3145 (1995).
22. Yordy, J. S. & Muise-Helmericks, R. C. Signal transduction

and the Ets family of transcription factors. Oncogene 19,
6503–6513 (2000).

23. Pruitt, K. & Der, C. J. Ras and Rho regulation of the cell cycle

and oncogenesis. Cancer Lett. 171, 1–10 (2001).

24. Rodriguez-Viciana, P. et al. Phosphatidylinositol-3-OH
kinase as a direct target of Ras. Nature 370, 527–532
(1994).

25. Pacold, M. E. et al. Crystal structure and functional analysis

of Ras binding to its effector phosphoinositide 3-kinaseγ.
Cell 103, 931–943 (2000).

12. Reuther, G. W. & Der, C. J. The Ras branch of small

35. Bellacosa, A. et al. Molecular alterations of the AKT2

GTPases: Ras family members don’t fall far from the tree.
Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 12, 157–165 (2000).

oncogene in ovarian and breast carcinomas. Int. J. Cancer
64, 280–285 (1995).

13. Takai, Y., Sasaki, T. & Matozaki, T. Small GTP-binding

36. Simpson, L. & Parsons, R. PTEN: life as a tumor suppressor.

38. Cox, A. D. & Der, C. J. Farnesyltransferase inhibitors:

58. Davies, H. et al. Mutations of the BRAF gene in human

promises and realities. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 2, 388–393
(2002).

39. Kohl, N. E. et al. Inhibition of farnesyltransferase induces

regression of mammary and salivary carcinomas in ras
transgenic mice. Nature Med. 1, 792–797 (1995).
The study that launched massive interest in farnesyl-
transferase inhibitors as tumour therapeutic drugs
aimed at RAS. Unfortunately, the activity turned out to
be selective for HRAS, an isoform that is only very
rarely activated in human tumours.

40. Lobell, R. B. et al. Evaluation of farnesyl:protein transferase

and geranylgeranyl:protein transferase inhibitor
combinations in preclinical models. Cancer Res. 61,
8758–8768 (2001).

41. Prendergast, G. C. Actin’ up: RhoB in cancer and
apoptosis. Nature Rev. Cancer 1, 162–168 (2001).

42. Ohkanda, J., Knowles, D.B., Blaskovich, M.A., Sebti, S.M. &

Hamilton, A.D. Inhibitors of protein farnesyltransferase as
novel anticancer agents. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 2, 303–323
(2002).

43. Singh, S. B. & Lingham, R. B. Current progress on farnesyl

protein transferase inhibitors. Curr. Opin. Drug. Discov.
Devel. 5, 225–244 (2002).

44. Cortes, J. E. et al. Efficacy of the farnesyl transferase

inhibitor, ZARNESTRATM (R115777), in chronic myeloid
leukemia and other other hematological malignancies.
Blood 31, 31 (2002).

cancer. Nature 417, 949–954 (2002).

59. Normanno, N., Bianco, C., De Luca, A. & Salomon, D. S.
The role of EGF-related peptides in tumor growth. Front.
Biosci. 6, D685–D707 (2001).

60. Sibilia, M. et al.The EGF receptor provides an essential

survival signal for SOS-dependent skin tumor development.
Cell 102, 211–220 (2000).
An elegant transgenic mouse study showing that the
ability of activated endogenous RAS protein to
promote tumour formation is dependent on the
activity of EGFR, indicating the importance of
autocrine EGF signalling in RAS transformation.
61. Fabbro, D., Parkinson, D. & Matter, A. Protein tyrosine

kinase inhibitors: new treatment modalities? Curr. Opin.
Pharmacol. 2, 374–381 (2002).

62. Wakeling, A. E. Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine

kinase inhibitors. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 2, 382–387 (2002).
63. de Bono, J. S. & Rowinsky, E. K. The ErbB receptor family: a
therapeutic target for cancer. Trends Mol. Med. 8, S19–S26
(2002).

64. Herbst, R. S. ZD1839: targeting the epidermal growth factor
receptor in cancer therapy. Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs 11,
837–849 (2002).

65. Hidalgo, M. et al. Phase I and pharmacologic study of OSI-

774, an epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, in patients with advanced solid malignancies. 
J. Clin. Oncol. 19, 3267–3279 (2001).

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

VOLUME 3 | JANUARY 2003 | 2 1

R E V I E W S

66. Schulze, A., Lehmann, K., Jefferies, H. B., McMahon, M. &

74. Bergo, M. O. et al. Absence of CAAX endoprotease Rce 1:

85. Raff, M. C. Social controls on cell survival and cell death.

Downward, J. Analysis of the transcriptional program induced
by Raf in epithelial cells. Genes Dev. 15, 981–994 (2001).

effects on cell growth and transformation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22,
171–181 (2002).

67. Herbst, R. S. & Shin, D. M. Monoclonal antibodies to target

75. Kloog, Y., Cox, A. D. & Sinensky, M. Concepts in Ras-

76. Kimoto, M., Sakamoto, K., Shirouzu, M., Mirao, I. &

87. Rose, W. C. et al. Preclinical antitumor activity of BMS-

Nature 356, 397–400 (1992).

86. End, D. W. et al. Characterization of the antitumor effects

of the selective farnesyl protein transferase inhibitor
R115777 in vivo and in vitro. Cancer Res. 61, 131–137
(2001).

214662, a highly apoptotic and novel farnesyltransferase
inhibitor. Cancer Res. 61, 7507–7517 (2001).
References 86 and 87 describe preclinical data on
two of the leading farnesyltransferase inhibitors. The
significant effects that are seen in these model
systems are probably not due to targeting RAS, and
it remains unclear whether they can be replicated in
the clinic.

Online links

DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Cancer.gov: http://www.cancer.gov/search
breast carcinoma | colon carcinoma | colorectal cancer | head and
neck cancer | leukaemia | melanoma | non-small-cell lung
carcinoma | ovarian carcinoma | prostate carcinoma | renal-cell
carcinoma | stomach carcinoma
LocusLink: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/
ABL | AKT | BCR | CDC42 | EGFR | ELK1 | ERBB2 | FOS | FoxO
family | GRB2 | HRAS | HSP90 | ICMT | JUN | KRAS | MAPKs |
MEK1 | MEK2 | NF1 | NRAS | PDK1 | PTEN | RAC | RAF | RALBP1 |
RALGDS | RB | RGL | RGL2 | RHO | SHC | SOS1 | SOS2 | TP53 |
TGF-α | VEGF
Access to this interactive links box is free online.

epidermal growth factor receptor-positive tumors: a new
paradigm for cancer therapy. Cancer 94, 1593–1611 (2002).

68. Robert, F. et al. Phase I study of anti-epidermal growth
factor receptor antibody cetuximab in combination with
radiation therapy in patients with advanced head and neck
cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 19, 3234–3243 (2001).

69. Slamon, D. J. et al. Use of chemotherapy plus a monoclonal

antibody against HER2 for metastatic breast cancer that
overexpresses HER2. N. Engl. J. Med. 344, 783–792 (2001).
The results of the Phase III trials with trastuzumab
(Herceptin) that showed it to be an effective treatment
for metastatic breast cancer with amplification of
ERBB2.

directed therapy. Exp. Opin. Investig. Drugs 8, 2121–2140
(1999).

Yokoyama, S. RNA aptamers that specifically bind to the
Ras-binding domain of c-Raf-1. FEBS Lett. 441, 322–326
(1998).

77. Kato-Stankiewicz, J. et al. Inhibitors of Ras/Raf-1 interaction

identified by two-hybrid screening revert Ras-dependent
transformation phenotypes in human cancer cells. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 14398–14403 (2002).

78. Ahmadian, M. R. et al.Guanosine triphopshatase stimulation

of oncogenic Ras mutants. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96,
7065–7070 (1999).

70. Xie, Y., Li, K. & Hung, M. C. Tyrosine phosphorylation of

79. Hidalgo, M. & Rowinsky, E. K. The rapamycin-sensitive

Shc proteins and formation of Shc/Grb2 complex correlate
to the transformation of NIH3T3 cells mediated by the
point-mutation activated neu. Oncogene 10, 2409–2413
(1995).

71. Keshamouni, V. G., Mattingly, R. R. & Reddy, K. B.

Mechanism of 17-β-estradiol-induced Erk1/2 activation in
breast cancer cells: A role for HER2 and PKC-δ. J. Biol.
Chem. 277, 22558–22565 (2002).

72. Hunger, R. E. et al. Successful induction of immune

responses against mutant ras in melanoma patients using
intradermal injection of peptides and GM-CSF as adjuvant.
Exp. Dermatol. 10, 161–167 (2001).

73. Reuveni, H. et al. Toward a PKB inhibitor: modification of a
selective PKA inhibitor by rational design. Biochemistry 41,
10304–10314 (2002).

signal transduction pathway as a target for cancer therapy.
Oncogene 19, 6680–6686 (2000).

80. Neckers, L. Hsp90 inhibitors as novel cancer chemotherapeutic

agents. Trends Mol. Med. 8, S55–S61 (2002).

81. Zucker, S., Cao, J. & Chen, W. T. Critical appraisal of the use

of matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors in cancer treatment.
Oncogene 19, 6642–6650 (2000).

82. Rosen, L. S. Angiogenesis inhibition in solid tumors. Cancer

J. 7 (Suppl. 3), S120–S128 (2001).

83. Kirn, D., Niculescu-Duvaz, I., Hallden, G. & Springer, C. J.

The emerging fields of suicide gene therapy and virotherapy.
Trends Mol. Med. 8, S68–S73 (2002).

84. Biederer, C., Ries, S., Brandts, C. H. & McCormick, F.
Replication-selective viruses for cancer therapy. J. Mol.
Med. 80, 163–175 (2002).

22 |  JANUARY 2003 | VOLUME 3

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

Copyright of Nature Reviews Cancer is the property of Nature Publishing Group and its content may not be
copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written
permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

