123Acta Neuropathologica ISSN 0001-6322Volume 123Number 3 Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321-348DOI 10.1007/s00401-011-0928-6Molecular mechanisms promoting thepathogenesis of Schwann cell neoplasmsSteven L. Carroll123Your article is protected by copyright andall rights are held exclusively by Springer-Verlag. This e-offprint is for personal use onlyand shall not be self-archived in electronicrepositories. If you wish to self-archive yourwork, please use the accepted author’sversion for posting to your own website oryour institution’s repository. You may furtherdeposit the accepted author’s version on afunder’s repository at a funder’s request,provided it is not made publicly available until12 months after publication.Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348
DOI 10.1007/s00401-011-0928-6

R E V I E W

Molecular mechanisms promoting the pathogenesis of Schwann
cell neoplasms

Steven L. Carroll

Received: 6 September 2011 / Revised: 1 December 2011 / Accepted: 4 December 2011 / Published online: 11 December 2011
Ó Springer-Verlag 2011

Abstract Neuroﬁbromas, schwannomas and malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) all arise from
the Schwann cell lineage. Despite their common origin,
these tumor types have distinct pathologies and clinical
behaviors; a growing body of evidence indicates that
they also arise via distinct pathogenic mechanisms.
Identiﬁcation of the genes that are mutated in genetic
diseases characterized by the development of either
neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs [neuroﬁbromatosis type 1
(NF1)] or schwannomas [neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2),
schwannomatosis and Carney complex type 1] has
greatly advanced our understanding of these mechanisms.
The development of genetically engineered mice with
ablation of NF1, NF2, SMARCB1/INI1 or PRKAR1A has
conﬁrmed the key role these genes play in peripheral
nerve sheath tumorigenesis. Establishing the functions of
the NF1, NF2, SMARCB1/INI1 and PRKAR1A gene
products has led to the identiﬁcation of key cytoplasmic
signaling pathways promoting Schwann cell neoplasia
and identiﬁed new therapeutic targets. Analyses of
human neoplasms and genetically engineered mouse
models have established that
interactions with other
tumor suppressors such as TP53 and CDKN2A promote
neuroﬁbroma-MPNST progression and indicate that
in-
tratumoral
interactions between neoplastic and non-
neoplastic cell types play an essential role in peripheral
nerve sheath tumorigenesis. Recent advances have also
provided new insights into the identity of the neural

S. L. Carroll (&)
Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1720 Seventh Avenue
South, SC930G3, Birmingham, AL 35294-0017, USA
e-mail: scarroll@uab.edu

crest-derived populations that give rise to different types
of peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Based on these ﬁnd-
ings, we now have an initial outline of the molecular
mechanisms driving the pathogenesis of neuroﬁbromas,
MPNSTs and schwannomas. However,
this improved
understanding in turn raises a host of intriguing new
questions.
Keywords Neuroﬁbromatosis  Schwannoma 
Tumor suppressor mutations 
Genetically engineered mouse tumor models 
Tumor microenvironment 
Aberrant growth factor signaling

Introduction

Peripheral nerve sheath tumors [neuroﬁbromas, malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) and schwanno-
mas] are relatively common lesions, representing 8.9% of
the nervous system tumors resected in the United States
between 2004 and 2006 [27]. Schwann cells, the myeli-
nating glia of the peripheral nervous system (PNS), are the
source of the neoplastic cells within each of these tumor
types. However, despite their common origin, the pathol-
ogy and clinical behavior of neuroﬁbromas, MPNSTs and
schwannomas is quite distinct. It has also become apparent
that the pathogenesis of these three tumor types differs in
several key features including: (1) mutations affecting
distinct sets of cancer driver genes, (2) distinct intercellular
interactions in the tumor microenvironment and (3) origin
from different Schwann cell and/or neural crest-derived
cellular populations. Information gained from studies of
human tumors and cleverly designed genetically engi-
neered mouse (GEM) models has been used to construct an

123

Author's personal copy322

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

initial scheme detailing the steps involved in the develop-
ment and progression of Schwann cell neoplasms.
Intriguingly,
though, each answer gleaned from these
studies has led to further questions. As a result, we now
appreciate that
the development of Schwann cell neo-
plasms is far more complicated than we initially imagined.
Below, I will review our current understanding of the
molecular mechanisms responsible for the development of
peripheral nerve sheath tumors. In large part, the mecha-
nisms involved in the pathogenesis of neuroﬁbromas and
MPNSTs are distinct from those promoting the develop-
ment of schwannomas. Consequently, I will consider these
groups of tumors separately. Our understanding of the
events involved in the molecular pathogenesis of neuroﬁ-
bromas and MPNSTs owes a great deal to the identiﬁcation
of the gene that is mutated in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1
(NF1; OMIM #162200) and subsequent studies of the
functions of neuroﬁbromin, the protein encoded by the NF1
gene. Identiﬁcation of the genes that are affected in neu-
roﬁbromatosis
101000),
schwannomatosis (OMIM #162091) and Carney complex
type 1 (CNC1; OMIM #160980) has been similarly
important for deciphering the mechanisms involved in the
pathogenesis of schwannomas. I will, therefore, begin each
section presented below with a discussion of the cellular
features of each tumor type, the relevant genetic diseases
and the functions of the proteins encoded by the genes that
are mutated in these diseases. I will then discuss how
subsequent studies with both human tumors and GEM
models of these genetic diseases have led to our current
understanding of the mechanisms involved in the molecu-
lar pathogenesis of Schwann cell neoplasms.

(NF2; OMIM #

type

2

Neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs

Despite major differences in their clinical behavior, all
neuroﬁbroma subtypes are composed of an identical
but complex mixture of cell types

All clinical disciplines recognize that there are several
distinct neuroﬁbroma subtypes. Unfortunately, these same
clinical disciplines disagree as to precisely how to deﬁne
these neuroﬁbroma subtypes (see [24] and the review by
Dr. Fausto Rodriguez in this issue for a detailed discus-
sion of current neuroﬁbroma classiﬁcation schemes). In
contrast, basic scientists studying neuroﬁbromas simply
categorize these neoplasms as either dermal neuroﬁbromas
(neuroﬁbromas arising in skin) or plexiform neuroﬁbro-
mas (neuroﬁbromas that occur in large, deeply situated
nerves or nerve plexuses). Although this latter terminol-
ogy glosses over some important clinical and anatomic
considerations,
is practical as dermal and plexiform

it

123

neuroﬁbromas exhibit quite distinct patterns of clinical
behavior. Dermal neuroﬁbromas typically begin to appear
in NF1 patients as they enter puberty; this observation,
considered together with the fact that pregnant women
with NF1 develop new dermal neuroﬁbromas and dem-
onstrate accelerated growth of existing tumors, has led to
the suggestion that dermal neuroﬁbromas are hormonally
responsive. It is also notable that dermal neuroﬁbromas
have virtually no malignant potential. In contrast, plexi-
form neuroﬁbromas are often congenital and show little
clinical evidence of hormonal responsiveness. Plexiform
neuroﬁbromas are also prone to undergo malignant
transformation and give rise to MPNSTs—an NF1
patient’s lifetime risk of developing an MPNST has been
estimated at 8–13% [43] and 5.9–10.3% [125]. These
distinct patterns of clinical behavior have led a number of
investigators to ask whether dermal and plexiform neu-
roﬁbromas arise via distinct molecular mechanisms and/or
from different progenitors (see below).

Despite their striking biological differences, dermal and
plexiform neuroﬁbromas have an identical, albeit compli-
cated, cellular makeup. Microscopic examination of
hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections of both dermal and
plexiform neuroﬁbromas shows these lesions to be mod-
erately hypercellular and often rather bland-appearing
tumors in which spindled cells are set against a background
rich in mucopolysaccharides and collagen (Fig. 1a).
Immunohistochemistry for Schwann cell markers such as
S100b (Fig. 1b) or the low afﬁnity neurotrophin receptor
(p75LNTR) shows that approximately 40–80% of the cells in
a neuroﬁbroma stain for these markers. The S100b-nega-
tive cells within these lesions represent a mixture of mast
cells (Fig. 1c), ﬁbroblasts, vascular elements and perineu-
rial-like cells; these latter cells have ultrastructural ﬁndings
characteristic of perineurial cells (e.g., numerous pinocy-
totic vesicles and a discontinuous basement membrane) but
lack the epithelial membrane antigen immunoreactivity
typically seen in the perineurium. Neuroﬁbromas also
contain a population of CD34-positive cells that have a
morphology variously described as dendritic or ﬁbroblastic
(Fig. 1d). These cells have been suggested to be either a
novel type of nerve sheath tumor cell that is distinct from
ﬁbroblasts and Schwann cells [193] or resident
tissue
macrophages [31]. However, their identity has not yet been
clearly established.

Given this mixture of cell types, it is not surprising that
the nature of neuroﬁbromas was debated for decades. Some
investigators felt
that neuroﬁbromas were endoneurial
hamartomas or localized hyperplastic processes within
nerves, while other considered them to be true neoplasms
of either ﬁbroblastic or Schwannian origin. This contro-
versy was not resolved until the NF1 tumor suppressor
gene was cloned.

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

323

Fig. 1 Neuroﬁbromas are composed of a complex mixture of cell
types. a Hematoxylin and eosin-stained section of a plexiform
neuroﬁbroma demonstrating the bland spindle cells set against a
myxoid background that are typically seen in these lesions. b Immu-
nohistochemistry for the Schwann cell marker S100b highlights
several immunoreactive elements within this plexiform neuroﬁbroma
(arrows). Note that numerous S100b-negative cells are also present.

c Immunoreactivity for c-Kit (CD117; arrows) is evident in numerous
mast cells in neuroﬁbromas. d CD34 immunoreactivity (red) is
present within both vasculature (arrowhead) and a dendritic popu-
lation
of CD34-
immunoreactive dendritic cells is variable in most neuroﬁbromas;
this region is particularly abundant in these cells. a–c 940 (scale bars
50 lm); d 960

neuroﬁbromas. The

density

(arrows)

in

Cloning of the NF1 gene establishes neuroﬁbromas
as neoplasms and Schwann cells as the neoplastic
component within these tumors

In the general population, neuroﬁbromas are commonly
encountered as solitary lesions. However, patients with
NF1 typically develop numerous neuroﬁbromas at multiple
sites throughout their body. NF1, which is inherited in an
autosomal dominant fashion, is estimated to occur in 1 in
2,500 to 1 in 3,500 newborn infants. The gene affected in
this condition has one of the highest rates of de novo
mutation observed for any single gene disorder; curiously,
these new mutations usually occur in the paternally derived
chromosome [78]. Because of this high new mutation rate,
about 50% of infants with NF1 are born into families with
no previous history of the disease.

Although NF1 is completely penetrant, its manifesta-
tions are highly variable even within the same family. In
addition to neuroﬁbromas, NF1 patients often exhibit
learning disabilities (i.e., intelligence quotients in the low
average range) and can develop bony dysplasias. They are
also prone to the development of multiple other tumor
types including optic gliomas (pilocytic astrocytomas of

the optic nerve), glioblastomas, pheochromocytomas,
rhabdomyosarcomas, gastrointestinal stromal tumors and a
rare leukemia known as juvenile chronic myelogenous
leukemia. Finally, NF1 patients often manifest pigmentary
lesions (melanocytic hamartomas) of the iris known as
Lisch nodules, axillary freckling and cafe´-au-lait macules;
curiously, cafe´-au-lait macules are commonly found over-
lying deeply situated neuroﬁbromas.

Given the devastating clinical features of NF1, it is
understandable that a great deal of effort was invested in
identifying the gene responsible for this condition. These
efforts culminated in 1990, when it was reported that a
gene located on the long arm of chromosome 17 (17q11.2)
was mutated in NF1 patients [186, 189]. The NF1 gene is
quite large, spanning nearly 283,000 base pairs and con-
taining 60 exons, several of which are alternatively spliced
in NF1 transcripts. Since the identiﬁcation of the NF1 gene,
comprehensive screening methods (a process that combines
direct sequencing of all coding exons, copy number anal-
ysis and screening for deep intronic splice mutations) have
been developed to identify mutations in patients potentially
affected by this disease. With these methods, NF1 muta-
tions are found in about 95% of non-founder classic NF1

123

Author's personal copy324

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

patients (patients with neuroﬁbromas in combination with
other clinical features of NF1) [132]; the remaining 5% are
suspected to have mutations in regions of the NF1 gene not
covered by this
screening procedure (e.g., promoter
sequences regulating NF1 expression, the 30 untranslated
region of NF1 mRNA). Of note, there is a cadre of patients
that present with the pigmentary lesions noted above in the
absence of neuroﬁbromas. Mutations of the NF1 gene are
found in about 70% of these patients, with 19% having
SPRED1 mutations (Legius syndrome)
[131] and the
remainder having mutations of other, as yet unidentiﬁed,
genes. Thus, while neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis is a very
common feature of NF1, neuroﬁbromas are not invariably
present in patients with this disease.

Since the protein encoded by the NF1 gene, neuroﬁ-
bromin, contains multiple functional domains (see below)
and some NF1 patients do not develop neuroﬁbromas, the
question arises as to whether mutations at speciﬁc locations
in the NF1 gene predispose patients to the development of
neuroﬁbromas. Unfortunately, at present only sparse
information is available regarding such genotype–pheno-
type correlations. As might be expected for a gene with
such a high new mutation rate, the spectrum of mutations
identiﬁed in the NF1 gene is highly variable. Total deletion
of the NF1 gene is found in only about 5% of NF1 patients
[199], with nonsense mutations, missense mutations,
frameshift mutations [132] and mutations affecting mRNA
splicing [198] being more typically encountered. Although
these latter mutations do tend to cluster in certain locations
within the NF1 gene (particularly exons 10a-c and 37),
they can be found throughout this locus [132]. It has been
observed that patients with whole gene deletions typically
have large numbers of dermal neuroﬁbromas together with
dysmorphic features and substantial cognitive impairment
[141]; these patients are also at increased risk for the
development of plexiform neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs
[121]. Beyond that, the only genotype–phenotype correla-
tion relevant to neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis identiﬁed to
date is that patients with a 3 base pair in-frame deletion in
exon 17 of the NF1 gene lack neuroﬁbromas while dem-
onstrating other features of NF1 [181]. Clearly, further
investigation into the relationship between speciﬁc NF1
mutations and neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis is needed.

The identiﬁcation of the NF1 gene also made it possible
to establish the nature of neuroﬁbromas and the identity of
the neoplastic cell
type within these lesions. Both the
autosomal dominant inheritance pattern of NF1 and the
functional characteristics of the protein encoded by the
NF1 locus (see below) suggested that NF1 was a tumor
suppressor gene. If this postulate was correct,
it was
anticipated that NF1 patients would carry one mutated and
one wild-type allele and that a ‘‘second hit’’ mutation of the
remaining functional NF1 gene in a relevant cell type

123

would result in tumorigenesis. In keeping with these pre-
dictions, NF1 loss of heterozygosity (LOH) was identiﬁed
in cultured Schwann cells, but not ﬁbroblasts, derived from
neuroﬁbromas [92] as well as in S100b immunoreactive
cells within neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs [144]. These
observations, together with subsequent studies of neuroﬁ-
bromin function and the generation of genetically
engineered mouse models directly testing the consequences
of Nf1 ablation (see below), clearly established that neu-
roﬁbroma pathogenesis results from mutation of a tumor
suppressor gene and that these lesions are thus true neo-
plasms. As NF1 LOH occurred speciﬁcally in Schwann
cells, these studies also demonstrated that Schwann cells
are the neoplastic component in neuroﬁbromas.

The NF1 gene encodes neuroﬁbromin, a protein
that inhibits Ras signaling and has other actions

Neuroﬁbromin, the 220 kDa protein encoded by the NF1
gene, spans 2,818 amino acids. The large size of neuroﬁ-
bromin made initial attempts to understand the function of
this polypeptide difﬁcult. However, shortly after the iden-
tiﬁcation of the NF1 gene, it was noted that neuroﬁbromin
contains a domain (amino acids 1203–1549 in GenBank
sequence NP_000258.1; Fig. 2) that is highly homologous
to the Ras GTPase-activating protein (GAP) domain found
in the yeast proteins IRA1 and IRA2 [205]. Ras proteins
are highly conserved GTP-binding proteins (G-proteins)
that, when activated, stimulate cytoplasmic signaling
pathways that promote proliferation, survival, migration
and a host of other essential cellular functions. Ras acti-
vation is triggered when Ras-bound GDP is exchanged for
GTP, a process that is facilitated by a diverse class of
molecules known as guanine nucleotide exchange factors
(GEFs). Subsequent inactivation of activated Ras proteins
is dependent upon the cleavage of a phosphate from Ras-
bound GTP by a GTPase-activity intrinsic to Ras. How-
ever, this intrinsic GTPase activity is inefﬁcient and, in
isolation, cleaves GTP as a very low rate; GAPs such as
IRA1 and IRA2 facilitate Ras inactivation by binding to
Ras and enhancing its GTPase activity by several orders of
magnitude. In keeping with their structural similarity, the
neuroﬁbromin GAP-related domain (GRD) proved capable
of rescuing the heat shock-sensitive phenotype of IRA1-
and IRA2-deﬁcient yeast [204], suggesting that its function
is both highly conserved and analogous to that of the yeast
GAPs. Recombinant neuroﬁbromin GRD also stimulated
the GTPase activity of yeast RAS2 and human H-Ras
[204],
functionally verifying this neuroﬁbromin
domain’s ability to inactivate Ras.

thus

It is now recognized that neuroﬁbromin is a member of a
family of mammalian Ras GAPs that includes RASA1
(p120GAP), RASA2 (Gap1m), RASA3 (GAP1IP4BP),

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

325

RASA4 (CAPRI), RASAL1 and SYNGAP (p135SynGAP)
(Fig. 2). Although the expression of some of these GAPs
(e.g., SYNGAP) is restricted to speciﬁc cell types, others
are expressed ubiquitously. Further, neuroﬁbromin and
RASA1 bind to the same target Ras proteins (see below for
a discussion of these different Ras proteins) with similar
afﬁnities [2, 3, 157]. However, despite their overlapping
expression patterns and the similarity of their interactions
with Ras proteins, these other Ras GAPs cannot compen-
sate for neuroﬁbromin loss and thus prevent tumorigenesis
(indeed, NF1 is the only Ras GAP gene that, when mutated,
results in a tumor predisposition syndrome). This may
reﬂect the fact that neuroﬁbromin contains a number of
structural domains that are not present in other Ras GAP
family members (Fig. 2); some of these domains appear to
modulate neuroﬁbromin’s Ras GAP activity while others
may serve different functions altogether. For instance,

neuroﬁbromin contains cysteine/serine-rich (CSRD) and
tubulin-binding (TBD) domains that are located N-terminal
to the GRD and act as regulators of neuroﬁbromin-mediated
inhibition of Ras signaling. Interestingly, these two domains
can act in an opposing manner—tubulin binding to the TBD
inhibits the GAP activity of neuroﬁbromin [17], whereas
phosphorylation of the CSRD by protein kinase Ca enhances
this same activity [118]. Neuroﬁbromin also contains a
bipartite domain C-terminal to the GRD that contains both a
segment homologous to the yeast Sec14p protein and a
pleckstrin homology domain [34]. Although the function of
this Sec14p homology domain is incompletely understood, it
can speciﬁcally bind glycerophospholipids [194] and struc-
tural studies predict that mutations in this domain will
interfere with as yet undeﬁned protein–protein interactions
[195]. A focal adhesion kinase (FAK)-interacting domain,
which
substrate

allows neuroﬁbromin

to modulate

CSRD

RasGAP

Sec14 PH

TBD

Neurofibromin

FAK-binding
domain

NLS

SH2

SH2

C2

RasGAP

RASA1/p120GAP

SH3

PH

C2 C2

RasGAP

PH -
Like

RASA2/GAP1m

BTK

C2 C2

RasGAP

PH -
Like

RASA3/GAP1

IP4BP

BTK

C2 C2

RasGAP

PH

RASA4/CAPRI

BTK

C2 C2

RasGAP

PH -
Like

RASAL1

BTK

PH -
Like

 C2

RasGAP

DUF3498

SYNGAP1/p135SynGAP

SH3

Fig. 2 Schematic illustrating the functional domains present
in
neuroﬁbromin and comparing the structure of neuroﬁbromin to that
of other Ras GAPs. The lengths of each protein (black bars) and
domains within each Ras GAP (colored expansions) are scaled to the
actual number of amino acids in each. See the text for a detailed
explanation of known functions of the domains contained within
neuroﬁbromin. Domain designations are as follows: CSRD cysteine/
serine-rich domain, TBD tubulin-binding domain, RasGAP Ras
GTPase-activating protein, Sec14 Sec14-homology domain, PH
pleckstrin homology domain that can target protein to appropriate

cellular location and bind inositol phosphates and other proteins, NLS
nuclear localization signal; SH2, domain that binds phosphotyrosine-
containing ligands via two surface pockets (a phosphotyrosine pocket
and a hydrophobic binding pocket), SH3 domain that binds proline-
rich ligands with moderate afﬁnity and selectivity (particularly PxxP
motifs), C2 calcium-dependent membrane-targeting module that
binds a variety of substrates including phospholipids,
inositol
polyphosphates and intracellular proteins, BTK Bruton tyrosine
kinase-like motif capable of binding zinc (always follows a PH
domain), DUF3498 domain of unknown function

123

Author's personal copy326

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

adherence, is additionally present at the C-terminal end of
neuroﬁbromin [97]. Curiously, although nuclear actions
have not yet been deﬁned for neuroﬁbromin, the FAK-
binding domain contains a nuclear localization signal [184].
In comparison, the overwhelming majority of the non-GRD
domains present in other Ras GAPs (Src homology 2 (SH2),
Src homology 3 (SH3), calcium-binding C2 and Bruton
tyrosine kinase-like domains) are not found in neuroﬁbro-
min. Consequently, it is possible that other Ras GAPs do not
compensate for neuroﬁbromin loss because their other non-
GRD domains impose regulatory and/or spatial constraints
distinct from those acting on neuroﬁbromin.

The functional validation of the neuroﬁbromin GRD led
to the expectation that neuroﬁbromin loss would result in
increased levels of activated Ras
in NF1-associated
peripheral nerve sheath tumors. It was subsequently veriﬁed
that Ras activation is indeed increased in neuroﬁbromas
[166] and MPNSTs [14], which suggested that inhibiting
Ras activity would be an effective means of treating these
tumors. Consequently, a clinical trial with tipifarnib, an
agent which inhibits Ras farnesylation (a modiﬁcation
essential for Ras maturation and appropriate localization),
was initiated in children with plexiform neuroﬁbromas.
However, although tipifarnib performed well in the phase I
trial [196], it proved ineffective in phase II. There are
several potential explanations for this failure. However, one
particularly attractive explanation is derived from the fact
that neuroﬁbromin regulates the activity of multiple Ras
proteins in mammalian cells (Fig. 3), including members of
both the classic Ras
(H-Ras, N-Ras, K-Ras4A and
K-Ras4B) and R-Ras (R-Ras, R-Ras2/TC21 and M-Ras/R-
Ras3) subfamilies [139]; whereas farnesyl
transferase
inhibitors do effectively inhibit H-Ras action, other neuro-
ﬁbromin-regulated Ras proteins can bypass the effects of
farnesyl transferase inhibitors by using alternative modiﬁ-
cations (e.g., geranylgeranylation). At present, precisely
what contribution each member of the classic Ras and
R-Ras subfamilies makes to peripheral nerve sheath
tumorigenesis is unclear. Although the identity of the Ras
proteins expressed in neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs has not
yet been fully investigated, H-Ras, N-Ras, K-Ras, R-Ras
and R-Ras2 are all present in murine wild-type and Nf1-/-
Schwann cells [70]. Studies with H-Ras dominant negative
mutants, which inhibit all members of the classic Ras sub-
family, and R-Ras dominant negative mutants, which
similarly inhibit R-Ras subfamily members, suggest that
one or more classic Ras proteins mediate proliferation in
these glia while an R-Ras family member (likely R-Ras2)
promotes their migration [70]. Nonetheless, it remains to be
established whether speciﬁc Ras proteins play a similar role
in neoplastic Schwann cells and to what degree these pro-
teins can compensate for each other. Given this uncertainty
about the role individual Ras proteins play in neuroﬁbromas

123

and MPNSTs, it is understandable that attention has instead
shifted to identifying key Ras-regulated signaling cascades
that can be targeted therapeutically. In this regard, it is
notable that recent evidence has implicated the PI3 kinase-
Akt-TSC2-mTOR-S6 kinase cascade as a particularly
important pathway in NF1-associated peripheral nerve
sheath tumors [80, 81]. Indeed, initial preclinical studies in
which mice xenografted with MPNST cells were treated
with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin or rapamycin deriva-
tives alone [15, 82], or in combination with Akt inhibitors
[212], have already shown promising effects.

Given its large size and the highly conserved nature of
neuroﬁbromin, the fact that the mutations at multiple sites
outside the GRD result in tumorigenesis and the ﬁnding
that this protein contains multiple structural domains in
addition to the GRD, it is reasonable to ask whether neu-
roﬁbromin regulates the activity of cytoplasmic signaling
events distinct from the canonical Ras-regulated cascades.
At present, only limited information is available regarding
potential neuroﬁbromin effects on other signaling pathways
(Fig. 3) and it is not clear what neuroﬁbromin domains
mediate these effects. There is evidence that that neuroﬁ-
bromin alters cAMP levels in astrocytes [37], non-
neoplastic Schwann cells [85] and neoplastic Schwann
cells [35], thereby regulating cAMP-dependent signaling
pathways.
increases
cAMP levels in Schwann cells while decreasing them in

Interestingly, neuroﬁbromin loss

  Growth Factor
(e.g. NRG1, EGF)

Kit Ligand

R-Ras 
and/or
R-Ras2

Migration

Altered
Calcium
Signaling
Pathways

GEFs

H - , N - 
and/or K-Ras

Raf

PI3K

XNF1

cAMP

 Protein
Kinase A

MEK 1/2

ERK 1/2

Proliferation

Fig. 3 A schematic demonstrating the cytoplasmic signaling path-
ways that are affected by neuroﬁbromin loss and what impact these
pathways have on key aspects of neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis inducing
tumor cell migration and proliferation and the secretion of factors
such as Kit ligand

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

327

astrocytes; these respective changes are both likely to be
pro-proliferative. There is also evidence that neuroﬁbro-
min loss
inﬂuences calcium signaling. Keratinocytes
isolated from NF1 patients have low resting intracellular
calcium levels, reduced calcium stores and reduced ca-
pacitative calcium inﬂux compared to controls [95].
Intercellular waves of calcium propagate abnormally in
sheets of these cells, apparently as a result of abnormal
localization of gap junction proteins. MPNST cells stim-
ulated with platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB)
also show an increase in intracellular calcium levels
which is not evident in similarly treated wild-type human
Schwann cells [36]. This increase is associated with
enhanced phosphorylation of the calmodulin target CaM-
KII, which promotes mitogenesis. In keeping with these
latter observations, we have recently found that tamoxifen
potently inhibits MPNST proliferation and survival both
in culture and in mice orthotopically xenografted with
MPNST cells [22]. This effect is estrogen receptor-inde-
pendent and appears instead to reﬂect tamoxifen action on
calmodulin (another known tamoxifen target) as it
is
phenocopied by triﬂuoperazine, another well-established
calmodulin inhibitor.

Genetically engineered mouse models conﬁrm the key
role Nf1 loss plays in neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis
and argue that non-neoplastic cells play an essential
role in tumorigenesis

With the identiﬁcation of the NF1 gene, it became feasible
to directly test the role this tumor suppressor plays in
neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis by creating mice with null
mutations of the murine Nf1 gene. Four years after the
identiﬁcation of the NF1 gene, it was reported that Nf1?/-
mice were viable and developed some of the neoplasms
(leukemia and pheochromocytomas) that are less com-
monly found in NF1 patients [77]. Unfortunately, however,
these animals did not present with neuroﬁbromas or
MPNSTs. Further, it was not possible to determine whether
complete Nf1 loss in Nf1-/- mice could induce peripheral
nerve sheath tumor formation as these mice died in utero
secondary to cardiac malformations [19] or exencephaly
[98]. In an effort to bypass the consequences of neuroﬁ-
bromin loss in the developing heart and brain, chimeras
were produced by fusing Nf1-/- and wild-type embryos.
Encouragingly, some of these mice did develop tumors
resembling neuroﬁbromas in spinal nerve roots and other
large nerves [29], suggesting that complete Nf1 loss in one
or more cell types could trigger neuroﬁbroma formation.

To deﬁnitively establish that it was complete Nf1 loss in
the Schwann cell lineage that induced neuroﬁbroma path-
ogenesis, a new mouse model was produced in which
ﬂoxed Nf1 alleles were conditionally ablated in Schwann

types,

cells by Cre recombinase expressed under the control of the
Krox20 promoter [211]. Surprisingly, although these ani-
mals developed microscopic hyperplastic lesions within
nerves,
they did not develop neuroﬁbromas. However,
noting that neuroﬁbromas arising in human NF1 patients
contain NF1 null Schwann cells embedded in a background
of numerous NF1?/- non-neoplastic cell
these
investigators next constructed mice with complete Nf1 loss
in Schwann cells and Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in all other
cell types (Krox20-Cre; Nf1ﬂox/- mice). In contrast to their
these Krox20-Cre;
initial conditional knockout model,
Nf1ﬂox/- mice developed neuroﬁbromas in multiple spinal
nerve roots and cranial nerves. Based on these and other
observations (see below), it was proposed that an NF1
haploinsufﬁcient tumor microenvironment is required for
neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis. However, this hypothesis was
subsequently challenged by studies of mouse models in
which Nf1 was ablated in the Schwann cell lineage using
Desert hedgehog (Dhh)-Cre [201] or proteolipid protein
(Plp)-Cre [123] drivers. Both of these mouse models
readily developed neuroﬁbromas despite having two intact
Nf1 alleles in other cell types present within their neuro-
ﬁbromas. In addition, it is clear that (barring the rare case
of NF1 mosaicism) sporadic neuroﬁbromas arising in the
general population develop on a background of non-sch-
wannian cells with intact NF1 function. At present,
it
remains unclear why Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in non-sch-
wannian cells is required for neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis in
some settings but not in others.

The suggestion that an NF1 haploinsufﬁcient

tumor
microenvironment potentiates neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis
raises the question of which cell types within neuroﬁbro-
mas are essential for this process and what signaling
molecules mediate these intercellular interactions. To date,
the most convincing studies have focused on mast cells. Kit
ligand (also known as stem cell factor), which is a growth
factor that promotes the migration, maturation, survival
and activation of mast cells, is secreted by Schwann cells in
neuroﬁbromas [68, 154]. Nf1-/- Schwann cells secrete
approximately six times more Kit ligand than either Nf1?/-
or wild-type Schwann cells [207], indicating that a com-
plete loss of neuroﬁbromin expression enhances the release
of this factor. The migration [76], proliferation and survival
[75, 76] of Nf1?/- mast cells challenged with Kit ligand are
also enhanced compared to wild-type mast cells treated
with this factor, demonstrating that Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency
results in exaggerated mast cell responses to Kit ligand. Kit
ligand also induces mast cell secretion of transforming
growth factor-b (TGFb), a process that is enhanced in
Nf1?/- mast cells [206]. Nf1?/- ﬁbroblasts treated with
TGFb show increased production of collagen relative to
wild-type ﬁbroblasts, suggesting that stimulation of intra-
tumoral ﬁbroblasts by this mast cell-derived factor may be

123

Author's personal copy328

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

responsible for the dense collagen deposits often observed
in human neuroﬁbromas.

Studies in knockout mice have conﬁrmed the impor-
tance of mast cells in neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis. As noted
earlier, neuroﬁbromas do not develop in Krox20-Cre;
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mice. However, if Krox20-Cre; Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mice
are lethally irradiated and then grafted with Nf1?/- bone
marrow,
they develop large numbers of neuroﬁbromas
containing Nf1?/- mast cells [208]. Recruitment of mast
cells and neuroﬁbroma formation in these animals is
clearly dependent on the action of Kit ligand as no tumor
formation was observed in analogous experiments in which
Krox20-Cre; Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mice were grafted with bone mar-
row derived from mice with hypoactive c-Kit receptors
(Nf1?/-; c-KitW41/W41 mice). Likewise, neuroﬁbromas did
not develop when lethally irradiated Krox20-Cre; Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox
mice were grafted with wild-type bone marrow. It is also
evident
that mast cells potentiate continued growth of
neuroﬁbromas as treating Krox20-Cre; Nf1-/ﬂox mice with
established neuroﬁbromas with the c-Kit inhibitor imatinib
mesylate reduces tumor volumes and proliferation rates
while increasing apoptosis. Having said that, it must be
emphasized that it is still unclear precisely what functions
mast cells perform upon reaching the developing neuroﬁ-
broma that
initiation and subsequent
growth.

facilitate tumor

Although the work noted above provides clear evidence
that mast cells promote neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis, the role
that other cell types play in this process remains undeter-
mined. A host of reciprocal interactions between Schwann
cells and other cell types (ﬁbroblasts, vascular elements,
perineurial-like cells, CD34 ? cells) intrinsic to neuroﬁ-
bromas can easily be envisioned. Future investigations
directed towards establishing whether these other cell types
are required for tumorigenesis, what signals are involved in
their recruitment and what function they perform after
arriving in the developing tumor will be of great interest.

Genetically engineered mouse models suggest
that dermal and plexiform neuroﬁbromas arise
from different progenitors

Given the presence of Schwann cells in neuroﬁbromas and
the fact that ablation of the Nf1 gene in the Schwann cell
lineage results in neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis, it is evident
that Schwann cells are the neoplastic elements in neuroﬁ-
bromas. However,
the work described above did not
demonstrate which speciﬁc stage in Schwann cell differ-
entiation serves as the source of these neoplastic elements.
In addition, the major biologic differences between dermal
and plexiform neuroﬁbromas raise the question of whether
these lesions are derived from distinct progenitors. As
differences in the origin of these tumors can potentially

123

inﬂuence their responsiveness to therapeutic agents, a great
deal of effort has been invested in generating genetically
engineered mouse models designed to identify the origin of
the neoplastic cell type in these tumors.

Conceptually, these efforts have focused on trying to
relate the neuroﬁbroma cell of origin to speciﬁc stages in
Schwann cell development. The Schwann cell
lineage,
which has been most extensively studied in developing
mouse sciatic nerve, arises from neural crest cells, a tran-
sient multipotent population of cells which appears in the
mouse between embryonic days (E) 8.5 and 10.5 (Fig. 4a).
Neural crest cells give rise to Schwann cell precursors (also
known as neural crest stem cells) between E12 and E13
which in turn become committed immature Schwann cells
(E13–E15) that ultimately give rise to the two Schwann
cell phenotypes (myelinating and non-myelinating) seen in
adults. Ablation of Nf1 in neural crest cells within Wnt1-
Cre; Nf1ﬂox/-, Mpz-Cre; Nf1ﬂox/- and Pax3-Cre; Nf1ﬂox/-
mice does not result
in neuroﬁbroma formation [84].
Granted, these mice die at birth, so it could be argued that
they might have developed neuroﬁbromas had they had
survived for a longer period. However, Krox20-Cre;
Nf1ﬂox/- mice, which do not ablate Nf1 until later stages in
the Schwann cell lineage, do develop neuroﬁbromas which
indicates that Nf1 loss in neural crest cells is not required
for neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis.

E12.5,

develop

at

neuroﬁbromas

In contrast, ablation of Nf1 in Schwann cell precursors
does result in neuroﬁbroma formation. P0a-Cre; Nf1ﬂox/-
mice, which express Cre in Schwann cell precursors
beginning
by
15–20 months of age [84, 210]. However, Schwann cell
precursors could not be isolated from the sciatic nerves of
P0a-Cre; Nf1ﬂox/- mice and Schwann cell precursors iso-
lated from E13 Nf1-/- mice were not tumorigenic when
grafted into the sciatic nerves of Nf1?/- mice [84]. Based
on these observations and the ﬁnding that proliferating
cells within neuroﬁbromas arising in P0a-Cre; Nf1ﬂox/-
mice lacked markers characteristic of Schwann cell pre-
cursors [e.g., brain lipid binding protein (BLBP), also
known as fatty acid binding protein 7 (FABP7)], it was
proposed that mature non-myelinating Schwann cells
derived from Schwann cell precursors were the most likely
progenitor for neuroﬁbromas. In contrast, however, Dhh-
Cre; Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mice (which also express Cre in Schwann
cell precursors beginning at E12.5) develop neuroﬁbromas
that contain numerous BLBP immunoreactive cells [201].
This was interpreted as indicating that a progenitor at the
Schwann cell precursor-immature Schwann cell transition
is a more likely source for the neoplastic cells within
neuroﬁbromas. In an attempt to resolve these conﬂicting
views, PLP-CreERT2; Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox [123] and PLP-CreERT2;
Nf1ﬂox/- [103] mice, in which Cre-mediated gene ablation
is induced by administration of tamoxifen, were generated

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

329

a

Boundary Cap Cells
E10.5

?

Neural Crest
E8.5 - 9

Schwann Cell
Precursor
E12 - 13

Immature
Schwann Cell
E13-15

b

Myelinating
Schwann Cell

Nonmyelinating 
Schwann Cell

Fig. 4 Multiple genetically engineered mouse models have been
designed to determine whether speciﬁc stages in Schwann cell
development are particularly susceptible to the pathogenesis of
plexiform neuroﬁbromas. a This scheme outlines the different stages
of Schwann cell differentiation and the timing of their occurrence in
the main trunk of the sciatic nerve; the embryonic days (E) indicated
correspond to the periods at which these cell types ﬁrst become
evident during mouse embryogenesis. Bars beneath different stages
indicate cell types in which Nf1 loss can result in neuroﬁbroma
pathogenesis, while the double bar indicates a stage of particular
susceptibility to tumorigenesis. Boundary cap cells, a neural crest-
derived population distinct from that giving rise to Schwann cells in
the main trunk of the sciatic nerve, are also indicated in this scheme as
they represent another population potentially capable of giving rise to
plexiform neuroﬁbromas. b The diagram to the left represents a cross-

section of embryonic spinal cord together with its associated dorsal
nerve roots, dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and ventral nerve roots.
Boundary cap cells (indicated in blue) are initially found at the dorsal
nerve roots entry zone and the ventral nerve root exit zone. They
subsequently migrate into adjacent regions of the nerve roots and the
dorsal root ganglia where they give rise to multiple cell types. The
box to the right presents a magniﬁed view of developing dorsal root
ganglion that has been invaded by boundary cap cells
that
subsequently differentiated into Schwann cells, a subpopulation of
nociceptive neurons and their associated satellite cells. Progeny
derived from boundary cap cells are colored blue. Note that some
DRG neurons and satellite cells are not blue. This indicates that these
cellular elements are derived from precursors other than boundary cap
cells

and used to ablate Nf1 embryonically or in adulthood. Nf1
ablation at either of these times resulted in neuroﬁbroma
formation. However,
tumorigenesis was more frequent
when tamoxifen was administered embryonically. These
observations suggest that, while Nf1 loss most effectively
leads to tumorigenesis when occurring in Schwann cell
precursors or immature Schwann cells, it can still lead to
neuroﬁbroma formation when occurring in mature Schw-
ann cells. Alternatively,
is possible that an as yet
undetected Schwann cell precursor population persists in

it

adult nerve and is the source of these lesions. In addition,
other potential sources of neoplastic Schwann cells within
neuroﬁbromas such as boundary cap cells (Fig. 4b) have
not yet been ruled out. This latter possibility is consistent
with the well-known clinical observation that neuroﬁbro-
mas commonly arise on dorsal spinal nerve roots in the
vicinity of dorsal root ganglia.

While it is clear that plexiform neuroﬁbromas arise
within peripheral nerves, the same cannot be said for der-
mal neuroﬁbromas. Although it has long been assumed that

123

Author's personal copy330

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

dermal neuroﬁbromas in NF1 patients arise from small
cutaneous nerves (Fig. 5a),
these tumors are often not
clearly associated with a nerve; alternatively, if a nerve is
present within a dermal neuroﬁbroma, it is difﬁcult to rule
out the possibility that it is entrapped rather than being the
source of the tumor. In addition, the Nf1 knockout models

described above do not develop neuroﬁbromas that are
clearly equivalent to human dermal neuroﬁbromas despite
the use of a number of Cre driver lines that are presumably
active in Schwann cells within small cutaneous nerves.
These observations have led investigators to consider other
possible sources for the neoplastic Schwann cells found

a

b

Dermal Neurofibroma
Initiating Cell in Dermal
Nerve

Dermal Neurofibroma
Initiating Cell in Hair 
Follicle

Fig. 5 A comparison of two proposed sources of origin for dermal
neuroﬁbromas. The diagram to the left illustrates a cross-section of
skin including the epidermis, dermis and subcutis. A hair shaft,
together with its associated follicle and sebaceous gland, is evident in
the center of this section. In this ﬁrst scheme (a), dermal neuroﬁbroma
pathogenesis occurs when the remaining functional copy of NF1 is
lost in a Schwann cell (indicated in blue) within a small cutaneous
nonmyelinating nerve. Although this model has long been attractive,
it does not explain why dermal neuroﬁbromas typically do not
develop in mice with conditional knockouts of Nf1; the promoters

used to drive Cre recombinase expression in many of these animals
would be expected to be active in small cutaneous nerves just as they
are in larger nerves. An alternative source for dermal neuroﬁbromas
(b), which is now supported by ﬁndings made with recently derived
genetically engineered mouse models, is that they are derived from
skin-derived precursors (SKPs), a multipotent neural crest-derived
precursor population that
is located within hair follicles. In this
scheme, neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis is initiated when the remaining
functional copy of NF1 is lost in a SKP (indicated as a blue cell within
the hair follicle)

123

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

331

within dermal neuroﬁbromas such as skin-derived precur-
sors
(SKPs; Fig. 5b). SKPs are neural crest-derived
multipotent progenitors that are capable of differentiating
into either Schwann cells or melanocytes and are present
within hair follicles in both mice and humans [48]. In
keeping with the hypothesis that SKPs are the source of
neoplastic Schwann cells within neuroﬁbromas, painting
tamoxifen onto the skin of CMV-CreERT2;Nf1ﬂox/- mouse
pups leads to the development of dermal neuroﬁbromas at
the site of administration [104]. Further, when SKPs are
isolated from these mice, treated with tamoxifen and then
grafted into the dermis of pregnant mice, neuroﬁbromas
develop at the graft site. These observations thus provide
strong evidence that dermal and plexiform neuroﬁbromas
arise from fundamentally different progenitors. However,
precisely what the functional differences between these
progenitors
Indeed,
attempts to deﬁne differences in the transcriptomes of
dermal and plexiform neuroﬁbromas have thus far been
unsuccessful [133].

remains poorly understood.

are

Neuroﬁbroma-MPNST progression results
from the accumulation of additional driver gene
mutations

MPNSTs, like plexiform neuroﬁbromas, demonstrate bi-
allelic inactivation of their NF1 genes [106]. However,
since MPNSTs arise via progression from plexiform neu-
roﬁbromas, it is apparent that MPNSTs must accumulate
mutations in additional driver genes (oncogenes and/or
tumor suppressor genes) during this process. In keeping
with this expectation, mutations of several
tumor sup-
pressor genes in the p19ARF-Mdm2-p53 and p16INK4A-
cyclin D-Rb cell cycle regulatory cascades are commonly
identiﬁed in MPNSTs. TP53 loss of function mutations are
particularly common in MPNSTs [16, 105, 130], having
been found in up to 75% of these sarcomas [69]. Interest-
ingly, however, these mutations often affect only one copy
of the TP53 gene, which has led some investigators to
suggest that TP53 hemizygosity may sufﬁce for MPNST
pathogenesis [182]. Mutations of CDKN2A are also quite
commonly encountered in MPNSTs, occurring in about
50% of these tumors [96, 138]. CDKN2A mutations dys-
regulate both the p19ARF-Mdm2-p53 and the p16INK4A-
cyclin D-Rb cascades as this tumor suppressor gene
encodes both p19ARF and p16INK4A, each of which acts as
an inhibitor of its respective cell cycle regulatory cascade.
The p19ARF protein inhibits Mdm2, a ubiquitin ligase that
ubiquitinates p53 and targets it for proteasomal degrada-
tion. The p16INK4A protein inhibits both cyclin-dependent
kinase 4 (CDK4) and cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6)
which phosphorylate the retinoblastoma (Rb) protein,
thereby promoting transition through the G1/S checkpoint

of the cell cycle. Consistent with the importance of the
p16INK4A-cyclin D-Rb cascade, loss of Rb is also seen in
about 25% of MPNSTs [119, 122].

Directly testing the signiﬁcance of these additional
tumor suppressor mutations in mouse Nf1 knockout models
has proven to be challenging, as neuroﬁbromas in these
animals do not progress to become MPNSTs at a high
frequency. Consequently, most investigators have instead
taken the approach of generating mouse models that carry
Nf1 mutations in combination with mutations of genes in
the p19ARF-Mdm2-p53 and/or the p16INK4A-cyclin D-Rb
cascades. To examine a potential interaction between the
Nf1 and Trp53 genes (both of which are located on chro-
mosome 11 in mice), tumorigenesis was examined in mice
carrying these genes on the same copy of chromosome 11
(cis Nf1?/-;Trp53?/- mice) and in animals with the genes
on different chromosomes (trans Nf1?/-;Trp53?/- mice)
[29, 187]. As whole chromosomal loss is the most common
means by which ‘‘second-hit’’ mutations occur in mice
[111], it was anticipated that MPNSTs would occur at a
higher frequency in cis Nf1?/-;Trp53?/- mice. In keeping
with this expectation, 30% of cis Nf1?/-;Trp53?/- mice
developed de novo MPNSTs at a young age (5 months),
while trans Nf1?/-;Trp53?/- mice lived twice as long
before succumbing to other types of soft tissue sarcomas.
Similarly, 26% of mice with Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency and
CDKN2A
homozygous
(Nf1?/-;p16Ink4a-/-/p19Arf-/- mice) develop de novo
MPNSTs [84]. Of note, mice with mutations designed to
affect only one of the two transcripts encoded by the
CDKN2A locus (Nf1?/-;p19Arf-/- or Nf1?/-;p16Ink4a-/-
mice) do not develop MPNSTs [84, 86], indicating that
simultaneous dysregulation of the p19ARF-Mdm2-p53 and
p16INK4A-cyclin D-Rb pathways is required for MPNST
pathogenesis.

mutations

null

of

Aberrant growth factor signaling also contributes
to neuroﬁbroma and MPNST pathogenesis

Neuroﬁbromin loss can conceivably induce a basal
increase in Ras activation in neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs.
However, given the central regulatory role of Ras and the
large number of upstream effectors (e.g., membrane tyro-
sine kinases) that serve to activate these G-proteins, it is
highly likely that that activation of growth factor receptors
further enhances Ras activation in neuroﬁbromas and
MPNSTs (the alternative possibility, namely that Ras
action is further enhanced by mutations of the Ras protein
itself, is unlikely as Ras mutations are uncommon in these
neoplasms [192]). This suggestion is consistent with work
from a number of laboratories that shows that maximal
activation of Ras downstream effectors (e.g., Raf-1)
requires both neoplastic activation of Ras and the action of

123

Author's personal copy332

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

membrane tyrosine kinase receptors (e.g., see [120]). A
number of growth factor signaling systems have been
identiﬁed that may play such a role in NF1-associated
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (please see our previous
review of this topic [26]). These include the EGF receptor,
neuregulin-1 (NRG1) and its erbB receptors, hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) and its c-Met receptor and PDGF and
its receptors. Consistent with the postulated interaction
described above, pharmacologic inhibition of several of
these growth factor receptors has been shown to impede the
migration and/or proliferation of neoplastic Schwann cells.
However, only the effects that the EGF receptor and NRG1
exert on peripheral nerve sheath tumorigenesis have been
directly tested in genetically engineered mice.

for

the generation of

The EGF receptor is expressed in human neuroﬁbromas
and MPNSTs (but not in wild-type neonatal Schwann cells)
[38, 55]. Further, this locus is ampliﬁed in some MPNSTs
[143] and EGF promotes the growth and survival of serum-
starved MPNST cells [38]. These observations provided
the impetus
transgenic mice
expressing the EGF receptor in Schwann cells (CNP-hE-
GFR mice)
[109]. CNP-hEGFR mice demonstrated
hyperproliferative changes within peripheral nerve associ-
ated with ﬁbrosis, increased numbers of mast cells and
Schwann cell-axon dissociation. However, the develop-
ment of well-developed neuroﬁbromas was very rare in
CNP-hEGFR mice and crossing them to Nf1?/- mice did
not further enhance their phenotype. On the other hand,
crossing mice with an EGF receptor hypomorphic mutation
(EGFRwa-2) to cis Nf1?/-;Trp53?/- mice impeded the
development of MPNSTs, which clearly indicates that the
EGF receptor acts to enhance MPNST pathogenesis.
Considered collectively, these observations suggest that
although EGFR overexpression promotes the pathogenesis
of NF1-associated peripheral nerve sheath tumors, it is not
sufﬁcient for their pathogenesis.

NRG1 is a potent Schwann cell mitogen and its recep-
tors (especially erbB2 and erbB3) are expressed throughout
Schwann cell development [200] and adulthood [23]. In
keeping with the hypothesis that NRG1/erbB signaling
promotes PNS neoplasia, rodents exposed during speciﬁc
windows in embryogenesis to the chemical carcinogen N-
ethyl-N-nitrosourea (EtNU) develop MPNST-like neo-
plasms with activating erbB2 mutations [21] and the erbB2
locus is ampliﬁed in some MPNSTs [173]. More recently,
it has been shown that NRG1 and its erbB receptors are
coexpressed by neoplastic Schwann cells within human
neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs [171]. These receptors are
constitutively activated (phosphorylated) and treatment
with erbB inhibitors (e.g., PD168393) abolishes erbB
phosphorylation and inhibits the proliferation [171] and
migration [42] of MPNST cells. Transgenic mice
expressing a secreted NRG1 isoform (glial growth factor-

123

b3; GGFb3) in Schwann cells under the control of the
myelin protein promoter (P0-GGFb3 mice) [72] develop
prominent Schwann cell hyperplasia [72] that is followed
by the development of multiple neuroﬁbromas throughout
the PNS (unpublished observations). Some of these neu-
roﬁbromas progress and give rise to highly aggressive
MPNSTs [72].

The ﬁndings noted above provide strong evidence that
aberrant EGF receptor and NRG1/erbB signaling contrib-
ute to the pathogenesis of neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs.
However, it is unlikely that these are the only growth factor
signaling cascades that are relevant to the development of
these neoplasms, especially given the diverse mixture of
cell types characteristic of neuroﬁbromas. These growth
factor receptors potentially represent key druggable targets
in neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs. Consequently, identifying
the growth factor signaling cascades that interact with Ras
signaling to promote neuroﬁbroma and MPNST patho-
genesis is likely to be highly important for the future
development of
these
neoplasms.

effective new therapies

for

An initial scheme describing the process
of neuroﬁbroma-MPNST pathogenesis…with some
signiﬁcant caveats

Considered jointly, these ﬁndings have led to a conceptual
outline of the events responsible for the initial pathogenesis
of plexiform neuroﬁbromas and their subsequent progres-
sion to become MPNSTs (Fig. 6). In this scheme, loss of
neuroﬁbromin expression ﬁrst occurs in a cell within the
Schwann cell lineage. Neuroﬁbromin loss, together with
aberrant growth factor signaling, results in the hyperacti-
vation of Ras proteins and signaling pathways regulated by
Ras. This enhanced Ras signaling promotes the prolifera-
tive and invasive behavior of the neoplastic cells and their
production of factors that recruit other NF1 haploinsufﬁ-
cient cell
types into the nascent neuroﬁbroma. The
subsequent
tumor suppressor genes
loss of additional
within the p19ARF-Mdm2-p53 and the p16INK4A-cyclin
D-Rb signaling cascades and ampliﬁcation of key growth
factor receptor genes then leads to the development of an
MPNST derived from the neoplastic Schwann cells within
the neuroﬁbroma.

This scheme is conceptually attractive and ﬁts the
available data. Nonetheless, this outline is almost certainly
woefully incomplete and oversimpliﬁes the process of
neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis
and neuroﬁbroma-MPNST
progression. There are several lines of evidence that indi-
cate that this is the case. To begin with, it is highly likely
that a loss of neuroﬁbromin expression alone is not sufﬁ-
cient
surveillance
mechanisms exist to keep Ras activity in check and these

a number of

for

tumorigenesis;

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

333

Loss of Remaining
Functional NF1 Gene

Plexiform
Neurofibroma

MPNST

+/-

NF1
Schwann
Cell

-/-

NF1
Schwann
Cell

H-, N-, K-Ras

R-Ras, R-Ras2

cAMP

S6 kinase

Ca++

EGFR

Kit Ligand

TGFß1

NRG1

PDGF

HGF

Cytoplasmic
Signaling
Cascades

Aberrant
Growth
Factor
Signaling

p53

INK4A

p16
p19 ARF

Rb

EGFR

ErbB2

c- Met

c- Kit

HGF

PDGFA

Tumor
Suppressor
Genes

Altered Expression
of Growth Factors
         and
Growth Factors 
Receptors

Fig. 6 Schematic illustrating the changes in cytoplasmic signaling
cascades that result from neuroﬁbromin loss during the pathogenesis
of neuroﬁbromas and aberration in growth factor signaling that
contribute to this same process. Also indicated are subsequently

developing abnormalities in other
tumor suppressor genes and
additional alterations in growth factor signaling that contribute to
the progression of a neuroﬁbroma to become an MPNST

must be overcome at least transiently for Ras hyperacti-
vation to continue. This postulate is
supported by
experiments that have examined the consequences of ab-
lating neuroﬁbromin expression in ﬁbroblasts. In these
cells, neuroﬁbromin loss triggers a transient activation of
classic Ras proteins and their downstream effectors which
are rapidly followed by inactivation of these proteins,
growth arrest and the expression of senescence markers
[32]. This negative feedback process, which is known as
oncogene-induced senescence, relies upon the inhibition of
GEFs and the enhanced activity of proteins opposing the
action of Ras and other molecules in this signaling cascade
[e.g., Sprouty proteins and dual speciﬁcity phosphatases
(DUSPs)]. Senescent neuroﬁbromin-negative Schwann
cells are present in neuroﬁbromas [32], which argue that
these surveillance mechanisms are active at least initially
in neoplastic Schwann cells. However, the growth of these
lesions indicates that neuroﬁbromin-null Schwann cells
must have some means of overcoming oncogene-induced
senescence. An alternative possibility is that neuroﬁbroma
pathogenesis is a more graduated process than is currently
appreciated and that additional, as yet unidentiﬁed, muta-
tions occur
in neuroﬁbromin-null Schwann cells that
cooperate with NF1 loss. Consistent with this latter

possibility,
array comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH) studies of neuroﬁbromas have identiﬁed regions of
reproducible unbalanced chromosomal loss that are distinct
from the NF1 gene [94].

There is also evidence to indicate that as yet unidentiﬁed
modiﬁer genes exist that inﬂuence the development of
neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs. Epidemiologic studies of the
occurrence of dermal and plexiform neuroﬁbromas in
patient cohorts that included pairs of monozygotic twins
indicated that the likelihood of tumor occurrence correlated
best between these twins relative to other members of their
pedigrees [41]. In addition, neuroﬁbroma occurrence cor-
related most closely between more closely related members
of each pedigree. Mouse models also support the existence
of such modiﬁer genes. Strain background clearly inﬂu-
cis
ences
Nf1?/-;Trp53?/- [66] and P0-GGFb3 (unpublished obser-
vations) mice. There is also evidence that two unlinked
polymorphic loci referred to as nerve sheath tumor resis-
tance 1 (Nstr1)
and Nstr2 impact upon MPNST
pathogenesis in cis Nf1?/-;Trp53?/- mice [147].

of MPNSTs

occurrence

the

in

both

Genomic studies of MPNSTs and MPNST cell lines also
suggest
that a number of driver genes contributing to
MPNST pathogenesis have not yet been identiﬁed. It has

123

Author's personal copy334

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

been widely noted that the karyotype of MPNSTs is highly
complex and variable, with multiple regions of chromo-
somal gain (chromosomes 7, 8q, 15q) and loss (particularly
involving chromosomes 1p, 9p, 11, 12p, 14q, 17q, 18, 22q,
X and Y) being frequently observed in MPNSTs [25].
These regions of unbalanced chromosomal gains and losses
do not correspond to known oncogenes and tumor sup-
pressors that have been implicated in the pathogenesis of
either neuroﬁbromas or MPNSTs and thus may contain
other genes contributing to the development of these
tumors. Finally,
it must be noted that some sporadic
MPNSTs have intact, apparently functional copies of NF1
[134]. This argues that there may be pathways to MPNST
pathogenesis that are independent of NF1 loss.

Schwannomas

In contrast to neuroﬁbromas, schwannomas are
composed solely of neoplastic Schwann cells and occur
in association with multiple genetic diseases

Like neuroﬁbromas, schwannomas (sometimes referred to
as neurilemomas) are benign tumors of peripheral nerve.
However, the similarities between these two tumor types

largely end there. Whereas neuroﬁbromas contain a com-
plex mixture of cell types, schwannomas are composed
solely of well-differentiated (albeit neoplastic) Schwann
cells (Fig. 7). Schwannomas are typically encapsulated
globular lesions that often ‘‘push’’ the associated nerve to
one side rather than inﬁltrating the nerve in the manner
characteristic of neuroﬁbromas. Further, malignant trans-
formation of schwannomas is exceedingly rare. Although
some uncommon schwannoma variants are periodically
encountered [e.g., cellular schwannomas (a benign variant
with cellularity higher than a conventional schwannoma),
plexiform schwannomas (schwannomas with a growth
pattern reminiscent of plexiform neuroﬁbromas) and mel-
anotic schwannomas (schwannomas containing extensive
melanin and at
times psammoma bodies)] the primary
signiﬁcance of these variants is that they may be mistaken
for a more aggressive tumor type (cellular schwannomas)
or herald the presence of a genetic disease (plexiform
schwannomas, melanotic schwannomas).

Schwannomas are commonly encountered in the general
population as solitary lesions. However, these peripheral
nerve sheath tumors also occur multiply in patients with
three distinct genetic diseases—neuroﬁbromatosis type 2
(NF2), Carney complex type 1 and schwannomatosis. As
the identiﬁcation of the tumor suppressor genes that are

Fig. 7 Unlike neuroﬁbromas, schwannomas are composed almost
exclusively of neoplastic Schwann cells and their supporting vascu-
lature. a Hematoxylin and eosin-stained section of an acoustic
schwannoma resected from a 27-year-old Caucasian man with NF2.
Acoustic schwannoma immunostained for the Schwann cell markers
S100b (b) and collagen type IV (c). Note that immunoreactivity for

the basement membrane protein collagen type IV invests each
individual tumor cell. d Double label immunohistochemical prepa-
ration of an acoustic schwannoma stained for S100b (green) and
CD34 (orange-red). In this tumor, unlike the neuroﬁbroma illustrated
in Fig. 1, CD34 immunoreactivity is only evident in intratumoral
blood vessels

123

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

335

affected in these disorders has provided key insights into
the molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of
schwannomas, I will discuss below each of these genetic
diseases, our current understanding of the function of the
protein encoded by the mutated genes and how their loss
leads to neoplasia. Interestingly, the NF2, Carney complex
type 1 and schwannomatosis tumor suppressor genes all
potentially impact on a common cytoplasmic signaling
cascade. This convergence points to key events that are
likely essential for the development of schwannomas. I
would also refer
readers interested in more detailed
descriptions of the clinical features of these diseases to the
article by Rodriguez et al. in this issue.

Identiﬁcation of the gene affected in NF2 points
to a distinct set of signaling pathways capable
of promoting Schwann cell neoplasia

NF2, the most common genetic disease associated with
schwannoma pathogenesis, is estimated to affect 1 in 25,000
newborn infants. Schwannomas developing in NF2 patients
typically arise in the vestibular branch of the eighth cranial
nerve and may be unilateral or bilateral. Multiple schwan-
nomas are also commonly found in cranial nerves or spinal
nerve roots in these patients as well as cutaneously, where
they are often plexiform. In addition to schwannomas, NF2
patients are prone to the development of meningiomas and,
less commonly, ependymomas. Cataracts, retinal hamarto-
mas
and retinal
hamartomas are also commonly found in these patients. Like
NF1, NF2 is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion,
which is consistent with the NF2 gene encoding a tumor
suppressor. The NF2 gene also has a similarly high rate of de
novo mutation, resulting in about 50% of infants with NF2
being born into families with no previous history of the
disease [47]; further, about a third of patients presenting with
clinical features of NF2 demonstrate mosaicism for this
mutation [47]. NF2 is completely penetrant in virtually all
patients by the time they are 60 years old.

and combined pigment

epithelial

The NF2 tumor suppressor gene, which is located on
chromosome 22 (22q12.2), was cloned in 1993 [152, 180].
This locus spans 93,083 base pairs and includes 17 exons.
The NF2 gene produces at least 10 protein isoforms via a
combination of alternative splicing and the use of multiple
transcription initiation sites [65, 74, 145]. However, iso-
forms I and II, which have distinct carboxy terminal
sequences produced by alternative splicing of exons 16 and
17, respectively, predominate. The proteins encoded by the
NF2 gene are highly unusual in that they do not contain
catalytic domains such as those present in neuroﬁbromin
and many other tumor suppressors. These polypeptides are
instead structurally similar to three molecules in the protein
4.1 superfamily that are known as ezrin, radixin and moesin

(the ‘‘ERM’’ proteins). These three ERM proteins link the
actin cytoskeleton to membrane-spanning proteins, thereby
organizing complex membranous domains and regulating
cellular adhesion, migration, cellular morphology, exocy-
tosis and endocytosis. Because of this structural similarity,
the NF2 protein was dubbed ‘‘merlin’’ (moesin-, ezrin-,
radixin-like protein) [180]; as loss of the NF2 gene is
associated with schwannoma pathogenesis, the NF2 protein
is also sometimes referred to as schwannomin [152].

Merlin and the ERM proteins have some important
functional differences, despite their structural similarity.
Moesin, ezrin and radixin contain an amino-terminal FERM
(protein 4.1–ezrin–radixin–moesin) domain that is linked,
via an a-helical region, to a carboxy terminal ERM-binding
domain (the C-ERMAD; Fig. 8) which includes an F-actin-
binding motif. The activity of the ERM proteins is regulated
by intramolecular (‘‘head-to-tail’’) interactions between the
FERM domain and the carboxy terminal domain. In the
‘‘closed’’ (head-to-tail interacting) conﬁguration, the FERM
domain binds the C-ERMAD and masks the actin-binding
site, maintaining moesin, ezrin and radixin in an inactive
state. Phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate (PIP2) bind-
ing to the FERM domain and subsequent phosphorylation
of critical threonine residues within the carboxy terminal
domain disrupts head-to-tail interactions within ERM pro-
teins, resulting in their activation. Merlin shares the FERM/
a-helical/C-ERMAD structure of ERM proteins, but its
carboxy terminal domain lacks an actin-binding motif.
Merlin isoform I (a 595 amino acid protein encoded by
exons 1–15 and 17), like ERM proteins, is regulated by
intramolecular interactions [165]. However, phosphoryla-
tion of Ser518 in the merlin C-ERMAD, which maintains
merlin in the open conﬁguration, results in the inactivation
of merlin rather than its activation [5, 151].

In keeping with clinical observations suggesting that
merlin is a tumor suppressor, germline DNA from NF2
patients contains a mutated NF2 gene and a functional wild-
type allele while schwannomas developing in these patients
carry two mutated NF2 genes [160]. The importance of NF2
mutations in schwannoma pathogenesis is further demon-
strated by the observation that overwhelming majority of
sporadic schwannomas have lost the expression of merlin,
but not other ERM proteins [169]. Direct evidence that
merlin functions as a tumor suppressor has been obtained by
showing that overexpression of this protein inhibits both
mitogenesis [112] and oncogene-induced transformation
[178]. Further, re-expressing merlin in human schwannoma
cells reduces both the proliferation and the survival of these
cells [158]. Nonetheless, it is clear that merlin’s action as a
tumor suppressor is rather unorthodox. While merlin does
repress cyclin D1 expression [203], it is localized at sites
where the cytoskeleton contacts the plasma membrane such
as membrane rufﬂes and nascent cell–cell contact points

123

Author's personal copy336

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

FERM

FERM

FERM

Merlin

FERM

FERM

FERM

α - Helical

α - Helical

Ezrin

Actin-Binding
Domain

FERM

FERM

FERM

Radixin

α - Helical

Actin-Binding
Domain

FERM

FERM

FERM

Moesin

α - Helical

Actin-Binding
Domain

Fig. 8 Schematic illustrating the functional domains present
in
merlin and comparing the structure of merlin to that of its closest
relatives (ezrin, radixin and moesin). The lengths of each protein
(black bars) and domains within each of these proteins (colored
expansions) are scaled to the actual number of amino acids in each.
Note that all four of these proteins contain a highly conserved amino-
terminal FERM domain composed of three related subdomains. In
each of these proteins, the FERM domain is linked to a COOH
domain by an a-helical region that allows these proteins to ﬂex and
facilitates intramolecular association between the FERM and COOH

domains. As indicated in the text, this intramolecular association
regulates the activity of these proteins. Curiously, however, merlin is
apparently active in the ‘‘closed’’ conﬁguration while this conﬁgu-
ration is inactive for the other three proteins. A key signal regulating
the conﬁguration of these proteins is the phosphorylation of Ser518 in
merlin and speciﬁc threonine residues in the COOH domain of ezrin,
radixin and moesin. Ezrin, radixin and moesin all also contain a
domain located at their extreme carboxy terminus that is capable of
binding to ﬁlamentous (F) actin. This domain is not conserved in
merlin

[57, 99, 116]. Levels of dephosphorylated (active) merlin
are increased at these sites in cells experiencing growth
arrest secondary to stimuli such as contact
inhibition,
growth factor deprivation, exposure to the extracellular
matrix component hyaluronic acid or a loss of adhesion to
the extracellular matrix [60, 99, 135, 163–165]. Conse-
quently, it is thought that merlin inhibits proliferation by
integrating extracellular signaling transmitted by mem-
brane-spanning proteins with the action of molecules in
multiple key cytoplasmic signaling pathways (see below).
As is evident from the discussion above, phosphoryla-
tion is a key means of regulating merlin’s activity. Merlin
can be phosphorylated at multiple residues [163]. However,
most studies to date have focused on the effects mediated
by phosphorylation of Ser518 within merlin’s C-ERMAD
domain. Events such as stimulation by growth factors,

attachment of cells to substrate and cell density all regulate
the phosphorylation of merlin at this serine [164]. Con-
sistent with the postulated ability of merlin to integrate
signals from disparate signaling pathways, several kinases
are capable of phosphorylating merlin Ser518. Activation of
the small G-protein Rac1 results in the phosphorylation of
merlin at this critical residue [164] via the action of the
Rac1 effector molecule p21-activated kinase (Pak; Fig. 9)
[90, 202]. Alternatively, protein kinase A, a cAMP-
dependent signaling molecule, can phosphorylate merlin at
this same site [5]. In Drosophila, the Sterile20-like kinase
Slik also phosphorylates merlin at Ser518 [71]. However, it
is currently unclear whether serine/threonine kinase 10
(STK10), the mammalian equivalent of Slik kinase, simi-
larly phosphorylates merlin in mammalian cells. It is also
likely that PIP2 binding to the merlin FERM domain acts

123

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

337

cooperatively with Ser518 phosphorylation to regulate
merlin activity as the PIP2 binding site identiﬁed in ezrin
[10] is conserved in merlin.

More recently, the functional signiﬁcance of phosphor-
ylation of Ser10, a residue within the N-terminus of merlin,
has been examined. Ser10, which is conserved in humans,
mice, rats and Xenopus, can be phosphorylated by either
protein kinase A [101] or Akt [102]. Curiously, phos-
phorylation of merlin Ser10 does not affect Ser518
phosphorylation or promote heterodimerization with ezrin,
an event previously demonstrated to occur following Ser518
phosphorylation [5]. Mutation of Ser10 to alanine (which is
non-phosphorylatable) and subsequent expression of the

mutated merlin protein in Nf2-/- ﬁbroblasts instead are
associated with the extension of long processes from the
cells and inhibition of migration. In contrast, similarly
introducing merlin with a Ser10 to glutamate (S10D)
mutation (which mimics a phosphorylation event at this
site) into ﬁbroblasts causes the cells to elaborate numerous
short ﬁlopodia-like protrusions and stabilizes actin in a
ﬁlamentous form [101]. Considered collectively,
these
observations indicate that phosphorylation of Ser10 plays a
key role in regulating cellular morphology.

Ser10 phosphorylation has also been reported to affect
the half-life of merlin protein by enhancing the interac-
tion of merlin with DCAF1 (DDB1- and Cul4-associated

Adhesion to
Adjacent Cells

Hyaluronic Acid

Mitogenic signal
  (e.g. NRG1)

Cadherins

CD44

RTK Complex

Fig. 9 A schematic
demonstrating the cycling of
merlin between its active
(dephosphorylated) and inactive
(phosphorylated) conﬁgurations
and how this activity affects
major cytoplasmic signaling
pathways important to Schwann
cell biology. Note that different
intramembranous receptors can
inactivate [e.g. receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) complexes] or
activate (cadherins, CD44)
merlin by activating kinases
[protein kinase A (PKA), p21-
activated kinase (Pak)] that
phosphorylate merlin or
phosphatases (MYPT1) that
remove phosphate groups

MYPT1

Merlin Open
(Inactive) Configuration

P

Merlin Closed
(Active) Configuration

Proliferation Motility 
and Invasion

Rac1

Pak1

cAMP

PKA

123

Author's personal copy338

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

accumulates within

factor 1)
[102], a protein that serves as a substrate
receptor for the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4DCAF1. This
interaction results in the ubiquitination of merlin and its
subsequent degradation by the proteasome. In contrast,
however, others have presented evidence that activated
(dephosphorylated) merlin
the
nucleus where it binds to the carboxy terminal region of
DCAF1, resulting in suppression of CRL4DCAF1 activity
[108]. Further, depletion of DCAF1 in merlin-null
schwannoma cells inhibits the increased proliferation
characteristic of
indicating that enhanced
CRL4DCAF1 activity occurring secondary to merlin loss
promotes tumorigenesis. The importance of this interac-
tion is underscored by the observation that speciﬁc
merlin mutations identiﬁed in NF2 patients impair the
interaction between merlin and DCAF1 [108]. Thus, it
appears
function is
strongly dependent upon its ability to translocate into the
nucleus and block the action of CRL4DCAF1.

that merlin’s

these cells,

tumor

suppressor

Given the presence of multiple functional domains
and key phosphorylation sites in merlin, it is reasonable
to ask both whether mutations at speciﬁc sites in the
NF2 gene predispose patients to the pathogenesis of
schwannomas and whether particular types of mutations
result
in increased numbers of schwannomas. Highly
effective comprehensive screening approaches designed
to detect
frameshift mutations, nonsense mutations,
missense mutations and small indels (direct sequencing
of all coding sequences) as well as copy number alter-
ations (multiple ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation)
within the NF2 gene have been developed and detect
mutations in 93% of non-founder NF2 patients [45].
Genotype–phenotype correlations clearly indicate that
patients with truncating nonsense mutations or frameshift
mutations (which likely result in the production of an
unstable protein product) are diagnosed at a younger age
and have a higher mean number of schwannomas [46,
153]. In contrast, the disease phenotype is much milder
in NF2 patients with large deletions, in-frame indels and
missense mutations [153], while patients carrying muta-
tions that affect RNA splice sites vary in the severity of
their disease [12, 93]. The missense mutations identiﬁed
in the former patients tend to be clustered in the FERM
domain, but are also often found in sequences encoding
the a-helical and carboxy terminal domains of merlin [4,
11]. Of note, most
series agree that
approximately 95% of NF2 patients ultimately develop
bilateral acoustic schwannomas [44, 167] and so the
differences noted above primarily reﬂect differences in
the numbers of schwannomas developing at sites other
than the VIIIth cranial nerve (e.g., spinal nerve roots).
This observation, as well as the fact that patients with
schwannomatosis develop schwannomas on spinal nerve

large clinical

123

roots but not their acoustic nerves (see below), raises the
question of whether there are other, as yet unidentiﬁed,
site-speciﬁc pathogenic factors that affect schwannoma
development.

Merlin links signaling from multiple cell surface
receptors to essential cytoplasmic signaling pathways

it

Given their importance in Schwann cell biology,
is
perhaps not surprising that the Schwann cell growth factor
NRG1 and merlin play opposing roles in the control of
Schwann cell mitogenesis (Fig. 9). Our laboratory [172]
and others [64] have found that NF2-associated and spo-
radic schwannomas express multiple NRG1 isoforms
together with activated forms of the NRG1 receptor sub-
units erbB2 and erbB3.
In addition, erbB inhibitors
effectively inhibit the proliferation of human schwannoma
cells in vitro [1, 6] and in xenografted immunodeﬁcient
mice [30]. In wild-type Schwann cells, the adaptor protein
paxillin binds to merlin, directing merlin to the cell
membrane where it
forms a molecular complex that
includes erbB2 and b1 integrin [49]. At the cell membrane,
activated merlin represses the accumulation of both erbB2
and erbB3, resulting in an inhibition of Akt and MAPK
signaling [100]. Thus,
loss of merlin in schwannomas
results in enhanced membranous localization of NRG1
receptors [100] which presumably results in elevated sig-
naling by Akt and MAPK. Merlin also likely interacts
indirectly with the NRG1 receptors by binding to cyto-
plasmic signaling molecules that interact with erbB2 and/or
erbB3. For example, merlin binds to magicin [197], a
molecule that forms a complex with the well-known erbB
effector molecule Grb2 [156]. Merlin also binds NHE-RF1
(also known as EBP50) [136, 146], a molecule that in turn
interacts with erbin, a PDZ domain protein that binds the
cytoplasmic tail of erbB2 and stabilizes this membrane
tyrosine kinase [176].

receptors.

trafﬁcking of growth factor

Although schwannomas typically do not express the
EGF receptor [172], merlin inhibits the internalization of
this kinase in other cell types, suggesting that merlin can
also control growth factor signaling by regulating the
intracellular
In
keeping with this postulate, expression of the receptors
for
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) and platelet-
derived growth factor (PDGF) is enhanced in peripheral
nerves from Nf2 mutant mice and in human schwanno-
mas [100]. Of note, the effect that merlin loss has on the
accumulation of
in
Schwann cells likely is of signiﬁcance for schwannoma
pathogenesis. Both IGF1 and PDGF are well-known
Schwann cell mitogens. Further, merlin overexpression in
schwannoma cells results in accelerated PDGF receptor
degradation, an inhibition of mitogenesis and reduced

the IGF1 and PDGF receptors

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

339

activation of the Raf-ERK-MAPK and PI3 kinase-Akt
signaling cascades [54]. Pharmacologic inhibitors of the
PDGF receptor and c-Raf likewise effectively inhibit the
proliferation of human schwannoma cells [7]. Thus, as in
neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs, multiple growth factor sig-
naling cascades may contribute to the pathogenesis of
schwannomas and represent important therapeutic targets
in these neoplasms.

In contrast,

intramembranous receptors that

transmit
signals indicating contact with extracellular matrix or
adjacent cells (contact
inhibition) can cooperate with
merlin to inhibit mitogenesis (Fig. 9). This ﬁrst became
evident when it was noted that merlin becomes activated
(dephosphorylated) in conﬂuent cells [135, 163] and that
this activation is both necessary and sufﬁcient for contact
inhibition [99, 135, 140]. CD44 and cadherins, which
serve as extracellular matrix and adhesion receptors,
appear to be particularly important for merlin activation
in these situations. CD44 is a receptor for hyaluronic
acid, an important component of the extracellular matrix
in peripheral nerve [179]. Merlin binds directly to the
intracellular
(cytoplasmic) domain of CD44 [9, 155],
resulting in contact-mediated inhibition of proliferation
[135].
In keratinocytes, merlin also associates with
adherens junctions, where it interacts with complexes of
E-cadherin and b-catenin [99]. Wild-type Schwann cells
express both E-cadherin [33, 129, 209] and N-cadherin
[107, 190, 191]; consistent with the ﬁndings delineated
above, loss of merlin results in disruption of adherens
junctions in primary cultures of schwannoma cells [53].
That is not to say that all intramembranous receptors
involved in extracellular contacts cooperate with merlin to
inhibit mitogenesis. As noted above, activated forms of the
NRG1 receptors erbB2 and erbB3 associate with b1 inte-
grin [49]. Simultaneous treatment of Schwann cells with
NRG1b and the b1 integrin ligand laminin-1 synergisti-
cally promotes the inactivation (phosphorylation) of merlin
[177]. Further, primary human schwannoma cells, which
demonstrate pathologic adhesion to the extracellular matrix
[52, 183], express elevated levels of b1 and b4 integrins
[183]. This overexpression of integrins, considered toge-
ther with the fact
that merlin loss results in other
protumorigenic events such as integrin-dependent consti-
tutive activation of mTORC1 and enhanced mRNA
translation [110], suggests that integrins likely cooperate
with associated growth factor
to promote
schwannoma pathogenesis.

receptors

Considerable evidence indicates that the activation of
merlin by growth factor receptors and integrins and its
inactivation by CD44 and cadherins results in changes in
the actin cytoskeleton that subsequently effect cellular
motility, invasion and proliferation. In keeping with this,
loss of merlin in schwannoma cells results in profound

cytoskeletal changes manifest as altered membrane ruf-
ﬂing, changes in cell spreading and rearrangement of
stress ﬁbers [142]. These changes can be reversed by
reexpressing merlin in schwannoma cells [13]. None-
theless, although several of the molecules that mediate
merlin’s effects on the cytoskeleton have been identiﬁed
over the last decade, the interactions of these molecules
with merlin are complicated and incompletely under-
stood. For instance, it is apparent that negative feedback
loops involving merlin and the Rho subfamily of small
G-proteins (Rho, Rac, Cdc42) play a central
role in
shaping the actin cytoskeleton. As noted above, activa-
tion of the Rac–Pak signaling cascade results in merlin
inactivation. Overexpression of merlin in turn inhibits
Rac-dependent signaling cascades [164]; in keeping with
this observation, Nf2-/- cells demonstrate
changes
analogous to cells with inappropriate activation of Rac
proteins [164]. However, merlin also binds Rho guanine-
dissociation inhibitor (Rho GDI) [116, 175], an inhibitor
of Rho and Rac that acts by impeding nucleotide release
from these small G-proteins [39, 40];
this results in
activation of Rho family proteins. There is also evidence
that merlin binds directly to and inhibits Pak [91]. Thus,
the picture that
is emerging is that merlin plays a
complicated role in the regulation of Rho/Rac/Pak sig-
naling, potentially affecting actin remodeling by acting at
multiple sites in this key signaling cascade.

It has also been argued that merlin may more directly
control the remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton. As noted
above, merlin lacks the carboxy terminal actin-binding
domain that is present in ezrin, radixin and moesin. How-
ever, merlin may instead bind actin directly via sequences
in its amino terminus [20, 79] or indirectly through inter-
actions with other ERM proteins [59, 128, 137], paxillin
[49] or the cytoskeletal protein bII-spectrin [159]. Merlin
also binds to and inhibits the action of other proteins
directly involved in remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton
such as N-WASP [117]. N-WASP is an activator of Arp2/
3, a complex which directs the nucleation of actin ﬁlaments
and promotes the branching of actin ﬁlaments in membrane
rufﬂes and adherens junctions [51]. Inhibition of N-WASP
action by merlin, therefore, inhibits the cell’s ability to
construct new actin assemblages.

In the last 5 years, considerable attention has been
focused on the ability of merlin to regulate the Hippo
signaling cascade, a pathway that plays an essential role in
cellular proliferation and survival
[67]. Evidence that
merlin regulates the Hippo signaling cascade (which
includes the Ste20 kinase Hippo, Salvador, Warts, Mats
and Yorkie) has come predominantly from studies in
Drosophila, where inactivating mutations of merlin result
in enhanced mitogenesis and cell survival
[63, 124].
these Drosophila
Mammalian homologs for each of

123

Author's personal copy340

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

proteins have been identiﬁed and several of them have been
shown to play important roles in human cancers. However,
molecules in the Hippo signaling cascade have not yet been
shown to affect the pathogenesis of schwannomas.

Identiﬁcation of the gene affected in Carney complex
type 1 highlights an important role for protein kinase
A in the pathogenesis of schwannomas

Genetically engineered mouse models conﬁrm a key
role for Nf2 loss in schwannoma pathogenesis

Initial attempts to produce a mouse model of NF2 were
directed towards producing genetically engineered mice
with null mutations at the murine equivalent of sites that
were frequently affected in human NF2 patients. Since a
number of human mutations occurred within sequences
encoding the merlin FERM domain (exons 2 and 3), a
region that included half of exon 2 and all of exon 3 was
deleted in the initial mouse model of NF2 [127]. When
bred to homozygosity, these Nf2 null embryos failed to
undergo gastrulation due to an absence of the extraem-
bryonic ectoderm, a structure which normally produces
signals required for the induction of mesoderm formation.
this Nf2 mutation frequently
Mice heterozygous
developed aggressive osteosarcomas as well as a number
of other malignancies such as lymphomas, pulmonary
adenocarcinomas, hepatocellular carcinomas and ﬁbro-
sarcomas
[126]. These malignancies demonstrated a
strikingly high rate of metastasis, suggesting that Nf2 loss
promotes metastasis. Unfortunately, however, Nf2?/-
mice did not develop schwannomas, meningiomas,
ependymomas or other manifestations characteristic of
human NF2.

for

cell

the control of

One possible explanation for the lack of schwannomas
in Nf2?/- mice was that loss of the remaining functional
Nf2 allele occurred at a very low rate in Schwann cells
compared to other
types. Consequently, mice
expressing Cre recombinase under
the
Schwann cell-speciﬁc myelin protein zero (P0) promoter
were crossed to animals with ﬂoxed Nf2 genes, resulting in
progeny with Nf2-null Schwann cells (P0-Cre;Nf2ﬂox/ﬂox
mice) [56]. In contrast to Nf2?/- mice, these P0-Cre;Nf2ﬂox/
ﬂox mice developed Schwann cell hyperplasia and sch-
wannomas as well as cataracts, intracranial calciﬁcations,
osteomas and osteosarcomas. The schwannomas develop-
ing in P0-Cre;Nf2ﬂox/ﬂox mice have a cellular composition
analogous to that of human schwannomas. However, the
murine schwannomas do differ in some respects from their
human counterparts. Of particular note, P0-Cre;Nf2ﬂox/ﬂox
schwannomas, unlike human schwannomas, are not
encapsulated and tend to inﬁltrate into adjacent soft tissue
[168]. Nonetheless,
the peripheral nerve sheath tumors
arising in P0-Cre;Nf2ﬂox/ﬂox mice are clearly schwannomas
and consequently this conditional knockout mouse model
provides the best direct evidence available showing that
NF2 loss promotes the pathogenesis of schwannomas.

123

Patients with Carney complex (also known as Carney
complex type 1, Carney myxoma-endocrine complex or
Carney syndrome) are also prone to develop multiple
schwannomas. Peculiarly, however, patients with this
genetic disease develop an unusual schwannoma variant
known as psammomatous melanotic schwannomas rather
than the more conventional schwannomas seen in NF2 and
schwannomatosis. Other clinical manifestations of Carney
complex are the occurrence of myxomas in heart, skin or
breast,
lentiginous pigmentary lesions, blue nevi and
endocrine overactivity. This condition is inherited in an
autosomal dominant fashion, consistent with the affected
gene encoding a tumor suppressor.

The occurrence of schwannomas in both NF2 patients
and patients affected by Carney complex suggests that the
genes affected in these conditions might act within inter-
related signaling cascades
that promote schwannoma
pathogenesis. This suspicion was conﬁrmed when the
Carney complex gene located on the long arm of chro-
mosome 17 (Carney complex type 1) was cloned and found
to encode the type 1A regulatory subunit of protein kinase
A (PRKAR1A) [87, 89]. The PRKAR1A gene spans 20,798
base pairs and includes 11 exons encoding a 381 amino
acid protein which contains two cAMP-binding domains
and a protein dimerization domain. In its inactive state,
protein kinase A is a tetramer that is composed of two
regulatory subunits and two catalytic subunits that function
as serine/threonine kinases. The binding of two cAMP
molecules to each regulatory subunit elicits a conforma-
tional change in the subunit, resulting in the release of the
active catalytic subunits. Initial analyses of PRKAR1A
mutations indicated that the majority of mutations in Car-
ney complex patients are functionally null [89]. Consistent
with PRKAR1A functioning as a tumor suppressor, loss of
heterozygosity for this locus is evident in tumors devel-
oping in Carney complex patients [87];
this loss of
PRKAR1A expression results in increased total cAMP-
stimulated kinase activity [18, 149, 150, 170]. Subse-
quently, patients with expressed mutant proteins were
identiﬁed. These mutations all resulted in enhanced protein
kinase A activity which was attributed to decreased binding
of mutant PRKAR1A protein to either the catalytic subunit
or cAMP [58].

schwannomas and other clinical

To directly test the role of PRKAR1A in the patho-
genesis of
features
associated with Carney complex, Prkar1a?/- mice were
generated [88]. Starting at 6 months of age, these mice
developed nonpigmented schwannomas and ﬁbro-osseous
bone lesions. Further, mutation of the wild-type Prkar1a

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

341

allele was evident in approximately a third of the cells
within the murine schwannomas, consistent with the
postulated role of Prkar1a as a tumor suppressor. Simi-
larly, mice with complete loss of Prkar1a in facial neural
(TEC3-Cre;Prkar1aﬂox/ﬂox mice) developed
crest cells
schwannomas in the affected region [88]. A subsequent
examination of candidate signaling molecules in these
murine tumors showed that their expression of neuroﬁ-
bromin
a
posttranslational mechanism [83]. Curiously, the loss of
neuroﬁbromin protein in TEC3-Cre;Prkar1aﬂox/ﬂox sch-
wannomas was associated with enhanced activation of
Rac1, but not Ras proteins. Thus, PRKAR1A mutation
both results in activation of the protein kinase A sig-
naling pathways and affects other proteins previously
implicated in the pathogenesis of peripheral nerve sheath
tumors.

protein was

presumably

decreased,

via

The pathogenesis of schwannomas in patients
with schwannomatosis results from mutations
in a novel type of tumor suppressor gene…possibly
with assistance from a next-door neighbor

Patients with schwannomatosis (also known as neurilem-
momatosis or neuroﬁbromatosis type 3) present with
multiple spinal nerve root schwannomas and cutaneous
schwannomas that are often quite painful [8, 28, 113, 115,
174]. In contrast to patients with NF2, however, individuals
affected by schwannomatosis do not develop vestibular
schwannomas nor do they fulﬁll other diagnostic criteria
for NF2 [50]. Schwannomatosis can occur sporadically or
familially, although the familial form of this disease is
strangely rare [113].

Given the overlap between the clinical features of NF2
and schwannomatosis, it is understandable that investi-
gators long debated whether schwannomatosis was a
distinct entity or simply an NF2 variant. However, linkage
analyses ultimately excluded the NF2 locus as the site of
the germline mutation in families with schwannomatosis
and instead pointed to a different region on chromosome
22 that was located closer
to the centromere [114].
Inactivating mutations of SMARCB1 (SWI/SNF-related,
matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin,
subfamily B, member 1; also known as hSNF5 and INI1),
a gene located at 22q11.2, were subsequently identiﬁed in
families with schwannomatosis [73]. This gene was a
known tumor suppressor, having been previously identi-
ﬁed as the gene located within a region that
is often
deleted in malignant rhabdoid tumors and atypical tera-
toid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RTs) [185]. Loss of function
mutations of SMARCB1 had also been found to be the
cause of
rhabdoid predisposition syndrome-1 (OMIM
#609322) [162].

The SMARCB1 tumor suppressor gene spans 47,554
base pairs and includes 9 exons which encode a 385 amino
acid protein. This protein is a subunit of the SWI/SNF
ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complex which
relaxes regions of repressed chromatin, thereby allowing
the transcriptional machinery to access target genes. In
malignant rhabdoid tumors, loss of SMARCB1 function
results in polyploidy and chromosomal instability [188];
re-expression of SMARCB1 in these tumor cells couples
cell cycle progression back to ploidy controls via a path-
way that utilizes the cell cycle regulators p16Ink4a, cyclin
D, CDK4, Rb and E2F. These observations,
therefore,
raised the possibility that SMARCB1 loss might similarly
result in chromosomal instability in Schwann cells, leading
to the development of schwannomas. However, analyses of
somatic mutations in schwannomas from schwannomatosis
patients suggested a more complicated possibility. Germ-
line NF2 mutations
in
schwannomatosis patients. Nonetheless,
schwannomas
arising in these patients frequently show biallelic inacti-
vating mutations of NF2 [62, 161]. Based on these
observations, it was proposed that a ‘‘4-hit’’ mechanism, in
which both SMARCB1 and NF2 are inactivated, underlies
the pathogenesis of
in patients with
schwannomatosis.

schwannomas

typically

found

not

are

Genetically engineered mouse models provide a poten-
tial means of determining which of these models better
describes schwannoma development
in the context of
schwannomatosis. Unfortunately, although a conventional
knockout model of Smarcb1 has been constructed [148], it
has not provided a clear answer
to this question.
Smarcb1-/- mice die in utero at embryonic day 7, well
before the appearance of Schwann cell progenitors.
Smarcb1?/- mice appear normal until
they begin to
develop malignant rhabdoid tumors at 5 weeks of age, but
have not been reported to develop schwannomas. Given the
fact that apparently low levels of ‘‘second-hit’’ mutations in
Schwann cells did not
lead to peripheral nerve sheath
tumor formation in Nf1?/- and Nf2?/- mice, it is quite
possible that the same issue limits the development of
schwannomas in Smarcb1?/- mice. Consequently,
it is
likely that mice with conditional Smarcb1 knockouts in
Schwann cells will be required to determine whether
Smarcb1 loss alone is sufﬁcient for schwannoma patho-
genesis. Such mice have not yet been described in detail.
However, a recent report from the 5th NCI Mouse Models
of Human Cancers Consortium Nervous System Tumors
Workshop noted that mice in which Smarcb1 was condi-
tionally inactivated in Schwann cell precursors had been
reported to develop peripheral nerve tumors and that mice
in which both Nf2 and Smarcb1 are ablated in these glia are
currently under development [61]. Hopefully, these new
models will clarify the respective roles that Smarcb1 and

123

Author's personal copy342

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

Nf2 mutations play in the pathogenesis of schwannomas in
schwannomatosis patients.

not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the National Institutes
of Health or the Department of Defense.

Conclusions and some unanswered questions regarding
the molecular mechanisms involved in schwannoma
pathogenesis

Based on the ﬁndings outlined above, a complex picture
of schwannoma pathogenesis is emerging in which the
loss of merlin plays a central role in the pathogenesis of
both sporadic and NF2 associated schwannomas. The
possibility that inactivation of both SMARCB1 and NF2
is necessary for the pathogenesis of schwannomas in the
setting of schwannomatosis potentially links merlin loss
to the development of these tumors as well. It also seems
likely that PRKAR1A loss in the schwannomas develop-
ing in Carney complex patients results in inhibition of
merlin signaling. The ﬁndings described above support
the hypothesis that
inappropriate activation of protein
kinase A resulting from PRKAR1A loss promotes
schwannoma pathogenesis. However, protein kinase A
also phosphorylates and inactivates merlin, suggesting
that merlin will be functionally repressed in Carney
complex-associated schwannomas. Considered together,
these ﬁndings argue that genetic or functional
loss of
merlin is a key step in the pathogenesis of most, if not
all, schwannomas.

Nonetheless, it is quite clear that our understanding of
the molecular mechanisms responsible for the pathogenesis
of schwannomas is still very rudimentary. As was noted in
the discussion above, major questions remain unanswered
regarding the signaling cascades that are affected by merlin
loss. The list of proteins that interact with merlin continues
to grow at a rapid clip—moving forward, it will be nec-
essary to determine which of
these interactions are
important for the development of schwannomas and what
the consequences of these interactions are. In addition, only
very limited genomic and epigenetic studies of schwan-
nomas have been performed to date and it seems likely that
there are other, as yet undiscovered genetic and epigenetic
abnormalities occurring in schwannomas that interact with
the mutations we already know about. Answering questions
such as these will be critically important as basic scientists
and clinicians work together to develop effective new
therapies for schwannomas.

Acknowledgments This work was supported by the National
Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke (R01 NS048353 to
S.L.C.), the National Cancer Institute (R01 CA122804 to S.L.C.; R01
CA134773 to Kevin A. Roth and S.L.C.) and the Department of
Defense (X81XWH-09-1-0086 to S.L.C.). We thank the Alabama
Neuroscience Blueprint Core Center (P30 NS57098) for technical
assistance with studies from our laboratory that are described in this
review. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does

123

References

1. Ahmad ZK, Brown CM, Cueva RA, Ryan AF, Doherty JK
(2011) ErbB expression, activation, and inhibition with lapatinib
and tyrphostin (AG825) in human vestibular schwannomas. Otol
Neurotol 32:841–847

2. Ahmadian MR, Hoffmann U, Goody RS, Wittinghofer A (1997)
Individual rate constants for the interaction of Ras proteins with
GTPase-activating proteins determined by ﬂuorescence spec-
troscopy. Biochemistry 36:4535–4541

3. Ahmadian MR, Kiel C, Stege P, Scheffzek K (2003) Structural
ﬁngerprints of the Ras-GTPase activating proteins neuroﬁbro-
min and p120GAP. J Mol Biol 329:699–710

4. Ahronowitz I, Xin W, Kiely R, Sims K, MacCollin M, Nunes FP
(2007) Mutational spectrum of the NF2 gene: a meta-analysis of
12 years of research and diagnostic laboratory ﬁndings. Hum
Mutat 28:1–12

5. Alfthan K, Heiska L, Gronholm M, Renkema GH, Carpen O
(2004) Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylates
merlin at serine 518 independently of p21-activated kinase and
promotes merlin-ezrin heterodimerization.
J Biol Chem
279:18559–18566

6. Ammoun S, Cunliffe CH, Allen JC et al (2010) ErbB/HER
receptor activation and preclinical efﬁcacy of lapatinib in ves-
tibular schwannoma. Neuro Oncol 12:834–843

7. Ammoun S, Flaiz C, Ristic N, Schuldt J, Hanemann CO (2008)
Dissecting and targeting the growth factor-dependent and
growth factor-independent extracellular signal-regulated kinase
pathway in human schwannoma. Cancer Res 68:5236–5245

8. Bacci C, Sestini R, Provenzano A et al (2010) Schwannomatosis
associated with multiple meningiomas due to a familial
SMARCB1 mutation. Neurogenetics 11:73–80

9. Bai Y, Liu YJ, Wang H, Xu Y, Stamenkovic I, Yu Q (2007)
Inhibition of the hyaluronan-CD44 interaction by merlin con-
tributes to the tumor-suppressor activity of merlin. Oncogene
26:836–850

10. Barret C, Roy C, Montcourrier P, Mangeat P, Niggli V (2000)
the phosphatidylinositol 4, 5-bisphosphate
Mutagenesis of
(PIP(2)) binding site in the NH(2)-terminal domain of ezrin
correlates with its altered cellular distribution. J Cell Biol
151:1067–1080

11. Baser ME (2006) The distribution of constitutional and somatic
in the neuroﬁbromatosis 2 gene. Hum Mutat

mutations
27:297–306

12. Baser ME, Kuramoto L, Woods R et al (2005) The location of
constitutional neuroﬁbromatosis 2 (NF2) splice site mutations is
associated with the severity of NF2. J Med Genet 42:540–546
13. Bashour AM, Meng JJ, Ip W, MacCollin M, Ratner N (2002)
The neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 gene product, merlin, reverses the
F-actin cytoskeletal defects in primary human Schwannoma
cells. Mol Cell Biol 22:1150–1157

14. Basu TN, Gutmann DH, Fletcher JA, Glover TW, Collins FS,
Downward J (1992) Aberrant regulation of ras proteins in
malignant tumour cells from type 1 neuroﬁbromatosis patients.
Nature 356:713–715

15. Bhola P, Banerjee S, Mukherjee J et al (2010) Preclinical in vivo
evaluation of rapamycin in human malignant peripheral nerve
sheath explant xenograft. Int J Cancer 126:563–571

16. Birindelli S, Perrone F, Oggionni M et al (2001) Rb and TP53
pathway alterations in sporadic and NF1-related malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Lab Invest 81:833–844

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

343

17. Bollag G, McCormick F, Clark R (1993) Characterization of
full-length neuroﬁbromin: tubulin inhibits Ras GAP activity.
EMBO J 12:1923–1927

18. Bossis I, Stratakis CA (2004) Minireview: PRKAR1A: normal

and abnormal functions. Endocrinology 145:5452–5458

19. Brannan CI, Perkins AS, Vogel KS et al (1994) Targeted dis-
ruption of
to
developmental abnormalities in heart and various neural crest-
derived tissues. Genes Dev 8:1019–1029

the neuroﬁbromatosis

type-1 gene

leads

20. Brault E, Gautreau A, Lamarine M, Callebaut I, Thomas G,
Goutebroze L (2001) Normal membrane localization and actin
association of the NF2 tumor suppressor protein are dependent
on folding of its N-terminal domain. J Cell Sci 114:1901–1912
21. Buzard GS, Enomoto T, Anderson LM, Perantoni AO, Devor
DE, Rice JM (1999) Activation of neu by missense point
mutation in the transmembrane domain in schwannomas
induced in C3H/HeNCr mice by transplacental exposure to
N-nitrosoethylurea. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 125:653–659

22. Byer SJ, Eckert JM, Brossier NM et al (2011) Tamoxifen
inhibits malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor growth in an
estrogen receptor-independent manner. Neuro Oncol 13:28–41
23. Carroll SL, Miller ML, Frohnert PW, Kim SS, Corbett JA
(1997) Expression of neuregulins and their putative receptors,
ErbB2 and ErbB3, is induced during Wallerian degeneration.
J Neurosci 17:1642–1659

24. Carroll SL, Ratner N (2008) How does the Schwann cell lineage

form tumors in NF1? Glia 56:1590–1605

25. Carroll SL, Stonecypher MS (2004) Tumor suppressor muta-
tions and growth factor signaling in the pathogenesis of NF1-
associated peripheral nerve sheath tumors. I. The role of tumor
suppressor mutations. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 63:1115–1123
26. Carroll SL, Stonecypher MS (2005) Tumor suppressor muta-
tions and growth factor signaling in the pathogenesis of NF1-
associated peripheral nerve sheath tumors: II. The role of dys-
regulated growth factor signaling. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
64:1–9

27. CBTRUS (2010) CBTRUS statistical report: primary brain and
central nervous system tumors diagnosed in the United States in
2004–2006. Central Brain Tumor Registry of the United States,
Hinsdale, IL. http://www.cbtrus.org

28. Christiaans I, Kenter SB, Brink HC et al (2011) Germline
SMARCB1 mutation and somatic NF2 mutations in familial
multiple meningiomas. J Med Genet 48:93–97

29. Cichowski K, Shih TS, Schmitt E et al (1999) Mouse models of
type 1. Science

in neuroﬁbromatosis

tumor development
286:2172–2176

30. Clark JJ, Provenzano M, Diggelmann HR, Xu N, Hansen SS,
Hansen MR (2008) The ErbB inhibitors trastuzumab and erl-
otinib inhibit growth of vestibular schwannoma xenografts in
nude mice: a preliminary study. Otol Neurotol 29:846–853

31. Cohen PR, Rapini RP, Farhood AI (1993) Expression of the
human hematopoietic progenitor cell antigen CD34 in vascular
and spindle cell tumors. J Cutan Pathol 20:15–20

32. Courtois-Cox S, Genther Williams SM, Reczek EE et al (2006)
A negative feedback signaling network underlies oncogene-
induced senescence. Cancer Cell 10:459–472

33. Crawford AT, Desai D, Gokina P, Basak S, Kim HA (2008)
E-cadherin expression in postnatal Schwann cells is regulated by
the
pathway. Glia
56:1637–1647

cAMP-dependent

protein

kinase

a

34. D’Angelo I, Welti S, Bonneau F, Scheffzek K (2006) A novel
bipartite phospholipid-binding module in the neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1 protein. EMBO Rep 7:174–179

35. Dang I, De Vries GH (2011) Aberrant cAMP metabolism in NF1
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor cells. Neurochem Res
36:1697–1705

36. Dang I, DeVries GH (2005) Schwann cell lines derived from
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors respond abnormally to
platelet-derived growth factor-BB. J Neurosci Res 79:318–328
37. Dasgupta B, Dugan LL, Gutmann DH (2003) The neuroﬁbro-
matosis 1 gene product neuroﬁbromin regulates pituitary
adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide-mediated signaling in
astrocytes. J Neurosci 23:8949–8954

38. DeClue JE, Heffelﬁnger S, Benvenuto G et al (2000) Epidermal
growth factor receptor expression in neuroﬁbromatosis type
1-related tumors and NF1 animal models. J Clin Invest
105:1233–1241

39. DerMardirossian C, Bokoch GM (2005) GDIs: central regula-
tory molecules in Rho GTPase activation. Trends Cell Biol
15:356–363

40. Dovas A, Couchman JR (2005) RhoGDI: multiple functions in
the regulation of Rho family GTPase activities. Biochem J
390:1–9

41. Easton DF, Ponder MA, Huson SM, Ponder BA (1993) An
analysis of variation in expression of neuroﬁbromatosis (NF)
type 1 (NF1): evidence for modifying genes. Am J Hum Genet
53:305–313

42. Eckert JM, Byer SJ, Clodfelder-Miller BJ, Carroll SL (2009)
Neuregulin-1 beta and neuregulin-1 alpha differentially affect
the migration and invasion of malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor cells. Glia 57:1501–1520

43. Evans DG, Baser ME, McGaughran J, Sharif S, Howard E,
Moran A (2002) Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours in
neuroﬁbromatosis 1. J Med Genet 39:311–314

44. Evans DG, Huson SM, Donnai D et al (1992) A clinical study of

type 2 neuroﬁbromatosis. Q J Med 84:603–618

45. Evans DG, Ramsden RT, Shenton A et al (2007) Mosaicism in
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2: an update of risk based on uni/bilat-
erality of vestibular schwannoma at presentation and sensitive
mutation analysis including multiple ligation-dependent probe
ampliﬁcation. J Med Genet 44:424–428

46. Evans DG, Trueman L, Wallace A, Collins S, Strachan T (1998)
Genotype/phenotype correlations in type 2 neuroﬁbromatosis
(NF2): evidence for more severe disease associated with trun-
cating mutations. J Med Genet 35:450–455

47. Evans GR, Lloyd SK, Ramsden RT (2011) Neuroﬁbromatosis

type 2. Adv Otorhinolaryngol 70:91–98

48. Fernandes KJ, McKenzie IA, Mill P et al (2004) A dermal niche
for multipotent adult skin-derived precursor cells. Nat Cell Biol
6:1082–1093

49. Fernandez-Valle C, Tang Y, Ricard J et al (2002) Paxillin binds
schwannomin and regulates its density-dependent localization
and effect on cell morphology. Nat Genet 31:354–362

50. Ferner RE (2007) Neuroﬁbromatosis 1 and neuroﬁbromatosis 2:

a twenty ﬁrst century perspective. Lancet Neurol 6:340–351

51. Firat-Karalar EN, Welch MD (2011) New mechanisms and

functions of actin nucleation. Curr Opin Cell Biol 23:4–13

52. Flaiz C, Ammoun S, Biebl A, Hanemann CO (2009) Altered
adhesive structures and their relation to RhoGTPase activation
in merlin-deﬁcient Schwannoma. Brain Pathol 19:27–38

53. Flaiz C, Utermark T, Parkinson DB, Poetsch A, Hanemann CO
(2008) Impaired intercellular adhesion and immature adherens
junctions in merlin-deﬁcient human primary schwannoma cells.
Glia 56:506–515

54. Fraenzer JT, Pan H, Minimo L Jr, Smith GM, Knauer D, Hung
G (2003) Overexpression of the NF2 gene inhibits schwannoma
cell proliferation through promoting PDGFR degradation. Int J
Oncol 23:1493–1500

55. Frohnert PW, Stonecypher MS, Carroll SL (2003) Constitutive
activation of the neuregulin-1/ErbB receptor signaling pathway
is essential for the proliferation of a neoplastic Schwann cell
line. Glia 43:104–118

123

Author's personal copy344

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

56. Giovannini M, Robanus-Maandag E, van der Valk M et al
(2000) Conditional biallelic Nf2 mutation in the mouse pro-
motes manifestations of human neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Genes
Dev 14:1617–1630

57. Gonzalez-Agosti C, Xu L, Pinney D et al (1996) The merlin
tumor suppressor localizes preferentially in membrane rufﬂes.
Oncogene 13:1239–1247

58. Greene EL, Horvath AD, Nesterova M, Giatzakis C, Bossis I,
Stratakis CA (2008) In vitro functional studies of naturally
occurring pathogenic PRKAR1A mutations that are not subject
to nonsense mRNA decay. Hum Mutat 29:633–639

59. Gronholm M, Sainio M, Zhao F, Heiska L, Vaheri A, Carpen O
(1999) Homotypic and heterotypic interaction of the neuroﬁ-
bromatosis 2 tumor suppressor protein merlin and the ERM
protein ezrin. J Cell Sci 112:895–904

60. Gutmann DH, Sherman L, Seftor L, Haipek C, Hoang Lu K,
Hendrix M (1999) Increased expression of the NF2 tumor sup-
pressor gene product, merlin, impairs cell motility, adhesionand
spreading. Hum Mol Genet 8:267–275

61. Gutmann DH, Stiles CD, Lowe SW, Bollag GE, Furnari FB,
Charest AL (2011) Report from the ﬁfth National Cancer
Institute Mouse Models of Human Cancers Consortium Nervous
System Tumors Workshop. Neuro Oncol 13:692–699

62. Hadﬁeld KD, Newman WG, Bowers NL et al (2008) Molecular
characterisation of SMARCB1 and NF2 in familial and sporadic
schwannomatosis. J Med Genet 45:332–339

63. Hamaratoglu F, Willecke M, Kango-Singh M et al (2006) The
tumour-suppressor genes NF2/Merlin and Expanded act through
Hippo signalling to regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis. Nat
Cell Biol 8:27–36

64. Hansen MR, Roehm PC, Chatterjee P, Green SH (2006) Con-
stitutive neuregulin-1/ErbB signaling contributes to human
vestibular schwannoma proliferation. Glia 53:593–600

65. Hara T, Bianchi AB, Seizinger BR, Kley N (1994) Molecular
cloning and characterization of alternatively spliced transcripts
of the mouse neuroﬁbromatosis 2 gene. Cancer Res 54:330–335
66. Hawes JJ, Tuskan RG, Reilly KM (2007) Nf1 expression is
dependent on strain background: implications for tumor sup-
pressor haploinsufﬁciency studies. Neurogenetics 8:121–130

67. Hergovich A, Hemmings BA (2009) Mammalian NDR/LATS
protein kinases in hippo tumor suppressor signaling. Biofactors
35:338–345

68. Hirota S, Nomura S, Asada H, Ito A, Morii E, Kitamura Y
(1993) Possible involvement of c-kit receptor and its ligand in
increase of mast cells in neuroﬁbroma tissues. Arch Pathol Lab
Med 117:996–999

69. Holtkamp N, Atallah I, Okuducu AF et al (2007) MMP-13 and
p53 in the progression of malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors. Neoplasia 9:671–677

70. Huang Y, Rangwala F, Fulkerson PC et al (2004) Role of TC21/
R-Ras2 in enhanced migration of neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient
Schwann cells. Oncogene 23:368–378

71. Hughes SC, Fehon RG (2006) Phosphorylation and activity of
the tumor suppressor Merlin and the ERM protein Moesin are
coordinately regulated by the Slik kinase.
J Cell Biol
175:305–313

72. Huijbregts RP, Roth KA, Schmidt RE, Carroll SL (2003)
Hypertrophic neuropathies and malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors in transgenic mice overexpressing glial growth
factor beta3 in myelinating Schwann cells. J Neurosci 23:7269–
7280

73. Hulsebos TJ, Plomp AS, Wolterman RA, Robanus-Maandag
EC, Baas F, Wesseling P (2007) Germline mutation of INI1/
SMARCB1 in familial schwannomatosis. Am J Hum Genet
80:805–810

123

74. Huynh DP, Nechiporuk T, Pulst SM (1994) Alternative tran-
scripts in the mouse neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2) gene are
conserved and code for schwannomins with distinct C-terminal
domains. Hum Mol Genet 3:1075–1079

75. Ingram DA, Hiatt K, King AJ et al (2001) Hyperactivation of
p21(ras) and the hematopoietic-speciﬁc Rho GTPase, Rac2,
cooperate to alter the proliferation of neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient
mast cells in vivo and in vitro. J Exp Med 194:57–69

76. Ingram DA, Yang FC, Travers JB et al (2000) Genetic and
biochemical evidence that haploinsufﬁciency of the Nf1 tumor
suppressor gene modulates melanocyte and mast cell fates in
vivo. J Exp Med 191:181–188

77. Jacks T, Shih TS, Schmitt EM, Bronson RT, Bernards A,
Weinberg RA (1994) Tumour predisposition in mice heterozy-
gous for a targeted mutation in Nf1. Nat Genet 7:353–361

78. Jadayel D, Fain P, Upadhyaya M et al (1990) Paternal origin of
new mutations in von Recklinghausen neuroﬁbromatosis. Nature
343:558–559

79. James MF, Manchanda N, Gonzalez-Agosti C, Hartwig JH,
Ramesh V (2001) The neuroﬁbromatosis 2 protein product
merlin selectively binds F-actin but not G-actin, and stabilizes
the ﬁlaments
association. Biochem J
356:377–386

through a lateral

80. Johannessen CM, Johnson BW, Williams SM et al (2008)
TORC1 is essential for NF1-associated malignancies. Curr Biol
18:56–62

81. Johannessen CM, Reczek EE, James MF, Brems H, Legius E,
Cichowski K (2005) The NF1 tumor suppressor critically reg-
ulates TSC2 and mTOR. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
102:8573–8578

82. Johansson G, Mahller YY, Collins MH et al (2008) Effective in
vivo targeting of the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway in
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Mol Cancer Ther
7:1237–1245

83. Jones GN, Tep C, Towns WH 2nd et al (2008) Tissue-speciﬁc
ablation of Prkar1a causes schwannomas by suppressing neu-
roﬁbromatosis protein production. Neoplasia 10:1213–1221

84. Joseph NM, Mosher JT, Buchstaller J et al (2008) The loss of
Nf1 transiently promotes self-renewal but not tumorigenesis by
neural crest stem cells. Cancer Cell 13:129–140

85. Kim HA, Ratner N, Roberts TM, Stiles CD (2001) Schwann cell
proliferative responses to cAMP and Nf1 are mediated by cyclin
D1. J Neurosci 21:1110–1116

86. King D, Yang G, Thompson MA, Hiebert SW (2002) Loss of
neuroﬁbromatosis-1 and p19(ARF) cooperate to induce a mul-
tiple tumor phenotype. Oncogene 21:4978–4982

87. Kirschner LS, Carney JA, Pack SD et al (2000) Mutations of the
gene encoding the protein kinase A type I-alpha regulatory
subunit
in patients with the Carney complex. Nat Genet
26:89–92

88. Kirschner LS, Kusewitt DF, Matyakhina L et al (2005) A mouse
model for the Carney complex tumor syndrome develops neo-
plasia
tissues. Cancer Res
65:4506–4514

cyclic AMP-responsive

in

89. Kirschner LS, Sandrini F, Monbo J, Lin JP, Carney JA, Stratakis
CA (2000) Genetic heterogeneity and spectrum of mutations of
the PRKAR1A gene in patients with the carney complex. Hum
Mol Genet 9:3037–3046

90. Kissil JL, Johnson KC, Eckman MS, Jacks T (2002) Merlin
phosphorylation by p21-activated kinase 2 and effects of phos-
phorylation on merlin localization. J Biol Chem 277:10394–10399
91. Kissil JL, Wilker EW, Johnson KC, Eckman MS, Yaffe MB,
Jacks T (2003) Merlin, the product of the Nf2 tumor suppressor
gene, is an inhibitor of the p21-activated kinase, Pak1. Mol Cell
12:841–849

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

345

92. Kluwe L, Friedrich R, Mautner VF (1999) Loss of NF1 allele in
Schwann cells but not in ﬁbroblasts derived from an NF1-associ-
ated neuroﬁbroma. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 24:283–285

93. Kluwe L, MacCollin M, Tatagiba M et al (1998) Phenotypic
variability associated with 14 splice-site mutations in the NF2
gene. Am J Med Genet 77:228–233

94. Koga T, Iwasaki H, Ishiguro M, Matsuzaki A, Kikuchi M (2002)
Losses in chromosomes 17, 19, and 22q in neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1 and sporadic neuroﬁbromas: a comparative genomic
hybridization analysis. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 136:113–120

95. Korkiamaki T, Yla-Outinen H, Koivunen J, Karvonen SL,
Peltonen J (2002) Altered calcium-mediated cell signaling in
keratinocytes cultured from patients with neuroﬁbromatosis type
1. Am J Pathol 160:1981–1990

96. Kourea HP, Orlow I, Scheithauer BW, Cordon-Cardo C,
Woodruff JM (1999) Deletions of the INK4A gene occur in
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors but not in neuroﬁ-
bromas. Am J Pathol 155:1855–1860

97. Kweh F, Zheng M, Kurenova E, Wallace M, Golubovskaya V,
Cance WG (2009) Neuroﬁbromin physically interacts with the
N-terminal domain of focal adhesion kinase. Mol Carcinog
48:1005–1017

98. Lakkis MM, Golden JA, O’Shea KS, Epstein JA (1999) Neu-
roﬁbromin deﬁciency in mice causes exencephaly and is a
modiﬁer for Splotch neural tube defects. Dev Biol 212:80–92

99. Lallemand D, Curto M, Saotome I, Giovannini M, McClatchey
AI (2003) NF2 deﬁciency promotes tumorigenesis and metas-
tasis
junctions. Genes Dev
17:1090–1100

destabilizing

adherens

by

100. Lallemand D, Manent J, Couvelard A et al (2009) Merlin reg-
ulates transmembrane receptor accumulation and signaling at
the plasma membrane in primary mouse Schwann cells and in
human schwannomas. Oncogene 28:854–865

101. Laulajainen M, Muranen T, Carpen O, Gronholm M (2008)
Protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation of the NF2 tumor
suppressor protein merlin at serine 10 affects the actin cyto-
skeleton. Oncogene 27:3233–3243

102. Laulajainen M, Muranen T, Nyman TA, Carpen O, Gronholm M
(2011) Multistep phosphorylation by oncogenic kinases enhan-
ces the degradation of the NF2 tumor suppressor Merlin.
Neoplasia 13:643–652

103. Le LQ, Liu C, Shipman T, Chen Z, Suter U, Parada LF (2011)
Susceptible stages in Schwann cells for NF1-associated plexi-
form neuroﬁbroma development. Cancer Res 71:4686–4695

104. Le LQ, Shipman T, Burns DK, Parada LF (2009) Cell of origin
and microenvironment contribution for NF1-associated dermal
neuroﬁbromas. Cell Stem Cell 4:453–463

105. Legius E, Dierick H, Wu R et al (1994) TP53 mutations are
frequent in malignant NF1 tumors. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
10:250–255

106. Legius E, Marchuk DA, Collins FS, Glover TW (1993) Somatic
deletion of the neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 gene in a neuroﬁbro-
sarcoma supports a tumour suppressor gene hypothesis. Nat
Genet 3:122–126

107. Lewallen KA, Shen YA, De la Torre AR, Ng BK, Meijer D,
Chan JR (2011) Assessing the role of the cadherin/catenin
complex at the Schwann cell-axon interface and in the initiation
of myelination. J Neurosci 31:3032–3043

108. Li W, You L, Cooper J et al (2010) Merlin/NF2 suppresses
ligase

tumorigenesis
CRL4(DCAF1) in the nucleus. Cell 140:477–490

inhibiting

ubiquitin

by

the E3

109. Ling BC, Wu J, Miller SJ et al (2005) Role for the epidermal
growth factor receptor in neuroﬁbromatosis-related peripheral
nerve tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell 7:65–75

110. Lopez-Lago MA, Okada T, Murillo MM, Socci N, Giancotti FG
(2009) Loss of the tumor suppressor gene NF2, encoding merlin,

constitutively activates integrin-dependent mTORC1 signaling.
Mol Cell Biol 29:4235–4249

111. Luongo C, Moser AR, Gledhill S, Dove WF (1994) Loss of
Apc ? in intestinal adenomas from Min mice. Cancer Res
54:5947–5952

112. Lutchman M, Rouleau GA (1995) The neuroﬁbromatosis type 2
gene product, schwannomin, suppresses growth of NIH 3T3
cells. Cancer Res 55:2270–2274

113. MacCollin M, Chiocca EA, Evans DG et al (2005) Diagnostic

criteria for schwannomatosis. Neurology 64:1838–1845

114. MacCollin M, Willett C, Heinrich B et al (2003) Familial sch-
wannomatosis: exclusion of the NF2 locus as the germline
event. Neurology 60:1968–1974

115. MacCollin M, Woodﬁn W, Kronn D, Short MP (1996) Sch-
wannomatosis: a clinical and pathologic study. Neurology
46:1072–1079

116. Maeda M, Matsui T, Imamura M, Tsukita S (1999) Expression
level, subcellular distribution and rho-GDI binding afﬁnity of
merlin in comparison with Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin proteins.
Oncogene 18:4788–4797

117. Manchanda N, Lyubimova A, Ho HY et al (2005) The NF2
tumor suppressor Merlin and the ERM proteins interact with
N-WASP and regulate its actin polymerization function. J Biol
Chem 280:12517–12522

118. Mangoura D, Sun Y, Li C et al (2006) Phosphorylation of
neuroﬁbromin by PKC is a possible molecular switch in EGF
receptor signaling in neural cells. Oncogene 25:735–745

119. Mantripragada KK, Spurlock G, Kluwe L et al (2008) High-
resolution DNA copy number proﬁling of malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors using targeted microarray-based compara-
tive genomic hybridization. Clin Cancer Res 14:1015–1024

120. Marais R, Light Y, Paterson HF, Mason CS, Marshall CJ (1997)
Differential regulation of Raf-1, A-Raf, and B-Raf by oncogenic
ras and tyrosine kinases. J Biol Chem 272:4378–4383

121. Mautner VF, Kluwe L, Friedrich RE et al (2010) Clinical
characterisation of 29 neuroﬁbromatosis type-1 patients with
molecularly ascertained 1.4 Mb type-1 NF1 deletions. J Med
Genet 47:623–630

122. Mawrin C, Kirches E, Boltze C, Dietzmann K, Roessner A,
Schneider-Stock R (2002) Immunohistochemical and molecular
analysis of p53, RB, and PTEN in malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors. Virchows Arch 440:610–615

123. Mayes DA, Rizvi TA, Cancelas JA et al (2011) Perinatal or
adult Nf1 inactivation using tamoxifen-inducible PlpCre each
cause neuroﬁbroma formation. Cancer Res 71:4675–4685

124. McCartney BM, Kulikauskas RM, LaJeunesse DR, Fehon RG
(2000) The neuroﬁbromatosis-2 homologue, Merlin, and the
tumor suppressor expanded function together in Drosophila to
regulate cell proliferation and differentiation. Development
127:1315–1324

125. McCaughan JA, Holloway SM, Davidson R, Lam WW (2007)
Further evidence of the increased risk for malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumour from a Scottish cohort of patients with
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. J Med Genet 44:463–466

126. McClatchey AI, Saotome I, Mercer K et al (1998) Mice het-
erozygous for a mutation at the Nf2 tumor suppressor locus
develop a range of highly metastatic tumors. Genes Dev
12:1121–1133

127. McClatchey AI, Saotome I, Ramesh V, Gusella JF, Jacks T
(1997) The Nf2 tumor suppressor gene product is essential for
extraembryonic development immediately prior to gastrulation.
Genes Dev 11:1253–1265

128. Meng JJ, Lowrie DJ, Sun H et al (2000) Interaction between two
isoforms of the NF2 tumor suppressor protein, merlin, and
between merlin and ezrin, suggests modulation of ERM proteins
by merlin. J Neurosci Res 62:491–502

123

Author's personal copy346

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

129. Menichella DM, Arroyo EJ, Awatramani R et al (2001) Protein
zero is necessary for E-cadherin-mediated adherens junction
formation in Schwann cells. Mol Cell Neurosci 18:606–618

130. Menon AG, Anderson KM, Riccardi VM et al (1990) Chro-
mosome 17p deletions and p53 gene mutations associated with
the formation of malignant neuroﬁbrosarcomas in von Rec-
klinghausen neuroﬁbromatosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
87:5435–5439

131. Messiaen L, Yao S, Brems H et al (2009) Clinical and muta-
tional spectrum of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1-like syndrome.
JAMA 302:2111–2118

132. Messiaen LM, Callens T, Mortier G et al (2000) Exhaustive
mutation analysis of the NF1 gene allows identiﬁcation of 95%
of mutations and reveals a high frequency of unusual splicing
defects. Hum Mutat 15:541–555

133. Miller SJ, Jessen WJ, Mehta T et al (2009) Integrative genomic
analyses of neuroﬁbromatosis tumours identify SOX9 as a bio-
marker and survival gene. EMBO Mol Med 1:236–248

134. Miller SJ, Rangwala F, Williams J et al (2006) Large-scale
molecular comparison of human schwann cells to malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor cell lines and tissues. Cancer Res
66:2584–2591

135. Morrison H, Sherman LS, Legg J et al (2001) The NF2 tumor
suppressor gene product, merlin, mediates contact inhibition of
growth through interactions with CD44. Genes Dev 15:968–980
136. Murthy A, Gonzalez-Agosti C, Cordero E et al (1998) NHE-RF,
a regulatory cofactor for Na(?)-H? exchange, is a common
interactor for merlin and ERM (MERM) proteins. J Biol Chem
273:1273–1276

137. Nguyen R, Reczek D, Bretscher A (2001) Hierarchy of merlin and
ezrin N- and C-terminal domain interactions in homo- and het-
relationship to binding of
erotypic associations and their
scaffolding proteins EBP50 and E3KARP.
J Biol Chem
276:7621–7629

138. Nielsen GP, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Ino Y, Moller MB,
Rosenberg AE, Louis DN (1999) Malignant transformation of
neuroﬁbromas
in neuroﬁbromatosis 1 is associated with
CDKN2A/p16 inactivation. Am J Pathol 155:1879–1884

139. Ohba Y, Mochizuki N, Yamashita S et al (2000) Regulatory
proteins of R-Ras, TC21/R-Ras2, and M-Ras/R-Ras3. J Biol
Chem 275:20020–20026

140. Okada T, Lopez-Lago M, Giancotti FG (2005) Merlin/NF-2
mediates contact inhibition of growth by suppressing recruit-
ment of Rac to the plasma membrane. J Cell Biol 171:361–371
141. Pasmant E, Sabbagh A, Spurlock G et al (2010) NF1 microde-
letions in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: from genotype to phenotype.
Hum Mutat 31:E1506–E1518

142. Pelton PD, Sherman LS, Rizvi TA et al (1998) Rufﬂing mem-
brane, stress ﬁber, cell spreading and proliferation abnormalities
in human Schwannoma cells. Oncogene 17:2195–2209

143. Perry A, Kunz SN, Fuller CE et al (2002) Differential NF1, p16,
and EGFR patterns by interphase cytogenetics (FISH)
in
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) and mor-
phologically similar spindle cell neoplasms. J Neuropathol Exp
Neurol 61:702–709

144. Perry A, Roth KA, Banerjee R, Fuller CE, Gutmann DH (2001)
NF1 deletions in S-100 protein-positive and negative cells of
sporadic and neuroﬁbromatosis 1 (NF1)-associated plexiform
neuroﬁbromas and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Am J Pathol 159:57–61

145. Pykett MJ, Murphy M, Harnish PR, George DL (1994) The neu-
roﬁbromatosis 2 (NF2) tumor suppressor gene encodes multiple
alternatively spliced transcripts. Hum Mol Genet 3:559–564

146. Rangwala R, Banine F, Borg JP, Sherman LS (2005) Erbin
regulates mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activation and
MAP kinase-dependent
interactions between Merlin and

123

adherens junction protein complexes in Schwann cells. J Biol
Chem 280:11790–11797

147. Reilly KM, Broman KW, Bronson RT et al (2006) An imprinted
locus epistatically inﬂuences Nstr1 and Nstr2 to control resis-
tance to nerve sheath tumors in a neuroﬁbromatosis type 1
mouse model. Cancer Res 66:62–68

148. Roberts CW, Galusha SA, McMenamin ME, Fletcher CD, Orkin
SH (2000) Haploinsufﬁciency of Snf5 (integrase interactor 1)
predisposes to malignant rhabdoid tumors in mice. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 97:13796–13800

149. Robinson-White A, Hundley TR, Shiferaw M, Bertherat J,
Sandrini F, Stratakis CA (2003) Protein kinase-A activity in
PRKAR1A-mutant cells, and regulation of mitogen-activated
protein kinases ERK1/2. Hum Mol Genet 12:1475–1484

150. Robinson-White A, Meoli E, Stergiopoulos S et al (2006)
PRKAR1A mutations and protein kinase A interactions with
other signaling pathways in the adrenal cortex. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 91:2380–2388

151. Rong R, Surace EI, Haipek CA, Gutmann DH, Ye K (2004)
Serine 518 phosphorylation modulates merlin intramolecular
association and binding to critical effectors important for NF2
growth suppression. Oncogene 23:8447–8454

152. Rouleau GA, Merel P, Lutchman M et al (1993) Alteration in a
new gene encoding a putative membrane-organizing protein
causes neuro-ﬁbromatosis type 2. Nature 363:515–521

153. Ruttledge MH, Andermann AA, Phelan CM et al (1996) Type of
mutation in the neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 gene (NF2) frequently
determines severity of disease. Am J Hum Genet 59:331–342

154. Ryan JJ, Klein KA, Neuberger TJ et al (1994) Role for the stem cell
factor/KIT complex in Schwann cell neoplasia and mast cell pro-
liferation associated with neuroﬁbromatosis. J Neurosci Res
37:415–432

155. Sainio M, Zhao F, Heiska L et al (1997) Neuroﬁbromatosis 2
tumor suppressor protein colocalizes with ezrin and CD44 and
associates with actin-containing cytoskeleton. J Cell Sci 110(Pt
18):2249–2260

156. Schade B, Lam SH, Cernea D et al (2007) Distinct ErbB-2 coupled
signaling pathways promote mammary tumors with unique path-
ologic and transcriptional proﬁles. Cancer Res 67:7579–7588

157. Scheffzek K, Ahmadian MR, Kabsch W et al (1997) The Ras-
RasGAP complex: structural basis for GTPase activation and its
loss in oncogenic Ras mutants. Science 277:333–338

158. Schulze KM, Hanemann CO, Muller HW, Hanenberg H (2002)
Transduction of wild-type merlin into human schwannoma cells
decreases schwannoma cell growth and induces apoptosis. Hum
Mol Genet 11:69–76

159. Scoles DR, Huynh DP, Morcos PA et al (1998) Neuroﬁbroma-
tosis 2 tumour suppressor schwannomin interacts with betaII-
spectrin. Nat Genet 18:354–359

160. Seizinger BR, Rouleau G, Ozelius LJ et al (1987) Common
pathogenetic mechanism for three tumor types in bilateral
acoustic neuroﬁbromatosis. Science 236:317–319

161. Sestini R, Bacci C, Provenzano A, Genuardi M, Papi L (2008)
Evidence of a four-hit mechanism involving SMARCB1 and NF2
in schwannomatosis-associated schwannomas. Hum Mutat
29:227–231

162. Sevenet N, Sheridan E, Amram D, Schneider P, Handgretinger
R, Delattre O (1999) Constitutional mutations of the hSNF5/
INI1 gene predispose to a variety of cancers. Am J Hum Genet
65:1342–1348

163. Shaw RJ, McClatchey AI, Jacks T (1998) Regulation of the
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 tumor suppressor protein, merlin, by
adhesion and growth arrest stimuli. J Biol Chem 273:7757–7764
164. Shaw RJ, Paez JG, Curto M et al (2001) The Nf2 tumor sup-
pressor, merlin, functions in Rac-dependent signaling. Dev Cell
1:63–72

Author's personal copyActa Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

347

165. Sherman L, Xu HM, Geist RT et al (1997) Interdomain binding
mediates tumor growth suppression by the NF2 gene product.
Oncogene 15:2505–2509

166. Sherman LS, Atit R, Rosenbaum T, Cox AD, Ratner N (2000)
Single cell Ras-GTP analysis reveals altered Ras activity in a
subpopulation of neuroﬁbroma Schwann cells but not ﬁbro-
blasts. J Biol Chem 275:30740–30745

167. Sobel RA (1993) Vestibular (acoustic) schwannomas: histologic
features in neuroﬁbromatosis 2 and in unilateral cases. J Neu-
ropathol Exp Neurol 52:106–113

168. Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Louis DN, Nielsen GP et al (2004)
Comparative pathology of nerve sheath tumors in mouse models
and humans. Cancer Res 64:3718–3724

169. Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Xu L, Gonzalez-Agosti C et al
(1997) Universal absence of merlin, but not other ERM family
members, in schwannomas. Am J Pathol 151:1649–1654

170. Stergiopoulos SG, Stratakis CA (2003) Human tumors associ-
ated with Carney complex and germline PRKAR1A mutations: a
protein kinase A disease! FEBS Lett 546:59–64

171. Stonecypher MS, Byer SJ, Grizzle WE, Carroll SL (2005)
Activation of the neuregulin-1/ErbB signaling pathway pro-
motes the proliferation of neoplastic Schwann cells in human
malignant
tumors. Oncogene
24:5589–5605

peripheral

nerve

sheath

172. Stonecypher MS, Chaudhury AR, Byer SJ, Carroll SL (2006)
Neuregulin growth factors and their ErbB receptors form a
potential signaling network for schwannoma tumorigenesis.
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 65:162–175

173. Storlazzi CT, Brekke HR, Mandahl N et al (2006) Identiﬁcation
of a novel amplicon at distal 17q containing the BIRC5/SUR-
VIVIN gene in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours.
J Pathol 209:492–500

174. Swensen JJ, Keyser J, Cofﬁn CM, Biegel JA, Viskochil DH,
Williams MS (2009) Familial occurrence of schwannomas and
malignant rhabdoid tumour associated with a duplication in
SMARCB1. J Med Genet 46:68–72

175. Takahashi K, Sasaki T, Mammoto A et al (1997) Direct inter-
action of the Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor with ezrin/radixin/
moesin initiates the activation of the Rho small G protein. J Biol
Chem 272:23371–23375

176. Tao Y, Dai P, Liu Y et al (2009) Erbin regulates NRG1 sig-
Sci USA

Proc Natl Acad

and myelination.

naling
106:9477–9482

177. Thaxton C, Lopera J, Bott M, Fernandez-Valle C (2008) Neu-
regulin and laminin stimulate phosphorylation of the NF2 tumor
suppressor in Schwann cells by distinct protein kinase A and
p21-activated
Oncogene
27:2705–2715

kinase-dependent

pathways.

178. Tikoo A, Varga M, Ramesh V, Gusella J, Maruta H (1994) An
anti-Ras function of neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 gene product
(NF2/Merlin). J Biol Chem 269:23387–23390

179. Tona A, Perides G, Rahemtulla F, Dahl D (1993) Extracellular
matrix in regenerating rat sciatic nerve: a comparative study on
the localization of laminin, hyaluronic acid, and chondroitin
sulfate proteoglycans, including versican. J Histochem Cyto-
chem 41:593–599

180. Trofatter JA, MacCollin MM, Rutter JL et al (1993) A novel
moesin-, ezrin-, radixin-like gene is a candidate for the neuro-
ﬁbromatosis 2 tumor suppressor. Cell 75:826

181. Upadhyaya M, Huson SM, Davies M et al (2007) An absence of
cutaneous neuroﬁbromas associated with a 3-bp inframe dele-
tion in exon 17 of the NF1 gene (c.2970–2972 delAAT):
evidence of a clinically signiﬁcant NF1 genotype–phenotype
correlation. Am J Hum Genet 80:140–151

182. Upadhyaya M, Kluwe L, Spurlock G et al (2008) Germline and
somatic NF1 gene mutation spectrum in NF1-associated

malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs). Hum
Mutat 29:74–82

183. Utermark T, Kaempchen K, Hanemann CO (2003) Pathological
adhesion of primary human schwannoma cells is dependent on
altered expression of integrins. Brain Pathol 13:352–363

184. Vandenbroucke I, Van Oostveldt P, Coene E, De Paepe A,
Messiaen L (2004) Neuroﬁbromin is actively transported to the
nucleus. FEBS Lett 560:98–102

185. Versteege I, Sevenet N, Lange J et al (1998) Truncating muta-
tions of hSNF5/INI1 in aggressive paediatric cancer. Nature
394:203–206

186. Viskochil D, Buchberg AM, Xu G et al (1990) Deletions and a
translocation interrupt a cloned gene at the neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1 locus. Cell 62:187–192

187. Vogel KS, Klesse LJ, Velasco-Miguel S, Meyers K, Rushing EJ,
Parada LF (1999) Mouse tumor model for neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1. Science 286:2176–2179

188. Vries RG, Bezrookove V, Zuijderduijn LM et al (2005) Cancer-
associated mutations in chromatin remodeler hSNF5 promote
chromosomal instability by compromising the mitotic check-
point. Genes Dev 19:665–670

189. Wallace MR, Marchuk DA, Andersen LB et al (1990) Type 1
neuroﬁbromatosis gene: identiﬁcation of a large transcript dis-
rupted in three NF1 patients. Science 249:181–186

190. Wanner IB, Guerra NK, Mahoney J et al (2006) Role of
N-cadherin in Schwann cell precursors of growing nerves. Glia
54:439–459

191. Wanner IB, Wood PM (2002) N-cadherin mediates axon-aligned
process growth and cell–cell interaction in rat Schwann cells.
J Neurosci 22:4066–4079

192. Watanabe T, Sakamoto A, Tamiya S, Oda Y, Masuda K, Tsu-
neyoshi M (2000) H-ras-1 point mutation in malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors: polymerase chain reaction
restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and direct
sequencing from parafﬁn-embedded tissues. Int J Mol Med
5:605–608

193. Weiss SW, Nickoloff BJ (1993) CD-34 is expressed by a dis-
tinctive cell population in peripheral nerve, nerve sheath tumors,
and related lesions. Am J Surg Pathol 17:1039–1045

194. Welti S, Fraterman S, D’Angelo I, Wilm M, Scheffzek K (2007)
The sec14 homology module of neuroﬁbromin binds cellular
glycerophospholipids: mass spectrometry and structure of a lipid
complex. J Mol Biol 366:551–562

195. Welti S, Kuhn S, D’Angelo I, Brugger B, Kaufmann D, Sche-
ffzek K (2011) Structural and biochemical consequences of NF1
associated nontruncating mutations in the Sec14-PH module of
neuroﬁbromin. Hum Mutat 32:191–197

196. Widemann BC, Salzer WL, Arceci RJ et al (2006) Phase I trial
and pharmacokinetic study of the farnesyltransferase inhibitor
tipifarnib in children with refractory solid tumors or neuroﬁ-
bromatosis type I and plexiform neuroﬁbromas. J Clin Oncol
24:507–516

197. Wiederhold T, Lee MF, James M et al (2004) Magicin, a novel
cytoskeletal protein associates with the NF2 tumor suppressor
merlin and Grb2. Oncogene 23:8815–8825

198. Wimmer K, Roca X, Beiglbock H et al (2007) Extensive in
silico analysis of NF1 splicing defects uncovers determinants for
splicing outcome upon 50 splice-site disruption. Hum Mutat
28:599–612

199. Wimmer K, Yao S, Claes K et al (2006) Spectrum of single- and
multiexon NF1 copy number changes in a cohort of 1, 100
unselected NF1
patients. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
45:265–276

200. Woodhoo A, Sommer L (2008) Development of the Schwann
cell lineage: from the neural crest to the myelinated nerve. Glia
56:1481–1490

123

Author's personal copy348

Acta Neuropathol (2012) 123:321–348

201. Wu J, Williams JP, Rizvi TA et al (2008) Plexiform and dermal
neuroﬁbromas and pigmentation are caused by Nf1 loss in desert
hedgehog-expressing cells. Cancer Cell 13:105–116

202. Xiao GH, Beeser A, Chernoff J, Testa JR (2002) p21-activated
kinase links Rac/Cdc42 signaling to merlin. J Biol Chem
277:883–886

203. Xiao GH, Gallagher R, Shetler J et al (2005) The NF2 tumor
suppressor gene product, merlin, inhibits cell proliferation and
cell cycle progression by repressing cyclin D1 expression. Mol
Cell Biol 25:2384–2394

204. Xu GF, Lin B, Tanaka K et al (1990) The catalytic domain of
the neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 gene product stimulates ras GTPase
and complements ira mutants of S. cerevisiae. Cell 63:835–841
205. Xu GF, O’Connell P, Viskochil D et al (1990) The neuroﬁbro-
matosis type 1 gene encodes a protein related to GAP. Cell
62:599–608

206. Yang FC, Chen S, Clegg T et al (2006) Nf1?/- mast cells
induce neuroﬁbroma like phenotypes through secreted TGF-b
signaling. Hum Mol Genet 15:2421–2437

207. Yang FC, Ingram DA, Chen S et al (2003) Neuroﬁbromin-
deﬁcient Schwann cells secrete a potent migratory stimulus for
Nf1 ± mast cells. J Clin Invest 112:1851–1861

208. Yang FC, Ingram DA, Chen S et al (2008) Nf1-dependent
tumors require a microenvironment containing Nf1?/-- and
c-kit-dependent bone marrow. Cell 135:437–448

209. Young P, Boussadia O, Berger P et al (2002) E-cadherin is
required for the correct formation of autotypic adherens junc-
tions of the outer mesaxon but not for the integrity of myelinated
ﬁbers of peripheral nerves. Mol Cell Neurosci 21:341–351

210. Zheng H, Chang L, Patel N et al (2008) Induction of abnormal
proliferation by nonmyelinating schwann cells triggers neuroﬁ-
broma formation. Cancer Cell 13:117–128

211. Zhu Y, Ghosh P, Charnay P, Burns DK, Parada LF (2002)
Neuroﬁbromas in NF1: Schwann cell origin and role of tumor
environment. Science 296:920–922

212. Zou CY, Smith KD, Zhu QS et al (2009) Dual targeting of AKT
and mammalian target of rapamycin: a potential therapeutic
approach for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor. Mol
Cancer Ther 8:1157–1168

123

Author's personal copy