Page  1 

 

 

 

 

1 of 1 DOCUMENT 

1989, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 

Journal of the National Cancer Institute 

J Natl Cancer Inst 1989; 81: 1088-1092 

July 19, 1989 

 
SECTION: REPORTS 
 
LENGTH: 2249 words 
 
TITLE: Display and Analysis of Patterns of Differential Activity of Drugs Against Human Tumor Cell Lines: 
Development of Mean Graph and COMPARE Algorithm 
 
AUTHOR: K. D. Paull, <1> R. H. Shoemaker, L. Hodes, A. Monks, D. A. Scudiero, L. Rubinstein, J. Plowman, M. R. 
Boyd 
 
ABSTRACT: The objective of this study was to develop and investigate an approach to optimally detect, rank, display, 
and analyze patterns of differential growth inhibition among cultured cell lines.    Such patterns of cellular responsive-
ness are produced by substances tested in vitro against disease-oriented panels of human tumor cell lines in a new anti-
cancer screening model under development by the National Cancer Institute.    In the first phase of the study, we devel-
oped a key methodological tool, the mean graph, which allowed the transformation of the numerical cell line response 
data into graphic patterns.    These patterns were particularly expressive of differential cell growth inhibition and were 
conveniently amenable to further analyses by an algorithm we devised and implemented in the COMPARE computer 
program. 
 
  TEXT: 

The National Cancer Institute (NCI) is implementing a new anticancer drug-screening program using a dis-

ease-oriented panel of cultured human tumor cell lines for the initial stages of screening.    More detailed aspects of this 
program and its origins, goals, methods, techniques, and rationale were described previously [n1-n4].    Criteria to define 
activity in the new screen are being explored.    One criterion under study, differential cell growth inhibition, was the 
principal focus of our study. 

Differential growth inhibition as defined here means that a cell line or group of cell lines can be inhibited to a given 

extent at a lower concentration of test drug than is required to exert the same effect on other cell lines.    Differential 
growth inhibition has not been systematically investigated as a criterion for new drug selection.    Therefore, unique data 
treatment and display methods were necessary for examination of its potential for determining activity in the new NCI 
drug screen.    The objective of this study was development of methods to optimally detect, rank, and display test results 
that signal differential growth inhibition.    A key result of the first phase of the study, the mean graph, has catalyzed 
development of additional methods by transforming the numerical cell line response data into graphic patterns that ex-
press differential growth inhibition. 
   
Methods 

We performed dose-response testing with cells from each cell line in a pilot screening panel.    This panel consisted 
of [SYMBOL OMITTED]50 cell lines, including colon, lung, ovarian, and renal carcinoma; melanoma; central nervous 
system tumors; human leukemia; and a miscellaneous group of cell lines including the MCF-7 breast cancer and P388 
murine leukemia cell lines and multidrug-resistant variants of these two lines.    Test samples were prepared in dimethyl 
sulfoxide at their maximum soluble concentrations, diluted 1:200 with medium, and tested in culture at five 
log[10]dilutions. 

HHS, NCI, J Natl Cancer Inst, July 19, 1989   

Page  2 

Drug screening was performed with automated assay methods described previously [n2,n3].    It is important to note 

that use of a different assay method or end point determination could yield substantively different screening data pro-
files and interpretations.    Nevertheless, our general approach to data display and analysis may be applicable to a variety 
of assays and/or end points. 
   
Results and Discussion 

The large amount of data generated for each compound ([SYMBOL OMITTED]50 dose-response curves) required 
an optimal format for the graphic presentation of differential cell growth inhibition.    The mean graph format developed 
for this purpose not only permits the ready visualization of any differential growth inhibition expressed by a test com-
pound but also creates a framework for logical analysis of the data.    This framework provides the foundation for com-
puter-assisted analysis of the data, a vital development, considering the unprecedented scale of the NCI in vitro 
drug-screening program.    However, the most intriguing property of the mean graph format is that it yields identifiable 
and characteristic "fingerprint" patterns, which appear to possess a remarkable degree of structure-function information. 
   
Mean Graph 

The concept for the mean graph emerged in part from attempts to detect differential growth inhibition from a 

standard bar graph presentation.    Indications of differential growth inhibition in a standard bar graph format reside only 
in the "ragged edge," the region between the tips of the bars for the least responsive cell line and the most responsive 
cell line.    Figure 1 illustrates a typical horizontal bar graph and the corresponding mean graph.    In this horizontal bar 
graph, the lengths of the bars are directly proportional to the potency of the test compound against the tumor cell line, 
which is expressed as the logarithm of the concentration resulting in 50% growth inhibition (IC[50]).    The region be-
tween the baseline and the right end of the bar representing the least potent response (fig. 1A) tends to defeat the per-
ception of differential growth inhibition.    As an alternative, we developed a graph centered at the arithmetic mean of 
the logarithm of the IC[50] values for all cell line responses measured for a compound.    While choice of the mean as an 
anchor point is arbitrary, its use has proven to be advantageous for the development of other mean-graph-derived anal-
yses such as the estimation of relative cell line sensitivities [n5]. 

The mean graph (fig. 1C) is constructed by projecting bars to the right or left of the mean, depending on whether 

cell sensitivity to a test drug is more or less than average.    The length of a bar is proportional to the difference between 
the logarithm of the cell line IC[50] and the mean.    Differential growth inhibition is depicted by the bar (delta), which 
projects to either side of the mean.    A bar projecting 3 log units to the right of the mean, for example, would reflect a 
cellular response 1,000 times more sensitive than the average of all of the cellular responses to the compound repre-
sented on the graph. 
   
Ranking by Degree of Differential Growth Inhibition 

One approach to surveillance of the drug-screening data base is to rank compounds by their degree of differential 

growth inhibition.    A novel technique for ranking follows from the mean graph format. 

The first step in this approach is to identify a single best delta for a compound among all the deltas generated for it.   

This best delta is identified as Delta.    The simplest definition of Delta is the highest numerical value of delta.    Howev-
er, a potentially better definition of the best delta is that delta representing the largest number of standard deviations 
from the mean of all the deltas observed for a cell line.    Thus, Delta is the statistically rarest delta.    The advantage of 
this statistical approach is that it helps to reduce the selection bias toward the intrinsically more sensitive cell lines.    To 
obtain Delta by this method, one calculates the number of standard deviations from the mean of deltas that each delta 
represents. 

The cell line-specific mean of delta values and the corresponding standard deviations are computed from the delta 
values for each cell line for all of the compounds evaluated.    For a given delta, the appropriate mean is subtracted from 
the delta, and this difference is divided by the corresponding standard deviation.    The quotient is the number of stand-
ard deviations from the cell line-specific mean.    The means and standard deviations for each cell line are listed in table 
1. 
   
Table 1.    Cell line-specific means, standard deviations, and confidence limits of delta* 

[SEE ORIGINAL SOURCE] 

HHS, NCI, J Natl Cancer Inst, July 19, 1989   

Page  3 

The second step in this method is to rank compounds in order of their differential growth inhibition using the Deltas 
selected in the first step.    Searching and sorting by Deltas provides an efficient means to identify compounds exhibiting 
differential growth inhibition. 
   
Pattern-Recognition Algorithm 

Another application of the mean graph format relates to pattern recognition.    This format creates a characteristic 

fingerprint pattern for each compound.    The possibility that these patterns might contain other exploitable information 
was investigated.    We devised a simple algorithm that was implemented in the COMPARE computer program to rank 
the similarity of the mean graph pattern of a specified "seed" compound to the patterns of all the other compounds in the 
NCI screening project data base.    Any previously tested compound can be used as the seed to initiate the pat-
tern-recognition program. 

The COMPARE program evaluates the similarity of mean graph patterns by computing average differences be-

tween the deltas obtained for a specified seed compound and the corresponding deltas for each of the other compounds 
in the data base.    For a seed compound screened against a panel of 50 cell lines, the 50 deltas obtained for those cell 
lines are subtracted from the corresponding deltas obtained in testing the same 50 cell lines (or a subset of these lines if 
all 50 were not tested) against each of the other compounds in the data base.    In this way, the mean graph pattern for 
the seed compound is sequentially compared quantitatively with all other mean graph patterns available.    For each 
compound, two parameters are calculated: Av, which is the average difference between deltas (computed as the mean of 
the absolute values of the differences), and Max, which is the maximum difference observed. 

The Av and the Max values are used by the COMPARE program to create a list of compounds ordered according to 

the similarity of their mean graph patterns to the mean graph pattern of the seed compound.    The compounds are first 
sorted by Av values; compounds with lower Av values are ranked higher.    Then compounds with the same Av values 
are further sorted by Max values; compounds with lower Max values are ranked higher.    The purpose of creating the 
ordered list was to first rank the compounds by their similarity in mean graph fingerprints and then to investigate 
whether this similarity correlates with any other significant property common to the ranked compounds and the seed 
compound. 

Since the meaning of the similarity in mean graph patterns was the central question, it was necessary to obtain ad-

ditional information about the test compounds as well as relevant information about the seed compound.    We con-
structed a data base of 88 test compounds suitable for this purpose and analyzed this data base with the COMPARE 
program.    Application of the algorithm to data sets restricted to well-known or prototypical seed compounds led to in-
triguing results.    Compounds known to be DNA binders (table 2), biological alkylating agents, or antimetabolites were 
grouped to a significant extent with agents having similar activity or structure. 
   
Table 2.    COMPARE pattern-recognition program: similarity of DNA binders and topoisomerase II inhibitors to doxo-
rubicin * 

[SEE ORIGINAL SOURCE] 

In table 2, the seed compound was doxorubicin.    The three compounds with the closest Av values were mitoxan-
trone, amsacrine, and acodazole.    These three drugs and the seed compound are thought to be DNA binders and topoi-
somerase II inhibitors.    The matching sequence includes taxol, rhizoxin, and then three more DNA binders (oxantra-
zole, bisantrene, and amonafide). 

The COMPARE analysis using the alkylating agent melphalan as the seed for comparison showed a significant 

clustering of the known alkylating agents.    Pipobroman, uracil mustard, and chlorambucil were ranked in that sequence 
as the closest matches to melphalan in the test set.    The antimetabolite cytarabine was also used as the seed compound 
in a COMPARE analysis.    Its close biological and structural analogue fazarabine ranked second to thioguanine in the 
listing. 

There is an important caveat that applies to our algorithm.    The algorithm must give a "best match" whether or not 
a meaningful one exists in the data base, and thus, unrelated compounds are sometimes given a high ranking.    Despite 
this caveat, it seems that the observed mean graph patterns express valuable information, sometimes reflecting similari-
ties in biological properties and/or chemical structure and properties.    Expression of such similarities in the mean 
graphs appears to be sufficiently robust that this relatively simple algorithm of the COMPARE program can successful-

HHS, NCI, J Natl Cancer Inst, July 19, 1989   

Page  4 

ly detect and rank these similarities in an order that seems to have an exploitable degree of correlation with inde-
pendently derived rankings of similarity based on biochemical and/or structural considerations. 
   
Conclusions 

We have developed a set of computerized procedures to facilitate the detection , ranking, display, and analysis of 
patterns of differential growth inhibition.    These procedures are conceptually centered in the mean graph, which was 
designed to graphically represent screening results for individual compounds tested against large numbers of tumor cell 
lines.    Experimental applications of the COMPARE program to a limited data base accrued from the pilot screen sug-
gest the possibility of meaningful clustering of mean graph patterns that is related to biological properties and/or chem-
ical structure and properties.    The potential wealth of information to be generated in the course of the new NCI 
drug-screening experiment can be subjected to a wide variety of analytical procedures.    Our work represents only the 
first of many potential avenues to data display and analysis that may be explored in the course of this project. 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: K. D. Paull, R. H. Shoemaker, L. Hodes, L. Rubinstein, J. Plowman, M. R. 
Boyd, Developmental Therapeutics Program, Division of Cancer Treatment, National Cancer Institute, National Insti-
tutes of Health, Bethesda, MD. 
Received November 7, 1988; revised March 23, 1989; accepted April 4, 1989. 

A. Monks, D. A. Scudiero, Program Resources Inc., NCI-Frederick Cancer Research Facility, Frederick, MD. 

<1> Correspondence to: Dr. K. D. Paull, Developmental Therapeutics Program, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 

Executive Plaza North, Rm. 831 , Bethesda, MD 20892. 
 
  REFERENCES: 
 
[n1.] BOYD MR, SHOEMAKER RH, MCLEMORE TL, ET AL: Drug development. In Thoracic Oncology (Roth JA, 
Ruckdeschel JC, Weisenburger TH, eds). Philadelphia: Saunders. In press 
   
[n2.] ALLEY MC, SCUDIERO DA, MONKS A, ET AL: Feasibility of drug screening with panels of human tumor cell 
lines using a microculture tetrazolium assay. Cancer Res 48:589-601, 1988 
   
[n3.] SCUDIERO D, SHOEMAKER RH, PAULL KD, ET AL: Evaluation of a soluble tetrazolium/formazan assay for 
cell growth and drug sensitivity in culture using human and other tumor cell lines. Cancer Res 48:4827-4833, 1988 
   
[n4.] SHOEMAKER RH, MONKS A, ALLEY MC, ET AL: Development of human tumor cell line panels for use in 
disease-oriented drug screening. In Prediction of Response to Cancer Chemotherapy (Hall T, ed). New York: Alan R 
Liss, 1988, pp 265-286 
   
[n5.] PAULL KD, HODES L, PLOWMAN J, ET AL: Reproducibility and response patterns of the IC50 values and 
relative cell line sensitivities from the NCI human tumor cell line drug screening project. Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 
29:488, 1988 
 
GRAPHIC: Figure 1, Comparison of two display formats for perception of differential growth inhibition in dis-
ease-oriented human tumor cell line panel. In standard horizontal bar graph, display of differential drug effects is con-
fined to "ragged edge". Ready perception of differential effects in section 1B is effectively defeated by presence of large 
base section, 1A. Mean graph format, section 1C, facilitates perception of differential responses of cell lines by elimi-
nating base section and projecting bars in opposite directions depending on whether cell sensitivity to the drug is more 
or less than average. Resulting fingerprint patterns provide delta values used in COMPARE analyses, LEUK = leuke-
mia; NSCLC = non-small cell lung cancer, SCLC = small cell lung cancer, CNS = central nervous system; and MISC = 
miscellaneous. Range = No. of log units between values for most sensitive and least sensitive cell lines. 
 

