Current Biology 16, 702–709, April 4, 2006 ª2006 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10.1016/j.cub.2006.02.063

The Tumor Suppressors Merlin
and Expanded Function Cooperatively
to Modulate Receptor Endocytosis and Signaling

Report

Sushmita Maitra,1 Rima M. Kulikauskas,2
Heather Gavilan,2 and Richard G. Fehon1,*
1 Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology
University of Chicago
Chicago, Illinois 60637
2 DCMB Group
Department of Biology
Duke University
Box 91000
Durham, North Carolina 27708

Summary

The precise coordination of signals that control prolif-
eration is a key feature of growth regulation in devel-
oping tissues [1]. While much has been learned about
the basic components of signal transduction path-
ways, less is known about how receptor localization,
compartmentalization, and trafﬁcking affect signaling
in developing tissues. Here we examine the mecha-
nism by which the Drosophila Neuroﬁbromatosis 2
(NF2) tumor suppressor ortholog Merlin (Mer) and
the related tumor suppressor expanded (ex) regulate
proliferation and differentiation in imaginal epithelia.
Merlin and Expanded are members of
the FERM
(Four-point one, Ezrin, Radixin, Moesin) domain su-
perfamily, which consists of membrane-associated
cytoplasmic proteins that interact with transmem-
brane proteins and may function as adapters that
link to protein complexes and/or the cytoskeleton [2].
We demonstrate that Merlin and Expanded function
to regulate the steady-state levels of signaling and ad-
hesion receptors and that loss of these proteins can
cause hyperactivation of associated signaling path-
ways. In addition, pulse-chase labeling of Notch in
living tissues indicates that receptor levels are up-
regulated at the plasma membrane in Mer; ex double
mutant cells due to a defect in receptor clearance
from the cell surface. We propose that these proteins
control proliferation by regulating the abundance, lo-
calization, and turnover of cell-surface receptors and
that misregulation of these processes may be a key
component of tumorigenesis.

Results and Discussion

Merlin’s tumor suppressor function is conserved from
humans to ﬂies [3], but the cellular basis for this function
remains unclear. Genetic studies in Drosophila suggest
that Mer regulates signaling pathways that control
proliferation [4], and cell biological experiments indicate
that Merlin may play a role in endocytic processes [3, 5].
In addition, Merlin physically interacts with Expanded,

*Correspondence: rfehon@uchicago.edu

a distantly related member of the FERM superfamily,
and these proteins colocalize in the apical junctional
region of epithelial cells. Furthermore, genetic studies
have shown that while mutations of each gene produce
modest overproliferation phenotypes in the eye and
wing [3, 6, 7] (see Figures S1 and S2 in the Supplemental
Data available with this article online), double mutant
Mer; ex cells display severe overgrowth and differentia-
tion defects that are not seen in either mutation alone.
Thus, Mer and ex are partially redundant in regulating
proliferation and differentiation [7].

Given these observations, we reasoned that the difﬁ-
culty in identifying precise cellular functions for Merlin
might stem from its redundancy with Expanded and
that this difﬁculty could be overcome by examining tis-
sues from double mutant animals and double mutant
cell clones generated by somatic recombination. Over-
proliferation of Mer; ex wing imaginal discs is more
extreme than that observed with either mutation alone
(Figure S2). Surprisingly, however, Mer4; ex697 eye-
antennal
imaginal discs have severely reduced eye
primordia with a substantial reduction in or total ab-
sence of photoreceptors, although the antennal portion
is normal or slightly larger than normal (Figures 1A–1D)
and occasionally is duplicated (data not shown). Apo-
ptosis does not appear to be enhanced in double mutant
eye-antennal discs (data not shown), suggesting that
loss of the eye primordium is not due to cell death.
Thus, loss of Mer and ex function has a tissue-speciﬁc
defect in the developing eye that is very different from
its effects on proliferation in the wing imaginal disc.

Why does the combined loss of two tumor suppres-
sors cause reduction rather than hypertrophy of eye tis-
sue? Previous studies have shown that initiation of the
morphogenetic furrow, which organizes development
of the eye, is regulated by a complex network of signals
at the posterior and lateral margins of the eye-antennal
disc [8, 9]. Mutations that affect these signals not only
block furrow initiation, but also may signiﬁcantly reduce
the size of the eye ﬁeld and disrupt photoreceptor differ-
entiation. For example, ectopic Wingless expression ei-
ther at the posterior and lateral margins [10] or through-
out the eye primordium [11] results in dramatic losses of
eye tissue that closely resemble the Mer; ex phenotype
just described. Similar effects are seen from reduction
in Decapentaplegic (DPP) or Hedgehog signaling in the
same cells [12, 13].

If Merlin and Expanded affect initiation of the morpho-
genetic furrow rather than differentiation of photorecep-
tors, then Mer; ex double mutant somatic clones should
block ommatidial development only when present at the
posterior or lateral margins of the eye ﬁeld. Indeed, we
observed that Mer; ex clones could differentiate photo-
receptors, but only when located in the middle of the eye
ﬁeld (Figures 1E and 1F). In contrast, clones in contact
with the posterior or lateral margin of the eye fail to pro-
duce photoreceptors. We infer from these observations
that one or more of the signaling pathways that control

Merlin and Expanded Function in Endocytosis
703

Figure 1. Simultaneous Loss of Merlin and Expanded Functions
Result in Reduction of the Eye Field and a Lack of Photoreceptor
Differentiation

(A–D) Eye-antennal disc complexes stained with anti-Coracle (mem-
brane marker, green) and Elav (photoreceptors, red). Posterior is to
the right in these and subsequent images of larval eye imaginal
discs. In the control eye-antennal complex (A), anti-Elav staining re-
veals the regular array of differentiating photoreceptors. Loss of Mer
(B) or ex (C) alone does not affect formation of photoreceptors. In
contrast, photoreceptor development and overall eye ﬁeld size are
severely reduced in double mutant discs (D).
(E and F) Somatic mosaic analysis of Mer; ex cells in the eye. Mutant
cell clones are negatively marked by absence of GFP ([E], green) or
Merlin ([F], green). Clones of double mutant cells (E and F) com-
pletely contained within the eye ﬁeld differentiate photoreceptors
(white arrows; note there is a thin strip of wild-type cells at the pos-
terior margin of the clone in [F]), but clones that encompass the lat-
eral or posterior margin have signiﬁcantly reduced numbers of pho-
toreceptors (white arrowheads). Dotted line indicates the boundary
of the eye epithelium in (E). The clone in (E) that touches the lateral
boundary has a few photoreceptors (black arrowhead) in the mutant
tissue. These photoreceptors presumably developed by passage of
the morphogenetic furrow that had initiated within the wild-type tis-
sue at the posterior margin.
Scale bar equals 100 mm (A–D) and 30 mm (E and F).

initiation of the morphogenetic furrow are likely dis-
rupted in Mer; ex double mutant cells.

Signaling and Adhesion Receptors Are Upregulated
in Mer; ex Double Mutant Cells
Given that Merlin is associated with the plasma mem-
brane and may function in endocytic processes [5], we

decided to ask if Merlin and Expanded play a role in reg-
ulating localization and/or abundance of transmem-
brane receptors that function in eye development. For
these studies, we examined Mer; ex somatic mosaic
cell clones to allow side-by-side comparisons of wild-
type and mutant cells in the wing and eye imaginal discs.
Immunoﬂuorescence staining with speciﬁc antibodies
then allowed us to compare the steady-state levels of re-
ceptors between adjacent wild-type and mutant cells.
Intriguingly, Notch, the EGF receptor, Patched, and
Smoothened all displayed increased antibody staining
in double mutant cells relative to their wild-type neigh-
bors (Figures 2A–2J). Notch, which is primarily localized
to the apical
junctional domain in wild-type cells,
showed not only increased junctional staining in mutant
cells, but also more diffuse staining (Figures 3A0 and
3B0). Similarly, preparations with anti-EGFR display
more abundant membrane-associated and cytoplasmic
staining in mutant than in wild-type cells (Figures 2A and
2B; data not shown). Patched staining, which is less ob-
viously junctional than Notch or EGFR, appeared more
punctate in Mer; ex cells (Figures 2E–2H). Thus, simulta-
neous loss of Merlin and Expanded results in increased
abundance of receptors for multiple signaling pathways,
though the precise localization defect seems to be spe-
ciﬁc to each receptor. We also examined two adhesion-
related receptors, E-cadherin and Fat, a cadherin su-
perfamily member, and found that both are similarly
upregulated in Mer; ex cells (Figures 2K–2N). However,
Coracle, a membrane-associated cytoplasmic protein,
is not affected (Figures 2O and 2P). In addition, the local-
ization of markers for apical-basal polarity, including
DLG, PATJ, and aPKC, was unaffected in the double
mutant cells, indicating that epithelial polarity is not dis-
rupted (data not shown). In contrast to the double mu-
tant cells, clones lacking just Merlin show no apparent
difference in receptor localization or abundance, and
exe1 cells display only a slight increase in staining (Fig-
ure S3; data not shown). Taken together, these results
indicate that Merlin and Expanded are required to re-
duce the steady-state abundance of a variety of signal-
ing and adhesion receptors in developing epithelia.

Mer; ex Mutant Cells Display Membrane
Trafﬁcking Defects
To determine the cause for increased receptor abun-
dance, we ﬁrst tested the possibility that their expres-
sion is transcriptionally upregulated in mutant cells.
We used quantitative PCR to determine the levels of
the EGFR transcript in imaginal discs from Mer4; ex697
double mutant larvae and found that it is downregulated
w4-fold (2.1 6 0.3 cycle difference). This observation is
consistent with previous observations that EGFR path-
way activation feeds back negatively on its expression
at the level of transcription [14], suggesting that EGFR
signaling is upregulated in Mer; ex mutant cells. Similar
experiments looking at Notch transcript levels showed
no effect on Notch expression (data not shown). Thus,
it does not appear that the observed effects in Mer; ex
cells are due to misregulation at the transcriptional level.
These results suggest an alternative possibility—that
membrane trafﬁcking is affected in Mer; ex double
mutant cells. To address this hypothesis, we used an-
tibodies against
the extracellular domain of Notch

Current Biology
704

Figure 2. Steady-State Levels of Transmembrane Receptors Are Elevated in Mer; ex Double Mutant Clones
Mer4; exe1 clones in eye (A–H) and wing (I–P) imaginal discs. Mutant tissue is marked by the absence of Merlin staining ([C–L], green) or GFP ([A, B,
M–P], green). Proteins of interest are shown in red in the merged panels (A, C, E, G, I, K, M, O) and separately in the corresponding lower panels (B,
D, F, H, J, L, N, P). Receptor proteins, EGFR (A and B), Notch (C and D), Patched (E–H), Smoothened (I and J), and membrane adhesion proteins
Fat (K and L), and DE cadherin (M and N), show increased staining in the double mutant tissue. Coracle (O and P), which is membrane associated,
is not altered in mutant cells. Higher magniﬁcation views of Patched (G and H) shows that the staining is both punctate and cytoplasmic. Panels
are maximum projections of z series. Scale bar equals 60 mm (A and B), 25 mm (C–F and I–P), and 10 mm (G and H).

(anti-ECN) to label protein on the surface of living cells in
imaginal discs bearing somatic mosaic clones. Side-by-
side comparisons of wild-type and Mer; ex mutant cells
show increased cell-surface Notch labeling, consistent
with what we observed with ﬁxed tissue and indicating
that there are increased levels of receptor at the plasma
membrane in mutant cells (Figures 3C, 3D, 3C0, 3D0, 3O,
and 3P). In addition, in double mutant cells, the junc-
tional band of Notch staining is broader (Figures 3C,
3D, 3C0, and 3D0), indicating that Notch localization to
the junctional region also may be affected. Similar differ-
ences in junctional staining were observed with the
same antibody on ﬁxed and permeabilized tissues, indi-
cating that surface labeling of live cells does not affect
Notch localization (Figures 3A–3D and 3A0–3D0).

To ask if the increased abundance is due to a defect in
turnover, we used a pulse-chase approach to label
Notch receptor at the plasma membrane and then fol-
lowed its removal from the cell surface. To restrict our

analysis to Notch that remains at the cell surface, tissues
were ﬁxed but not permeabilized at the end of the chase
period. We observed a progressive loss of Notch stain-
ing at the cell surface during the chase period that ap-
peared more rapid in wild-type than in mutant cells (Fig-
ures 3C–3J), suggesting a defect in trafﬁcking off the
plasma membrane. We used quantitative ﬂuorescence
analysis to determine the relative quantities of Notch
on wild-type and mutant cells at the various chase
time points. The results indicate that the ratio of cell-sur-
face Notch ﬂuorescence in mutant versus wild-type cells
increases signiﬁcantly between 0 and 10, 30, or 60 min
postlabeling (Table 1). Therefore, Notch protein is
cleared more rapidly from the surface of wild-type than
mutant cells.

Three lines of evidence indicate that this procedure
has no effect on receptor behavior or activation state.
First, control experiments with the mAb323 antibody to
E(spl) bHLH proteins [15] indicate that treatment with

Merlin and Expanded Function in Endocytosis
705

Figure 3. Trafﬁcking of Notch from the Plasma Membrane Is Slower in Mer; ex Cells
Antibody labeling of the Notch extracellular domain in ﬁxed and permeabilized (A, B, A0, B0) or live (C–R, C0, D0) wing imaginal discs that carry
Mer4; exe1 double mutant clones. (A)–(N) display projections through multiple optical sections. (A0)–(D0) show high-magniﬁcation projections
at the border of clones shown in (A)–(D). Clones are marked by absence of GFP (green). Anti-Notch staining is shown in red in the merged panels
(A, A0, C, C0, E, G, I, K, M, O, and Q) and singly in the remaining panels (B, B0, D, D0, F, H, J, L, N, P, and R). (A, B, A0, B0) Fixed, permeabilized wing
disc stained with an antibody that recognizes an extracellular epitope of Notch (anti-ECN). Compared to wild-type cells, Notch staining is ele-
vated and more diffuse in double mutant cells. (C–R, C0, D0) Live wing imaginal discs pulse labeled with anti-ECN, rinsed, and either ﬁxed imme-
diately (C, D, C0, D0, O, P) or chased (E–N, Q–R) to follow Notch trafﬁcking. In (C)–(J), the secondary antibody was incubated in the absence of
detergent so that only anti-ECN that remained on the cell surface was labeled. In (K)–(R), detergent was added during secondary antibody
incubation to reveal intracellular Notch protein that had trafﬁcked from the plasma membrane. The absence of internal Notch staining (from syn-
thesis and internalization) results in a much sharper image in nonpermeabilized than in permeabilized tissue (compare [D] to [B], [D0] to [B0]). 0 min
chase (C, D, C0, D0, O, P): both nonpermeabilized tissue (C, D, C0, D0) and permeabilized tissue (O and P) show distinct junctional staining and only
a slight increase in Notch staining in double mutant cells. At this time point, there is little or no detectable cytoplasmic staining (P). 10 min (E and
F) and 30 min (G and H) chase: Differences in nonpermeabilized anti-ECN staining between wild-type and mutant cells are quite apparent at both
time points. There is elevated staining in mutant cells relative to wild-type cells, and it appears less clearly associated with the junctional region.
60 min chase (I–N, Q–R): apical region of cells in both nonpermeabilized (I and J) and permeabilized (K and L) tissue show that junctional anti-ECN
staining is substantially reduced in wild-type cells but still obvious in mutant cells. More basally in permeabilized tissues (M and N), punctate
staining is seen in both wild-type and mutant cells, with the latter showing larger number of punctae and diffuse cytoplasmic stain. Optical
cross-sections (Q and R) conﬁrm the presence of apical junctional and subapical punctate staining in both cell types. Scale bar equals 10 mm
(A–N), 15 mm (O–R), 2 mm (A0–D0).

anti-ECN does not affect Notch signaling (data not
shown). Second, this procedure had no detectable ef-
fect on Notch localization, indicating that the antibody
treatment does not
internalization
(Figure S4). Third, monovalent Fab fragments of the
anti-Notch antibody behaved identically in these exper-
iments to the intact IgG monoclonal (Figure S4), indicat-
ing that the intact IgGs did not induce artifacts through
static interference or receptor cross-linking.

induce receptor

It is worth noting that current models for Notch re-
ceptor activation require cleavage and release of its

extracellular domain in response to ligand binding [16].
Because we used an antibody that recognizes this do-
main, it follows that our studies examined only ligand-in-
dependent trafﬁcking of the receptor. In support of this
inference, the pattern of Notch internalization in pulse-
chase experiments was unaffected in Delta2 clones
(data not shown). These observations suggest that
Merlin and Expanded function in steady-state, ligand-
independent clearance of receptors from the plasma
membrane, rather than internalization and degradation
that occurs in response to ligand binding.

Current Biology
706

Table 1. Quantitation of Notch Clearance from the Plasma
Membrane

Chase Period

Ratio (mut/wt)
SE
n
p value

0 min

2.33
60.13
18

10 min

30 min

60 min

2.93
60.27
17
0.03

3.06
60.32
17
0.02

2.92
60.23
16
0.02

The ratio of total anti-ECN ﬂuorescence was determined in mutant
cells relative to wild-type cells at the indicated time points as
described in the Experimental Procedures. Standard error (SE),
the number of mutant clones scored (n), and p values relative to
the 0 min time point (by means of a single-tailed t test) are indicated
below the ratios.

We wondered if in addition to a defect in clearance
from the plasma membrane, Mer; ex cells might also
be defective in degradation of Notch receptors once
they have been internalized. Imaginal epithelia pulse
chased with anti-ECN display cytoplasmic punctae of
Notch staining that are visible only in detergent-perme-
abilized preparations,
indicating that they represent
endocytic compartments. These punctae appear more
numerous in mutant cells at a later time point (Figures
3K–3N, 3Q–3R). This result indicates that receptors
can be internalized from the surface of mutant cells
and raises the possibility of an additional defect in deg-
radation of receptors after internalization. Further stud-
ies will be required to clarify the nature of this defect.

Merlin and Expanded Can Function to Limit
Signaling Pathway Output
Increased receptor abundance may be expected to re-
sult in increased signaling output, if receptor quantity
is a limiting factor. In addition, even if overall receptor
quantity is not limiting, alterations in subcellular localiza-
tion or the dynamics of receptor trafﬁcking may have
dramatic effects on receptor function. To ask if loss of
Merlin and Expanded result in increased output from
signaling pathways that regulate eye development and
cell proliferation, we used markers speciﬁc for down-
stream activation of the EGFR, Wingless, and Notch
signaling pathways (Figure 4). First, we stained double
mutant clones with an antibody that recognizes the
phosphorylated, activated form of MAP kinase (anti-
dpERK), a downstream effector of the EGFR pathway
(Figures 4A–4C). In addition to the normal anti-dpERK
pattern in the wing imaginal disc, we observed in-
creased staining in Mer; ex clones relative to their
wild-type neighbors, suggesting upregulation of EGFR
pathway activity. Similarly, output from the Wingless
pathway was monitored by looking at expression of Dis-
talless, a target of Wingless signaling [17] and found to
be dramatically higher in the double mutant wing clones
(Figures 4D–4F). In contrast, similar experiments with
the mAb323 antibody to E(spl) bHLH proteins, a marker
for Notch pathway activity, did not show upregulation of
Notch signaling (data not shown). This result is consis-
tent with the observation that overexpression of Notch
in a wild-type genetic background has little or no pheno-
type [18]. To examine this further, we analyzed a genetic
context in which Notch receptor quantities are known to

be limiting—in animals that are heterozygous for a null
Notch mutation. Such animals display a dominant, hap-
loinsufﬁcient phenotype characterized by notching
along the wing margin. To ask if reduction in Merlin
and Expanded in this context can cause upregulation
of Notch pathway output, we generated animals triply
heterozygous for Notch, Merlin, and expanded and
found that the characteristic Notch wing phenotype
was strongly suppressed (Figures 4G–4I).

Taken together, these results are consistent with our
observation that the steady-state level of multiple re-
ceptors is elevated in Mer; ex cells and indicate that,
depending on the precise developmental or genetic
context, loss of Merlin and Expanded can result in in-
creased output
from the corresponding signaling
pathways. In Mer; ex eyes, upregulation of Wingless sig-
naling may be a primary contributor to the observed de-
fect in ommatidial development. Previous studies have
shown that ectopic Wingless signaling produces re-
markably similar eye phenotypes [10, 11, 19], and our
preliminary data suggest that inhibiting Wingless signal-
ing partially suppresses the Mer; ex eye phenotype (data
not shown). In the wing, the dramatic overproliferation of
Mer; ex cells may be the combined result of upregulation
of several pathways, including EGFR and Wingless.

Our previous studies have shown that Merlin and Ex-
panded are associated with the apical junctional region
in imaginal epithelia and with endocytic vesicles in cul-
tured cells [5, 7]. Results shown here indicate that loss
of these proteins affects abundance, cell-surface local-
ization, and endocytic trafﬁcking of Notch, EGFR, and
other signaling and adhesion receptors in epithelial
cells. Recent studies of endocytic trafﬁcking in re-
ceptor/ligand regulation [16, 20] suggest aspects of en-
docytosis that could relate to Merlin and Expanded
function. For example, it is possible that Merlin and
Expanded function at the plasma membrane to recruit
or anchor transmembrane proteins at sites on the mem-
brane from which they are endocytosed or in the sorting
between recycling endosomes and lysosomal degrada-
tion by promoting receptor degradation. Both possibili-
ties are consistent with our observations of increased
receptor levels at the plasma membrane in Mer; ex mu-
tant cells (Figures 2 and 3) and colocalization of Merlin
and Expanded with Notch in punctate structures at the
plasma membrane (Figure S5). In addition, we have ob-
served a partial colocalization of Merlin and Expanded
with Rab 11, a marker for recycling endosomes, and
with EEA-1, which labels early endosomes (Figure S6).
Intriguingly, a previous study has suggested that the
closely related ERM protein Ezrin functions to promote
recycling rather than degradation of the b2-adrenergic
receptor via its interactions with ﬁlamentous actin [21].
Understanding the exact relationship of Merlin and Ex-
panded to endocytosis and recycling of receptors, as
well as their possible relationship to ERM proteins in
this process, will require further analysis.

A recent study has proposed that Merlin and Ex-
panded function upstream of Hippo in the Warts signal-
ing pathway, which regulates proliferation [22]. As noted
in their study, Merlin and expanded mutants display
similar phenotypes to those seen in hippo mutants.
However, there are signiﬁcant phenotypic differences
between Mer; ex and hippo mutations, most notable of

Merlin and Expanded Function in Endocytosis
707

Figure 4. Signaling Pathway Outputs Are Affected by Loss of Merlin and Expanded
(A–C) Wing imaginal discs stained for dpERK, a marker for activation of the EGFR pathway ([A], w1118, [B and C], Mer4; exe1 clones). Double mu-
tant tissue is marked by the absence of green in (B) (anti-Merlin). In addition to the normal pattern of dpERK staining (the arrow indicates endog-
enous ERK activation at the dorsoventral boundary in [C]), there is increased staining within the clone of double mutant cells.
(D–F) Distalless expression in wing imaginal discs used as an indicator of wingless signaling output ([D], w1118; [E and F], Mer4; exe1 clones). Note
the increased anti-Distalless staining in mutant clones in the proximal regions (edges) of the wing blade, where Distalless is normally expressed.
(G–I) Wings from adult Drosophila females: (G) w1118; (H) N54L9/w1118. Haploinsufﬁciency for the Notch locus results in notches at the wing margin.
This phenotype is seen in essentially all ﬂies of this genotype.
(I) N54L9 Mer4/w1118; ex697/+. The Notch phenotype is strongly suppressed in this genotype.
Scale bar equals 100 mm (A–F).

which is that hippo mutations have not been reported to
block induction of eye morphogenesis. In addition, there
is no evidence to suggest that the Hippo pathway regu-
lates output of the EGFR, Wingless, or Notch signaling
pathways. Thus, the relationship of Merlin and Ex-
panded to the Hippo pathway may be more complicated
than the linear pathway proposed. One possibility is that
Hippo activation is a downstream consequence of Mer-
lin and Expanded’s effects on output of multiple signal-
ing pathways as we have shown here.

More than a decade after its molecular characteriza-
tion, the precise cellular functions of Merlin in regulating
cell proliferation remain unclear. Based on our studies,
we propose that Merlin’s tumor suppressor phenotype
results from defects in endocytic trafﬁcking of signaling
receptors and accompanying hyperactivation of associ-
ated signaling pathways. Recent studies highlight the
importance of endocytosis in regulation of signaling
pathways [16, 20]. Based on the results presented here,
we suggest that proper regulation of membrane trafﬁck-
ing also may have important implications for under-
standing the cellular basis of tumor suppression in ﬂies
and mammals.

Experimental Procedures

Drosophila Stocks and Genetics
(Mer4) and expanded hypomorphic
Stocks carrying Merlin null
(ex697) mutations were used to build the following double mutant
stock: y w Mer4 FRT19A/FM7, P{ActGFP}; ex697/CyO, P{ActGFP}.
Controls stocks used were w1118 for the BrdU incorporation experi-
ments and analysis of pupal eye structure and y w FRT19A for anal-
ysis of larval eye-antennal disc structure and quantitative PCR
experiments. All stocks used to build recombinant chromosomes
and for crosses to generate clones were obtained from the Bloom-
ington Drosophila Stock Center except where noted.

Mer4; exe1 double mutant clones were obtained by crossing either
y w Mer4FRT19A; P{Ubi-Mer+}, P{Ubi-GFPnls}, FRT40A/CyO,
P{ActGFP}, or y w Mer4FRT19A; P{Ubi-Mer+} FRT40A/CyO,
P{ActGFP} females to w/Y; exe1 FRT40A/CyO, P{ActGFP}; MKRS,
P{hsﬂp}/TM6, Tb, Hu males. Mer4; ex697 double mutant clones
were obtained via a similar scheme. Single mutant clones for Merlin
were obtained by crossing y w Mer419AFRT; P{Ubi-Mer+}, P{Ubi-
GFPnls}, FRT40A/CyO, P{ActGFP} females to w/Y; FRT40A;MKRS,
P{hsﬂp}/TM6, Tb, Hu males. exe1 clones were obtained by crossing
w; exe1 FRT40A/CyO, P{ActGFP}; MKRS, P{hsﬂp}/TM6, Tb, Hu fe-
males to y w/Y; P{Ubi-GFP}33, P{Ubi-GFP}38, FRT40A males. In all
the above crosses, clones were detected either by absence of
GFP ﬂuorescence or by anti-Merlin staining. For somatic mosaic
analysis, uncrowded collections (5–10 hr) were made in vials, heat

Current Biology
708

shocked (1 hr at 37ºC, 1 hr at 25ºC, 1 hr at 37ºC) 33–48 hr after egg
collection (AEL), and dissected at the wandering third instar stage.
To obtain single and double mutant animals, embryo collections
were made on apple juice plates for 12 hr. Approximately 40 non-
GFP (mutant) and 20 GFP (wild-type) larvae were transferred to
food vials at 25ºC to allow the animals to grow under uncrowded
conditions. Wandering third instar non-GFP male larvae were dis-
sected for imaginal discs. For pupal eye dissections, white prepupae
were collected and aged for 24 hr at 25ºC.

To study genetic interactions between Merlin, expanded, and
Notch, females from N54L9/FM6 and y w N54L9 Mer4 FRT19A/FM7,
P{ActGFP}; ex697/CyO, P{ActGFP} stocks were out-crossed to
w1118 males and the F1 progeny scored for the wing notching pheno-
type.

Antibody Production
The anti-Expanded antibody was produced by immunizing guinea
pigs with a fusion protein encompassing amino acids 145–947 fused
to glutathione S transferase.

Immunoﬂuorescence
Wandering third instar larvae or 24 hr pupae were dissected in
Schneider’s medium to obtain eye-antennal or wing imaginal discs.
Tissues for anti-EGFR staining were dissected in serum-free
Schneider’s medium. Tissues were processed for immunoﬂuores-
cence as described previously [23], with the following exceptions.
For detection of dpERK, tissues were dissected in phosphate buffer,
ﬁxed in paraformaldehyde-lysine-phosphate buffer
[24], and
blocked in 10% normal goat serum with 0.1% Triton X-100 (K. Mo-
ses, personal communication). For BrdU incorporation, previously
described methods [25] were used. Antibodies recognizing the fol-
lowing epitopes were used: BrdU (1:1,000, mouse, Zymed); Coracle
(1:10,000, guinea pig [26]); DE cadherin (1:200, rat, provided by
T. Uemura); Distalless (1:500, provided by I. Duncan); dpERK
(1:100, mouse, Clone MAPK-YT, Sigma); EEA1 (1:1,000, from Ab-
cam,
Inc); EGFR (1:20,000, rabbit, provided by E. Bach); Elav
(1:1,000, mouse, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, DHSB);
Expanded (1:5,000, guinea pig, this report); Fat (1:1,000, rat, pro-
vided by M. Simon); Merlin (1:10,000, guinea pig polyclonal [5]);
Notch intracellular domain (1:10,000, mouse, clone C17.9C6 [27]);
Notch extracellular domain (1:500, mouse, clone C458.2H, DHSB,
also referred to as anti-ECN in this report); Patched (1:50, mouse,
provided by I. Guerrero); Rab5 (1:250, provided by M. Gonzales-Gai-
tan); Rab11 (1:20,000, provided by D. Ready), and Smoothened
(1:1,000, mouse, DHSB). To reduce nonspeciﬁc staining, blocking
solution was supplemented with 5% milk for anti-EGFR, and the
Expanded and Patched antibodies were preabsorbed against
Drosophila larval tissue. Secondary antibodies (diluted 1:1,000)
were from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories. Images were
obtained and analyzed with either a Zeiss LSM 410 or LSM 510 con-
focal microscope and prepared with Adobe Photoshop 6.0.

Live Notch Labeling and Detection
Wing imaginal discs were dissected in Schneider’s medium from
wandering third instar larvae. The peripodial membrane was torn
with a tungsten needle to promote antibody access to the apical
membrane of the disc epithelium. Discs were washed once in cold
Schneider’s medium and pulse labeled with mouse anti-Notch
C458.2H (a 1:2 mix of hybridoma culture supernatant in Schneider’s
medium) for 15 min on ice. After washing three times in cold
Schneider’s medium on ice, the discs were either ﬁxed immediately
or transferred to Schneider’s medium at room temperature for 10,
30, or 60 min. Fixation was done in 4% paraformaldehyde (in PBS)
at room temperature for 30 min. Tissues were blocked either in
PBS with 0.1% Triton X and 1% goat serum (for the permeabilized
set) or in PBS with 1% goat serum alone (for the nonpermeabilized
set). Alexa Fluor 586 (Molecular Probes) coupled secondary anti-
body was used at 1:2000. Images were taken as described before.
For experiments with Fab fragments, ascites ﬂuid containing
mouse anti-Notch C458.2H (obtained from DHSB) was puriﬁed and
cleaved with the Pierce Immunopure IgG1 Fab preparation kit follow-
ing manufacturer’s instructions. Complete cleavage was conﬁrmed
by SDS-PAGE analysis.

Quantitative Measurements of Immunoﬂuorescence Images
To compare relative ﬂuorescence, Z-series sections were collected
through imaginal discs containing somatic mosaic clones so that
adjacent mutant and wild-type cells could be compared directly in
a pairwise fashion. Wing blade clones from nonpermeabilized discs
were used for the analysis. Fluorescence values were quantiﬁed with
MetaMorph (Meta Imaging Series 6.1, Universal Imaging Corpora-
tion, PA). In brief, each Z series was thresholded to remove back-
ground. Fluorescence was measured over equivalent areas from
mutant and wild-type tissue for individual z-sections starting from
the apical-most portion of the epithelium and proceeding basally
for 4–10 mm at 0.2 mm increments. Values for individual clones
were then summed for each genotype and used to determine the ra-
tio of ﬂuorescence between mutant and wild-type cells. Care was
taken to ensure that the regions analyzed did not encompass varia-
tions in the endogenous pattern of Notch expression. Pairwise com-
parisons were made between the mean ratio (mutant/wild-type) at
0 min to the mean ratio at the later time points (10, 30, or 60 min)
by means of a t test analysis (MS Excel).

Quantitative PCR
Total RNA was extracted from wing imaginal discs with Trizol (Invi-
trogen). Glycogen (Ambion) was added as a carrier to facilitate pre-
cipitation. The RNA was DNase (Ambion) treated and ﬁrst strand
synthesis was performed with TaqMan Reverse Transcription Re-
agents (Invitrogen). 1% of the resulting product was used as a tem-
plate in a quantitative PCR reaction as described in the Light Cycler
Fast Start DNA Master SYBR Green I kit (Roche), except that reac-
tions were scaled down to 10 ml. PCR was performed with the Light
Cycler System (Roche). RP49 was used for normalization. Results of
four independent experiments were averaged.

Supplemental Data
Supplemental Data include six ﬁgures and can be found with this
article online at http://www.current-biology.com/cgi/content/full/
16/7/702/DC1/.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to C. Ferguson, M. Glotzer, S. Haase, D. Kiehart,
I. Rebay, and members of the Fehon laboratory for comments and
critical reading of the manuscript. We would also like to thank N. We-
solowska for technical help and the many colleagues who have pro-
vided antibodies and other reagents. S.M. was the recipient of a
Young Investigator Award from the National Neuroﬁbromatosis
Foundation. This work was supported by grant NS034783 from the
National Institutes of Health.

Received: August 30, 2005
Revised: January 31, 2006
Accepted: February 15, 2006
Published: April 3, 2006

References

1. Johnston, L.A., and Gallant, P. (2002). Control of growth and

organ size in Drosophila. Bioessays 24, 54–64.

2. Bretscher, A., Edwards, K., and Fehon, R.G. (2002). ERM pro-
teins and merlin: integrators at the cell cortex. Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 3, 586–599.

3. LaJeunesse, D.R., McCartney, B.M., and Fehon, R.G. (1998).
Structural analysis of Drosophila Merlin reveals functional do-
mains important for growth control and subcellular localization.
J. Cell Biol. 141, 1589–1599.

4. LaJeunesse, D.R., McCartney, B.M., and Fehon, R.G. (2001). A
systematic screen for dominant second-site modiﬁers of Mer-
lin/NF2 phenotypes reveals an interaction with blistered/DSRF
and scribbler. Genetics 158, 667–679.

5. McCartney, B.M., and Fehon, R.G. (1996). Distinct cellular and
subcellular patterns of expression imply distinct functions for
the Drosophila homologues of moesin and the neuroﬁbromato-
sis 2 tumor suppressor, merlin. J. Cell Biol. 133, 843–852.

26. Fehon, R.G., Dawson, I.A., and Artavanis-Tsakonas, S. (1994).
A Drosophila homologue of membrane-skeleton protein 4.1 is
associated with septate junctions and is encoded by the coracle
gene. Development 120, 545–557.

27. Fehon, R.G., Kooh, P.J., Rebay, I., Regan, C.L., Xu, T., Muska-
vitch, M.A.T., and Artavanis-Tsakonas, S.
(1990). Molecular
interactions between the protein products of the neurogenic
loci Notch and Delta, two EGF-homologous genes in Drosophila.
Cell 61, 523–534.

Merlin and Expanded Function in Endocytosis
709

6. Boedigheimer, M.J., Nguyen, K.P., and Bryant, P.J.

(1997).
Expanded functions in the apical cell domain to regulate the
growth rate of imaginal discs. Dev. Genet. 20, 103–110.

7. McCartney, B.M., Kulikauskas, R.M., LaJeunesse, D.R., and
Fehon, R.G. (2000). The Neuroﬁbromatosis-2 homologue, Mer-
lin, and the tumor suppressor expanded function together in
Drosophila to regulate cell proliferation and differentiation.
Development 127, 1315–1324.

8. Lee, J.D., and Treisman, J.E. (2002). Regulators of the morpho-
genetic furrow. In Results and Problems in Cell Differentiation,
Volume 37, Drosophila Eye Development Edition, K. Moses,
ed. (Berlin: Springer-Verlag), pp. 21–34.

9. Silver, S.J., and Rebay, I. (2005). Signaling circuitries in develop-
ment: insights from the retinal determination gene network. De-
velopment 132, 3–13.

10. Kumar, J.P., and Moses, K. (2001). The EGF receptor and notch
signaling pathways control the initiation of the morphogenetic
furrow during Drosophila eye development. Development 128,
2689–2697.

11. Lee, J.D., and Treisman, J.E. (2001). The role of Wingless signal-
ing in establishing the anteroposterior and dorsoventral axes of
the eye disc. Development 128, 1519–1529.

12. Chanut, F., and Heberlein, U. (1997). Role of decapentaplegic in
initiation and progression of the morphogenetic furrow in the
developing Drosophila retina. Development 124, 559–567.

13. Dominguez, M., and Hafen, E. (1997). Hedgehog directly con-
trols initiation and propagation of retinal differentiation in the
Drosophila eye. Genes Dev. 11, 3254–3264.

14. Sturtevant, M.A., O’Neill, J.W., and Bier, E. (1994). Down-regula-
tion of Drosophila Egf-R mRNA levels following hyperactivated
receptor signaling. Development 120, 2593–2599.

15. Jennings, B., Preiss, A., Delidakis, C., and Bray, S. (1994). The
Notch signalling pathway is required for Enhancer of split
bHLH protein expression during neurogenesis in the Drosophila
embryo. Development 120, 3537–3548.

16. Le Borgne, R., Bardin, A., and Schweisguth, F. (2005). The roles
of receptor and ligand endocytosis in regulating Notch signal-
ing. Development 132, 1751–1762.

17. Zecca, M., Basler, K., and Struhl, G. (1996). Direct and long-
range action of a wingless morphogen gradient. Cell 87, 833–
844.

18. Rebay, I., Fortini, M., and Artavanis-Tsakonas, S. (1993). Analy-
sis of phenotypic abnormalities and cell fate changes caused by
dominant activated and dominant negative forms of the Notch
receptor in Drosophila development. C. R. Acad. Sci. III 316,
1111–1123.

19. Cadigan, K.M., Jou, A.D., and Nusse, R. (2002). Wingless blocks
bristle formation and morphogenetic furrow progression in the
eye through repression of Daughterless. Development 129,
3393–3402.

20. Le Roy, C., and Wrana, J.L. (2005). Clathrin- and non-clathrin-
mediated endocytic regulation of cell signalling. Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 6, 112–126.

21. Cao, T.T., Deacon, H.W., Reczek, D., Bretscher, A., and von
Zastrow, M. (1999). A kinase-regulated PDZ-domain interaction
controls endocytic sorting of the beta2-adrenergic receptor.
Nature 401, 286–290.

22. Hamaratoglu, F., Willecke, M., Kango-Singh, M., Nolo, R., Hyun,
E., Tao, C., Jafar-Nejad, H., and Halder, G. (2006). The tumour-
suppressor genes NF2/Merlin and Expanded act through Hippo
signalling to regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis. Nat. Cell
Biol. 8, 27–36.

23. Fehon, R.G., Johansen, K., Rebay, I., and Artavanis-Tsakonas,
S. (1991). Complex cellular and subcellular regulation of Notch
expression during embryonic and imaginal development of
Drosophila: implications for Notch function. J. Cell Biol. 113,
657–669.

24. Tomlinson, A., Bowtell, D.L., Hafen, E., and Rubin, G.M. (1987).
Localization of the sevenless protein, a putative receptor for po-
sitional information in the eye imaginal disc of Drosophila. Cell
51, 143–150.

25. Asano, M., Nevins, J.R., and Wharton, R.P. (1996). Ectopic E2F
expression induces S phase and apoptosis in Drosophila imag-
inal discs. Genes Dev. 10, 1422–1432.

