The American Journal of Pathology, Vol. 186, No. 3, March 2016

Neuropathology Theme Issue

ajp.amjpathol.org

REVIEW
The Challenge of Cancer Genomics in Rare
Nervous System Neoplasms
Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors as a Paradigm for
Cross-Species Comparative Oncogenomics

Steven L. Carroll

From the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina

Accepted for publication
October 20, 2015.

Address correspondence to
Steven L. Carroll, M.D., Ph.D.,
Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, 171
Ashley Ave., MSC 908,
Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC
29425-9080. E-mail: carrolst@
musc.edu.

Comprehensive genomic analyses of common nervous system cancers provide new insights into their
pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment. Although analogous studies of rare nervous system tumors are
needed, there are major barriers to performing such studies. Cross-species comparative oncogenomics,
identifying driver mutations in mouse cancer models and validating them in human tumors, is a promising
alternative. Although still in its infancy, this approach is being applied to malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors (MPNSTs), rare Schwann cellederived malignancies that occur sporadically, after radiotherapy, and
in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Studies of human neuroﬁbromatosis type 1eassociated tumors suggest that
NF1 tumor suppressor loss in Schwann cells triggers cell-autonomous and intercellular changes, resulting in
development of benign neuroﬁbromas; subsequent neuroﬁbroma-MPNST progression is caused by aberrant
growth factor signaling and mutations affecting the p16INK4A-cyclin D1-CDK4-Rb and p19ARF-Mdm2-p53 cell
cycle pathways. Mice with Nf1, Trp53, and/or Cdkn2a mutations that overexpress the Schwann cell mitogen
neuregulin-1 or overexpress the epidermal growth factor receptor validate observations in human tumors
and, to various degrees, model human tumorigenesis. Genomic analyses of MPNSTs arising in neuregulin-1
and epidermal growth factor receptor-overexpressing mice and forward genetic screens with Sleeping Beauty
transposons implicate additional signaling cascades in MPNST pathogenesis. These studies conﬁrm the
utility of mouse models for MPNST driver gene discovery and provide new insights into the complexity of
MPNST pathogenesis. (Am J Pathol 2016, 186: 464e477; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.10.023)

Our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the devel-
opment of common types of nervous system tumors has
expanded exponentially over the past decade. In large part, this
is because a cadre of investigators and consortia such as The
Cancer Genome Atlas have comprehensively identiﬁed the
genomic abnormalities in large cohorts of neoplasms such as
glioblastomas,1,2 ependymomas,3e8 medulloblastomas,9,10 and
diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas.11e13 These studies have
provided key insights that are fundamentally altering both the
diagnosis and treatment of central nervous system tumors. For
diagnosis, it is now clear that for some tumor types, mutational
status is more predictive of prognosis than classic pathologic
criteria.14 As
International Society of

result,

a

the

Neuropathology-Haarlem Working Group, which is devel-
oping the upcoming version of the Diagnostic Manual for
the Central Nervous System, has proposed a
Tumours of
diagnostic approach that integrates pathologic and molecular
ﬁndings to better predict patient outcomes.15 It is also now

Supported by NIH National Institute of Neurological Diseases and
Stroke grant R01 NS048353; NIH National Cancer Institute grant R01
CA122804;
the Department of Defense grants X81XWH-09-1-0086,
W81XWH-11-1-0498, W81XWH-12-1-0164, W81XWH-14-1-0073,
and W81XWH-15-1-0193; and The Children’s Tumor Foundation grants
2014-04-001 and 2015-05-007.
Disclosures: None declared.
This article is part of a review series on neuropathology.

Copyright ª 2016 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.10.023

diffuse

intrinsic

ependymomas,5e8

evident that there are several molecular subtypes of glioblas-
tomas,16
pontine
gliomas,11,17e19 and medulloblastomas,20e22 each of which
depends on distinct signaling cascades and thus potentially
sensitive to different therapeutic agents. As a result, many
academic centers are now performing oncogenomic testing to
predict which drugs are potentially effective against a patient’s
tumor.

It

is reasonable to expect

that globally deﬁning the
genomic abnormalities that occur in large cohorts of rare
nervous system cancers would similarly affect the care of
patients with those neoplasms. However, there are important
barriers to performing such analyses. The Cancer Genome
Atlas typically tries to study 500 examples of each tumor
type, using frozen tissue and a matched germline DNA; this
cohort size will capture driver mutations present in at least
5% of that tumor type. In practice, the number of tumor
samples that must be collected is much larger, because many
samples will be rejected during quality assurance.
In
addition, The Cancer Genome Atlas prefers tumors from
patients who have not yet received chemotherapy or radio-
therapy, which reduces the pool of available tumor samples.
Because large numbers of samples are needed and rare
cancers that meet these criteria are encountered only a few
times annually even in large medical centers, it is likely that
investigators from different institutions will have to pool
their tumor collections if these studies are to be performed.
However, assembling even a small collection of rare tumor
specimens requires several years, and many investigators are
reluctant to donate their tumor collections to large consortia
because of a concern that
invested in their
collection will not be recognized. Consequently, human
factors will also impede the collection of large numbers of
rare human cancer specimens.

the effort

This should not dissuade us from performing compre-
hensive genomic analyses on all of the rare nervous system
tumors we can collect; the information we will derive from
these studies will undoubtedly be invaluable. However, to
maximize the value of information derived from relatively
small numbers of human tumors, we will need to partner
these studies with other approaches. Recognizing this,
many investigators are beginning to use genetically engi-
neered mouse models to identify driver genes potentially
relevant to the pathogenesis of rare tumor types. Here, I
review how this approach has been used to probe the
pathogenesis of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
(MPNSTs).

MPNSTs are rare Schwann cellederived neoplasms that
represent approximately 5% of the soft tissue sarcomas diag-
nosed annually.23 Although MPNSTs occur sporadically, after
radiotherapy and in individuals with the autosomal dominant
tumor susceptibility syndrome neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1),
our current understanding of the mechanisms responsible for
MPNST pathogenesis in humans is derived almost exclusively
from studies of NF1-associated MPNSTs. I begin by discussing
the mechanisms responsible for the pathogenesis of plexiform

Oncogenomics in MPNST Models

neuroﬁbromas, the benign precursors that give rise to MPNSTs
in NF1 patients, and their transformation into MPNSTs. I then
consider key genetically engineered mouse models that were
created to validate observations in human MPNSTs, what we
have learned from these models, and their relative suitability for
MPNST driver gene discovery. I ﬁnish by reviewing the initial
genomic analyses that have been performed with these mouse
MPNST models.

Pathogenesis of Human Neuroﬁbromas and
MPNSTs
NF1 Tumor Suppressor Gene and Its Role in Plexiform
Neuroﬁbroma Pathogenesis

NF1 is the most common genetic disease that affects the human
nervous system, occurring in 1 in every 3500 newborn infants.24
Although completely penetrant, the manifestations of NF1 are
highly variable, even in the same family. NF1 patients
commonly have learning disabilities, pigmentary lesions of the
iris (Lisch nodules) and skin (axillary freckling, café-au-lait
macules), bone dysplasias, and glial neoplasms in brain (optic
gliomas, glioblastomas), large peripheral nerves (plexiform
neuroﬁbromas, MPNSTs), and skin (dermal neuroﬁbromas).
Less frequently, these individuals develop other tumors such as
pheochromocytomas, rhabdomyosarcomas, leiomyosarcomas,
and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia. In NF1 patients, one
allele of neuroﬁbromin 1 (NF1), a tumor suppressor gene that
contains 60 exons and spans 282,751 bp on chromosome 17
(17q11.2), is inactivated. Nonsense mutations,25 missense mu-
tations,25 frameshift mutations,25 or mutations that affect RNA
splicing26 are the usual means of NF1 inactivation; these mu-
tations tend to cluster in exons 10a to 10c and 37, but they can be
found anywhere in the NF1 coding sequence. Complete deletion
of the NF1 gene also occurs, but is rare, being seen in only 5% of
NF1 patients.27

Although the NF1 gene was cloned in 1990, the functions
performed by neuroﬁbromin, the 2818-amino acid polypeptide
encoded by this gene, are still incompletely understood. We do
know that neuroﬁbromin inactivates members of the Ras
family of small GTP-binding proteins.24 This function is
mediated by a centrally located domain (amino acids 1203 to
1549) within neuroﬁbromin that
is homologous to the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs)
IRA1 and IRA2. Ras proteins are activated on binding GTP; the
neuroﬁbromin Ras GAP domain stimulates an intrinsic
GTPase activity in Ras proteins, causing them to cleave a
phosphate from the bound GTP and inactivate themselves.
Other domains in neuroﬁbromin, namely the cysteine/serine-
rich domain and a tubulin-binding domain located amino
terminal to the Ras GAP domain, modulate its Ras GAP
activity.24 The cysteine/serine-rich domain and TBD have
opposing actions; phosphorylation of the cysteine/serine-rich
domain by protein kinase Ca results in enhanced Ras GAP
activity, whereas the interaction of tubulin with the tubulin-
binding domain inhibits neuroﬁbromin’s Ras GAP function.

The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org

465

Carroll

A bipartite domain that contains both a region analogous to the
yeast protein Sec14p and a pleckstrin homology domain is
present carboxy terminal to the Ras GAP domain. Although it
was suggested that this domain binds glycerophospholipids
and interacts with other as yet unidentiﬁed proteins, the bio-
logical signiﬁcance of these hypothetical interactions remains
unknown. The carboxy terminus of neuroﬁbromin also con-
tains a focal adhesion kinase (FAK)einteracting domain that
allows neuroﬁbromin to modulate substrate interactions.
Curiously, although neuroﬁbromin has no known nuclear
functions, a nuclear localization signal is present within the
FAK-interacting domain. Conversely, some neuroﬁbromin
functions are not yet linked to speciﬁc domains in this protein.
For example, although neuroﬁbromin loss results in changes in
cAMP and calcium signaling, it is not yet known which
neuroﬁbromin domains regulate these events.

Most

investigators examining neuroﬁbromin’s tumor
suppressor function have focused on the role of the Ras
GAP domain. However, there is reason to think that other
domains in neuroﬁbromin also contribute to tumor sup-
pression. For instance, neuroﬁbromin is a member of a
family of Ras GAPs that
includes RASA1 (p120GAP),
PLXNB2, RASA2 (Gap1m), RASA3 (GAP1IP4BP), RASA4
(CAPRI), RASAL1, SYNGAP (p135SynGAP), DAB2IP,
RASAL2, and IQGAP1-3. Although several of these pro-
teins are expressed ubiquitously, they do not compensate for
neuroﬁbromin loss in NF1-null tumors. Further, none of
these other Ras GAPs produce a tumor susceptibility syn-
drome when mutated, indicating that loss of their Ras GAP
activity is not sufﬁcient for tumorigenesis. A comparison of
the structure of neuroﬁbromin to that of other Ras GAPs
shows that, other than their Ras GAP domains, the domains
present in other members of this protein family differ from
those in neuroﬁbromin. Given the structural and functional
differences between neuroﬁbromin and other Ras GAPs, it
is thus possible that both the Ras GAP and other domains in
neuroﬁbromin are required for tumor suppression.

Shortly after the cloning of the NF1 gene, it was recog-
nized that plexiform neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis is initiated
when a second-hit mutation inactivates the remaining
functional NF1 gene in a cell within the Schwann cell
lineage,24 resulting in a loss of neuroﬁbromin expression
and Ras hyperactivation.24 This led to the prediction that
drugs targeting Ras signaling would be effective against
NF1-null nerve sheath tumors. Unexpectedly, however, the
farnesyltransferase inhibitor tipifarnib, which blocks a post-
translational modiﬁcation critical for Ras activity, did not
the progression of plexiform neuroﬁbromas.28 In
inhibit
retrospect, this clinical trial likely failed because the Ras
activation that follows neuroﬁbromin loss is more complex
than that seen in tumors with an activating mutation of a
single Ras protein. Neuroﬁbromin inhibits both the classic
Ras (H-, N-, and K-Ras) and R-Ras (R-Ras, R-Ras2/TC21,
and M-Ras) subfamilies.24 As it happens, multiple members
of both subfamilies (H-Ras, N-Ras, K-Ras, R-Ras, and
R-Ras2) are simultaneously expressed and activated in

Figure 1
In plexiform neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs, neuroﬁbromin loss
deregulates multiple proteins from both the classic Ras and R-Ras sub-
families. NF1 stimulates an intrinsic GTPase activity in Ras proteins,
causing them to cleave a phosphate from bound GTP and inactivate
themselves. Ras is reactivated when guanine nucleotide exchange factors
(eg, Sos), which themselves are activated by stimuli such as growth factors,
cause Ras to release GDP and bind a new molecule of GTP. Despite their
similar
regulation, classic Ras and R-Ras proteins have overlapping
(proliferation) and distinct (migration, survival) effects. This reﬂects the
ability of different Ras families to differentially activate signaling path-
ways. Classic Ras proteins activate the Raf/MEK/ERK1/2/RSK and PI3K/Akt/
mTORC1/S6K1 pathways, thereby enhancing proliferation and survival. It is
known that R-Ras proteins can activate the PI3K pathway as well, but little
is known about the cytoplasmic pathways they activate to promote
migration. Note that, for the sake of simplicity, the illustration of the PI3K
pathway was simpliﬁed, and some key regulators of this pathway are not
shown (eg, Rheb, TSC1/2). ERK, extracellular signal-related kinase; GEF,
guanine nucleotide exchange factor; MEK, mitogen-activated protein ERK
kinase; MPNST, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor; mTOR, mamma-
lian target of rapamycin; NF1, neuroﬁbromin; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-
kinase; RSK, ribosomal S6 kinase.

MPNST cells. Further, these subfamilies have both over-
lapping and distinct functions in MPNST cells (Figure 1).
Classic Ras and R-Ras proteins both contribute to MPNST
proliferation. However, only classic Ras proteins promote
the survival of MPNST cells, whereas R-Ras proteins drive
their migration.29 Within the classic Ras subfamily, though,
there appears to be functional redundancy; ablation of one
subfamily member
results in increased expression and
activation of another subfamily member with little, if any,
effect on proliferation. Tipifarnib inhibits only H-Ras,
such as
because other post-translational modiﬁcations
geranylgeranylation allow K-Ras
to be

and N-Ras

466

ajp.amjpathol.org - The American Journal of Pathology

appropriately activated30 and thus circumvent inhibition by
tipifarnib. Consequently,
treatment with this drug likely
resulted in compensatory activation of other,
tipifarnib-
resistant Ras proteins. Indeed, the simultaneous activation
and intrafamily functional redundancy of Ras proteins in
NF1-null MPNST cells suggests that it will be difﬁcult to
target these proteins therapeutically. Consequently, some
laboratories have asked whether targeting signaling path-
ways downstream of Ras such as mitogen-activated protein
extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) kinase (MEK)31,32
and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt-TSC2-
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)-S6 kinase33,34
would be more effective therapeutically. Although initial
results indicate that
the full
repertoire of Ras-dependent signaling pathways activated in
NF1-null peripheral nerve sheath tumors has not yet been
deﬁned. Indeed, a recent study that examined changes
occurring in the phosphoproteome after inhibition of classic
Ras signaling29 showed that classic Ras signaling controlled
multiple additional signaling cascades in MPNSTs. It will
be important to determine which of these signaling cascades
contribute to tumorigenesis and whether they are further
dysregulated by additional mutations
arising during
neuroﬁbroma-MPNST progression.

this is the case, note that

and

a

 / 

þ/ 

poorly

Because NF1 loss occurs in Schwann cells, it might be
expected that NF1-null nerve sheath tumors would be pri-
marily composed of neoplastic Schwann cells. Paradoxi-
cally, however, neuroﬁbromas are histologically complex
lesions composed of NF1
Schwann cells intermingled
with multiple other cell types, including NF1
Schwann
cells, ﬁbroblasts, perineurial-like cells, vasculature, mast
cells, macrophages,
deﬁned CD34-
immunoreactive population. Further, animal models (see
Currently Available Mouse Models of Neuroﬁbroma and
MPNST Pathogenesis) indicate that at least some of these
other cell types are essential for neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis.
This admixture of cell types occurs, in part, because NF1-
null Schwann cells demonstrate enhanced expression of
paracrine signaling factors that recruit other cell types into
the nascent neuroﬁbroma. Although the nature of these
paracrine signaling factors is incompletely understood, there
is good evidence that at least one of them is stem cell factor
(SCF, also known as Kit ligand), a protein that promotes the
migration, survival, maturation, and activation of mast
 / 
cells.35,36 NF1 loss enhances SCF expression, with NF1
Schwann cells secreting sixfold higher levels of SCF than
or wild-type Schwann cells.37 Intriguingly, changes
NF1
in NF1 copy number also affects mast cell physiology;
mast cells show enhanced proliferation, survival,
NF1
and migration when challenged with SCF.38,39 The hyper-
responsiveness of NF1
mast cells also has cascading
effects on other cell types in the developing neuroﬁbroma.
For instance, SCF-induced secretion of transforming growth
mast cells.40 When
factor-b is exaggerated in NF1
þ/ 
challenged with transforming growth factor-b, NF1
ﬁbroblasts show increased production of collagen relative to

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

Oncogenomics in MPNST Models

wild-type ﬁbroblasts, potentially explaining the dense collag-
enous deposits evident in human neuroﬁbromas. Considered
together, these observations suggest a model in which NF1
loss in Schwann cells results in both cell autonomous
(eg, enhanced proliferation) and nonautonomous (recruitment
to drive
of other NF1
neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis. This hypothesis is consistent with
observations from several laboratories showing that multiple
cell types, including Schwann cells,41 ﬁbroblasts,40,42
NF1
and keratinocytes,43 show altered proliferative responses
relative to their wild-type counterparts.

types) effects that

interact

þ/ 

þ/ 

cell

Genomic Abnormalities Mediating Neuroﬁbroma-MPNST
Progression

The transformation of a neuroﬁbroma into a MPNST requires
the accumulation of additional mutations, many of which affect
tumor suppressor genes. Mutations that affect the p16INK4A-
cyclin D1-cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)4-Retinoblastoma
(Rb) and p19ARF-Mdm2-p53 cell cycle regulatory pathways
were among the ﬁrst linked to MPNST pathogenesis. CDKN2A
mutations occur in up to 50% of MPNSTs44,45 and are especially
deleterious because they dysregulate both of these cell cycle
regulatory pathways. This is because CDKN2A encodes both
p16INK4A, which inhibits CDK4 and CDK6, and p19ARF, a
protein that inhibits Mdm2, an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase which
tags p53 for proteasomal degradation. However, these pathways
can be disabled in other ways in MPNSTs. For instance,
expression of Rb protein is lost in 25% of MPNSTs.46,47 De-
letions and other loss of function mutations of TP53 are also
common, occurring in up to 75% of MPNSTs.24 Tumor sup-
pressor mutations that affect other essential signaling cascades
such as the PI3K-Akt-TSC2-mTOR-S6 kinase pathway have
also been identiﬁed in MPNSTs. For instance, loss of the
phosphate and tensin homologue tumor suppressor, an inhibitor
of the PI3K-Akt-TSC2-mTOR-S6 pathway,
in
approximately 60% of MPNSTs.48,49 Epigenetic repression of
tumor suppressors also plays a role in MPNST pathogenesis, as
demonstrated by the recent ﬁnding that expression of Ras
association domain family member 1, isoform A (RASSF1A) is
silenced in MPNSTs by DNA methylation.50

is evident

and growth factor

The discovery of candidate oncogenes in MPNSTs was
driven primarily by a search for therapeutic targets. As part of
this effort, several laboratories have explored the possibility
that aberrant growth factor signaling is a key upstream medi-
ator of Ras activation in MPNSTs. These studies identiﬁed
several growth factors
receptors
that potentially contribute to neuroﬁbroma and MPNST
pathogenesis, including the epidermal growth factor (EGF)
receptor,24 neuregulin-1 (NRG1),24 platelet-derived growth
factor,24 hepatocyte growth factor, and its c-Met receptor,24
the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor,51 transforming
growth factor-b1,52 lysophosphatidic acid,53 midkine,52 Kit
ligand and its c-Kit receptor,24 CXCR4 and its CXCL12
ligand,54 basic ﬁbroblast growth factor, and vascular endo-
thelial growth factor.55 However, the strength of the evidence

The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org

467

Carroll

supporting a role for each of these candidate molecules is
highly variable, ranging from merely showing that a factor or
receptor is present to showing strong genomic or functional
evidence. As genomic evidence, genes encoding several re-
ceptor tyrosine kinases, including the EGF receptor, the NRG1
co-receptor erbB2, c-Kit, c-Met, and the platelet-derived
receptor-a, are ampliﬁed in subsets of
growth factor
MPNSTs.24 Consistent with these genomic observations,
pharmacologic inhibitors of
the EGF receptor, NRG1
receptors, c-Kit, platelet-derived growth factor receptors, and
c-Met inhibit the proliferation and/or invasion of MPNST
cells.24 However, several important questions remain unan-
swered about the role these molecules play in MPNST path-
ogenesis. Of particular importance, it is not yet known whether
there are distinct subsets of MPNSTs that depend on different
growth factors for their growth or, alternatively, whether each
of these growth factors play distinct, critically important roles
in the same tumor.

Since multiple oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes have
already been implicated in MPNST pathogenesis, it is reason-
able to ask whether comprehensive genomic analyses of
MPNSTs are likely to identify substantial numbers of currently
unknown mutations that promote the pathogenesis of these tu-
mors. A consideration of the chromosomal abnormalities in
MPNSTs shows that the pathogenic abnormalities identiﬁed
thus far represent only a fraction of the genomic changes in these
tumors. Cytogenetic and array comparative genomic hybridi-
zation (aCGH) studies of human NF1-associated MPNSTs
indicate that these neoplasms have highly complex hypodiploid
or near-triploid genomes. This complexity has made it quite
difﬁcult to identify recurrent copy number changes that contain
potential driver genes. Nonetheless, some such regions were
identiﬁed; for instance, losses occur repeatedly in sites on
chromosomes 1p, 9p, 11, 12p, 14q, 17q, 18, 22q, X, and Y, with
focal gains commonly observed on chromosome 7, 8q, and
15q.56e65 Consistent with the tumor suppressor mutations
identiﬁed in MPNSTs, some repetitive losses, such as 17q (the
NF1 gene) and 9p (CDKN2A), affect genes implicated in
MPNST pathogenesis. However, for most of the regions of
recurrent gain or loss, the driver gene or genes within these in-
tervals have not been identiﬁed.

Only two studies have examined the genomes of human
MPNSTs at nucleotide resolution. Zhang et al66 performed
whole genome sequencing on four NF1-associated MPNSTs
and matched buffy coats. They found that these tumors had a
median of 60 tumor-speciﬁc small insertions-deletions and
nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms that affect
protein-coding sequences. Intriguingly, all four of the MPNSTs
also had inactivating mutations of SUZ12, a gene encoding a
chromatin-modifying protein that forms part of polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Targeted sequencing of an
additional 42 formalin-ﬁxed, parafﬁn-embedded MPNST
specimens (31 NF1-associated, 11 sporadic) showed that both
NF1-associated and sporadic MPNSTs had mutually exclusive
mutations in SUZ12 or genes that encode other proteins that
interact with PRC2 (EED, AEBP2, EPC1, EZH2, or RBBP7).

SUZ12 mutations were not present in the neuroﬁbromas from
which some of these MPNSTs were derived, indicating that
SUZ12 mutations occur during malignant progression. Lee
et al67 performed whole exome sequencing, DNA copy number
analyses, and whole transcriptome sequencing on 15 MPNSTs,
including six NF1-associated, four sporadic, and four radiation-
associated tumors. In these tumors and a subsequent validation
cohort of 37 formalin-ﬁxed, parafﬁn-embedded specimens,
PRC2 mutations were evident
in 70% of NF1-associated
MPNSTs, 92% of sporadic MPNSTs, and 90% of radiation-
induced MPNSTs. In keeping with the role of PRC2 in estab-
lishing and maintaining epigenetic regulation via methylation of
histone H3, H3K27me3 immunoreactivity was lost in MPNSTs
with mutation of PRC2 components and the transcriptomes of
PRC2-wild type and -mutant MPNSTs were distinct.

At present, it is unclear whether the pathogenesis of spo-
radic, radiation-induced, and NF1-associated MPNSTs is
driven by distinct mechanisms. Although NF1-associated and
sporadic MPNSTs share some common pathogenic mecha-
nisms (eg, EGF receptor ampliﬁcation and activation of the
PI3K-Akt-mTOR and MEK signaling cascades), a report that
two sporadic MPNST cell lines (STS-26T and YST-1 cells)
have intact NF1 genes68 has given the impression that NF1
mutation distinguishes between these two groups of neo-
plasms. An examination of currently available data shows that
this conclusion is incorrect. Subsequent to the report that STS-
26T cells have intact NF1 genes, it was found that these cells
actually have a deletion within NF1.69 My laboratory has found
that YST-1 cells have a genome quite distinct from that of
MPNST cells, suggesting that they were incorrectly identiﬁed
as an MPNST cell line (unpublished data). Further, one of the
whole exome sequencing studies found NF1 mutations in 82%
(18 of 22) of the sporadic and radiation-induced MPNSTs
examined.67 Finally, it is not yet known whether sporadic
MPNSTs with intact NF1 genes have other mutations that
affect NF1-regulated signaling pathways; this possibility is
consistent with observations from some genetically engineered
mouse models (see Currently Available Mouse Models of
Neuroﬁbroma and MPNST Pathogenesis). Thus, we cannot
yet conclude that sporadic and NF1-associated MPNSTs arise
via distinct mechanisms. Indeed, the fact that transcriptome
proﬁles distinguishing these tumor types have not yet been
found (despite multiple attempts)70 is consistent with the pos-
sibility that the mechanisms driving the pathogenesis of spo-
radic and NF1-associated MPNSTs are quite similar.

Using Cross-Species Comparative Oncogenomics
to Investigate MPNST Pathogenesis
Selecting an Animal Model That Maximizes the
Advantages of Cross-Species Comparative
Oncogenomics

Cross-species comparative oncogenomics is an approach in
which a mouse cancer model is used to identify the somatic

468

ajp.amjpathol.org - The American Journal of Pathology

Oncogenomics in MPNST Models

Figure 2
Comparison of the genomes of a representative human MPNST and a mouse (P0-GGFb3) MPNST. A: This human MPNST contained two major
populations, one with 89 chromosomes and the other with 101 chromosomes. This highly complex karyotype was interpreted as 89 approximately
101<4n>,XXX,-X,-1,der(1)t(1;9)(q41;q21)x2,-2,der(2)(2pter->2p14::2q37->2p11.2::2q32->2qter),þder(3)(3qter->3p11::?::15q21->15qter),-4,þ5,der(7)
t(2;7)(q23;q22),þ8,der(9)t(1;9)(q41;q13)x4,þi(9)(q10),-10,der(10)t(9;10)(q21;q25),þi(12)(p10),þadd(13)(p11.2),-15,add(15)(q22)x2,-17,der(17)t(9;17)
(q21;p11.1),add(17)(p11.2),-18,-18,add(20)(q12),der(21)t(19;21)(q13.3;p11.1)[cp15]. B: Array CGH analysis of an MPNST from P0-GGFb3 mouse B233. In
this ideogram, gains are indicated in red and losses in green. This genome is much simpler than that of the human MPNST shown in A, with only four
whole chromosome gains or losses and four focal copy number variations. The arrowhead indicates a copy number loss that ablated the Cdkn2a/Cdkn2b
gene. MPNST, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor.

mutations that drive tumorigenesis, and the relevance of
these mutations is then validated in the human counterpart
of the mouse cancer. Because validation can be performed
with formalin-ﬁxed, parafﬁn-embedded tissue specimens,
the size of the human tumor cohort available for validation
is effectively ampliﬁed. The use of mouse cancer models
also offers advantages that facilitate rapid identiﬁcation of
driver mutations. First, the genome of inbred mouse strains
has less variability than human genomes. This means that
somatic mutations in a mouse cancer are being identiﬁed
against a relatively uniform genetic background rather than
one with the extreme variability typical of humans. Second,
there are intrinsic differences in the stability of human and
mouse cancer genomes.71 Human cancer genomes are
typically structurally complex, with numerous regions of
focal chromosomal gain and loss; however, only a small
subset of these copy number changes affect driver genes
(Figure 2). In contrast, mouse cancer genomes tend to have
whole chromosome gains or losses, with few focal copy
number variations. Those focal gains or losses that do occur
in mouse tumors arise under strong selective pressure and
are more likely to contain a driver gene.72 Finally, because
key driver genes and their associated pathways are evolu-
tionarily conserved, driver mutations in mouse cancer
models are usually relevant to the pathogenesis of their
human counterpart. As evidence, cross-species comparative
oncogenomic studies with the use of several genetically
engineered mouse cancer models3,73e80 or murine cancers
produced by insertional mutagenesis with the Sleeping
Beauty transposon system64,81e83 have proven highly
effective for identifying novel oncogenes and tumor sup-
pressor genes relevant to human tumor pathogenesis.

To completely understand peripheral nerve sheath
tumorigenesis, we need to identify the driver mutations
responsible for neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis,
the trans-
formation of a neuroﬁbroma into a MPNST, and the pro-
gression from a low-grade MPNST to a high-grade
malignancy. Ideally, cross-species comparative oncoge-
nomics would thus be performed with animal models that
recapitulate the process of tumorigenesis seen in humans
and develop neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs
that have
genomic abnormalities mirroring those seen in their human
counterparts. A variety of approaches were used to create
genetically engineered mouse models that could be used
these approaches included
for these studies (Table 1);
knocking out Nf1 and other
tumor suppressor genes,
overexpressing the growth factor NRG1, and over-
expressing the EGF receptor. Given the central role that
NF1 mutation plays in human neuroﬁbroma and MPNST
pathogenesis, one might expect that Nf1 knockout models
would be the natural choice for cross-species comparative
oncogenomics studies. However, there are important lim-
itations to currently available Nf1 knockout models, and
cancer genomics studies performed thus far have instead
used the NRG1 and EGF receptor overexpression models.
To explain these observations, it is useful to consider the
strengths and weaknesses of these mouse models.

Currently Available Mouse Models of Neuroﬁbroma and
MPNST Pathogenesis

Mice with genetic ablation of the Nf1 gene were ﬁrst created
in 1994, when two laboratories independently created mice
with deletion of exon 31 (Nf1D31/þ
mice).84,85 Surprisingly,

The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org

469

Carroll

Table 1
Model
Nf1 knockout models

Genetically Engineered Mouse Models of Neuroﬁbroma and MPNST Pathogenesis

Transgenic Mouse Model
Nf1D31/D31
Nf1D31/þ

Krox20-Cre;Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox
Krox20-Cre;Nf1ﬂox/ 

Tumor microenvironment

Krox2-Cre;Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox

models

transplanted with Nf1
bone marrow

þ/ 

; Krox2-Cre

Nf1ﬂox/þ
transplanted with Nf1
bone marrow

þ/þ

MPNST formation driven

by dual tumor
suppressor loss

PNS tumor formation

driven by dysregulated
growth factor signaling

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

;p53

;p53
þ/ 

cis-Linked Nf1
Nf1

trans-Linked Nf1
þ/ 
p16Ink4a / 
p19Arf / 
p16Ink4a/p19Arf / 

þ/ 

Nf1

þ/ 

Nf1
P0-GGFb3

P0-GGFb3;Trp53

þ/ 

CNPase-hEGFR

þ/R270H

Cnp-hEGFR;Trp53
Cnp-hEGFR;Dhh-Cre;Ptenﬂox/þ

Phenotype

Limitations

Die of cardiac failure by embryonic

Early death prevents observation of

day 13.5

Develop pheochromocytomas (15%
incidence); also show accelerated
development of other non-NF1 tumors
compared with wild-type mice

tumorigenic effects of Nf1 loss

No neuroﬁbromas or MPNSTs

observed

Schwann cell hyperplasia

No neuroﬁbromas or MPNSTs

observed

Neuroﬁbromas in this model do not

transform into MPNSTs

Other Nf1

þ/ 

cell types within the

hematopoietic lineage (eg,
macrophages) may contribute to
neuroﬁbroma development

Plexiform neuroﬁbroma development by
1 year of age (showing importance of
 / 
both Nf1
neuroﬁbroma formation)

and Nf1

cells in

þ/ 

Developed plexiform neuroﬁbromas

inﬁltrated by donor mast cells
(demonstrating importance of Nf1
haploinsufﬁciency in hematopoeitic
lineage for neuroﬁbroma formation)
No neuroﬁbromas developed (showing
importance of Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency
in hematopoeitic lineage for
neuroﬁbroma formation)

Develop non-MPNST sarcomas

No MPNST formation

characteristic of p53 LOH

Developed MPNSTs (w30% incidence)
Accelerated development of tumors

characteristic of p16INK4a loss

Accelerated development of tumors

characteristic of p19Arf loss

Developed MPNSTs (w30% incidence)
Neuroﬁbroma formation with progression

to MPNSTs by 6 to 10 months

MPNSTs develop de novo and with
complete penetrance by 6 to 9
months; also model MPNST
progression from WHO grade II to IV
Schwann cell hyperplasia with mast cell

recruitment and ﬁbrosis

No neuroﬁbroma precursor lesion
No MPNST formation

No MPNST formation

No neuroﬁbroma precursor lesion
Although genetic complementation

indicates that protumorigenic
effect of NRG1 is in the Nf1
signaling cascade, tumors are not
Nf1 null and other, as yet
unknown, non-RasGAP
neuroﬁbromin functions that
contribute to tumorigenesis may
not be modeled

No neuroﬁbroma precursor lesion

Neuroﬁbroma formation exceedingly
rare at advanced age; no MPNSTs
observed

Develop both neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs See discussion in text
Develop neuroﬁbromas

Neuroﬁbromas do not transform into

Cnp-hEGFR;Dhh-Cre;Ptenﬂox/ﬂox Develop MPNSTs de novo

MPNSTs

No neuroﬁbroma precursor lesion

GAP, GTPase-activating protein; LOH, loss of heterozygosity; MPNST, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor; NF1, NF1, neuroﬁbromatosis type 1; NRG,

neuregulin; WHO, World Health Organization.

although Nf1D31/þ
mice were viable and fertile, they did not
develop neuroﬁbromas; these animals showed only some of
the more rare manifestations of NF1 such as leukemias and
pheochromocytomas. Mice homozygous for this mutation
(Nf1D31/D31 mice) died at embryonic day 13.5 secondary to

cardiac failure, and they displayed abnormally developed
skeletal muscle, kidneys, and liver. However, nervous sys-
tem pathology was limited to neuronal hyperplasia in
sympathetic ganglia and,
less commonly, exencephaly;
neuroﬁbromas were not evident.

470

ajp.amjpathol.org - The American Journal of Pathology

One possible explanation for the absence of neuroﬁ-
bromas in Nf1D31/þ
mice was that the frequency of second
hit Nf1 mutations in the Schwann cells of these animals was
rate limiting. Consequently, investigators next tried to create
mice with a conditional knockout of Nf1 in Schwann cells
(Krox20-Cre;Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mice).86 These mice showed only
mild Schwann cell hyperplasia, indicating that Nf1 loss in
Schwann cells was not sufﬁcient for neuroﬁbroma patho-
genesis. However, mice with complete Nf1 loss in Schwann
cells and Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in all other cell
types
(Krox20-Cre;Nf1ﬂox/ 
mice) developed multiple neuro-
ﬁbromas in their cranial nerves and spinal nerve roots by 1
year of age. The contrasting phenotypes of Krox20-
Cre;Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox and Krox20-Cre;Nf1ﬂox/ 
mice provided the
ﬁrst experimental evidence that an Nf1 haploinsufﬁcient
tumor microenvironment was essential for neuroﬁbroma
pathogenesis. This concept (and the important role played
by mast cells) was given further support by the subsequent
demonstration that lethally irradiated Krox20-Cre;Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox
mice grafted with Nf1
bone marrow developed multiple
neuroﬁbromas inﬁltrated by donor mast cells.87 Krox20-
Cre;Nf1ﬂox/ 
mice thus provided important new insights into
the process of neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis. Disappointingly,
however, the neuroﬁbromas in these animals only rarely
transform and give rise to MPNSTs, and so Krox20-
 /ﬂox mice cannot be used to identify the driver
Cre;Nf1
genes responsible for the malignant transformation of neu-
roﬁbromas and MPNST progression.

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

;Trp53

;Trp53

;Trp53

The lack of malignant transformation in the neuroﬁbromas of
 /ﬂox mice could, like the absence of neuroﬁ-
Krox20-Cre;Nf1
bromas in Nf1D31/þ
mice, reﬂect a low rate of mutation in other
key tumor suppressor genes involved in MPNST pathogenesis.
To test this possibility, mice carrying null mutations of both Nf1
and Trp53 on the same (cis-linked Nf1
mice) and
different (trans Nf1
mice) copies of chromosome
11 were created.88,89 In mice, the most common mechanism of
second hit mutation is whole chromosome loss. Consistent with
this, 30% of cis-linked Nf1
mice developed
þ/ 
MPNSTs by 5 months of age, whereas trans Nf1
mice typically died at 10 months of age with other tumor types
characteristic of Trp53
mice
that also have homozygous mutations affecting both key
Cdkn2a functions (Nf1
mice) also
develop MPNSTs.90 Intriguingly, mice with mutations affecting
only one of the two transcripts encoded by the Cdkn2a locus
(Nf1
mice) do not develop
MPNSTs,90,91 indicating that both the p16INK4A-cyclin
D1-CDK4-Rb and the p19ARF-Mdm2-p53 pathways must
be dysregulated for MPNST pathogenesis to occur. These
models provide strong experimental evidence that the Nf1,
Trp53, and Cdkn2a genes play an important role in MPNST
pathogenesis. However, in all of these models, MPNSTs
arise de novo rather than from a neuroﬁbroma precursor,
and so they cannot be used to study transformation.
Because a series of tumors from these animals have not been
rigorously graded,
is also unclear whether they are

mice. Likewise, 26% of Nf1
;p16Ink4a / 

;p16Ink4a / 

;Trp53
þ/ 

;p19Arfþ/ 

;p19Arf / 

or Nf1

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

it

Oncogenomics in MPNST Models

appropriate models for identifying genes responsible for
MPNST progression.

that

Although several growth factors and growth factor receptors
contribute to neuroﬁbroma and MPNST pathogenesis, only
two of these molecules have been overexpressed in the
Schwann cells of genetically engineered mice to directly
examine their role in tumorigenesis. One of these is NRG1, a
growth factor
regulates Schwann cell proliferation,
survival, migration, and maturation during development. We
have shown that NRG1 and all three of its receptors (the
erbB2, erbB3, and erbB4 receptor tyrosine kinases) are
co-expressed in human neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs;
the
resulting constitutive activation of these receptors drives the
proliferation,92 survival,93 and migration94 of human MPNST
cells. To determine whether inappropriate activation of the
NRG1/erbB signaling is sufﬁcient to induce tumorigenesis, we
created transgenic mice in which a secreted NRG1 isoform is
overexpressed in Schwann cells (P0-GGFb3 mice). On both an
outbred C57BL/6J  SJL/J background and when back-
crossed onto a C57BL/6J background for ﬁve to eight gener-
ations, >90% of P0-GGFb3 mice develop multiple
neuroﬁbromas in cranial, sympathetic, and spinal nerves that
recapitulate the pathology of human plexiform neuroﬁbromas.
In 70% to 80% of P0-GGFb3 mice, one or more neuroﬁbromas
transform into MPNSTs.95,96 Further, P0-GGFb3 MPNSTs
have mutations in the p16INK4A-cyclin D/CDK4-Rb and
p19ARF-Mdm-p53 pathways that parallel those seen in human
MPNSTs. In addition, Ras is hyperactivated in P0-GGFb3
MPNSTs in an erbB-dependent manner. However, immuno-
blot analyses96 and whole exome sequencing (unpublished
data) showed that Nf1 is not mutated in P0-GGFb3 MPNSTs,
which raised the question of whether NRG1 promoted
tumorigenesis via its effects on the Nf1 signaling cascade or
instead activated another pathway that cooperated with the
Nf1 signaling pathway to drive neoplasia. An opportunity to
distinguish between these possibilities presented itself
when it was noted that tumorigenesis was suppressed in P0-
GGFb3 mice bred onto a C57BL/6J background for 15
(inbred P0-GGFb3 mice). To determine
generations
whether NRG1 interacts with Nf1 or Trp53 loss, cohorts of
inbred P0-GGFb3;Nf1
mice
were established and examined for evidence of tumor
formation.97 Although no tumors were seen in P0-
þ/ 
GGFb3;Nf1
mice,
P0-
þ/ 
GGFb3;Trp53
mice developed MPNSTs. The MPNSTs
þ/ 
þ/ 
in P0-GGFb3;Trp53
;
mice, arose de novo, demonstrating that NRG1
Trp53
overexpression could substitute for Nf1 loss and thus must
promote tumorigenesis through the same signaling cascade
affected by Nf1 loss. Further, P0-GGFb3;Trp53
MPNSTs
originated as lesions with the pathologic features of human
World Health Organization grade II MPNSTs and subse-
quently progressed to become World Health Organization
grade III and IV lesions. Thus, P0-GGFb3 mice develop both
neuroﬁbromas
the process
of neuroﬁbroma-MPNST progression seen in human, and have

mice, like those in cis-linked Nf1

and P0-GGFb3;Trp53

and MPNSTs,

recapitulate

virtually

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

the

all

of

The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org

471

Carroll

tumor suppressor mutations analogous to those in human
þ/ 
MPNSTs. In addition, P0-GGFb3 and P0-GGFb3;Trp53
mice model the evolution of MPNSTs as they progress from
low to high grade.

0

0

,3

0

-cyclic nucleotide 3

Transgenic mice that overexpress the EGF receptor
(erbB1) in Schwann cells [2
phos-
phodiesterase (Cnp)-hEGFR mice) have also been gener-
ated.98 Although the EGF receptor is in the same family as
the NRG1 receptors, the phenotype of Cnp-hEGFR mice is
more subtle than that of P0-GGFb3 mice. Cnp-hEGFR mice
show Schwann cell hyperplasia, dissociation of Schwann
cells from axons, increased numbers of intraneural mast
cells, and ﬁbrosis, but frank neuroﬁbroma formation is
rare, indicating that inappropriate expression of the EGF
receptor is not sufﬁcient for tumorigenesis. Nonetheless,
the phenotype of Cnp-hEGFR mice does not exclude a
role for the EGF receptor in neuroﬁbroma and MPNST
pathogenesis. As evidence, MPNST pathogenesis
is
impaired in cis-linked Nf1
mice that also
carry a hypomorphic EGF receptor mutation (EGFRwa 2
mice). There is also evidence that inappropriate expres-
sion of
interacts with key tumor

the EGF receptor

;Trp53

þ/ 

þ/ 

Figure 3
Overview of our current understand-
ing of neuroﬁbroma- MPNST pathogenesis is based
on both human and mouse studies. The upper half
of the diagram indicates the cell autonomous and
nonautonomous consequences of NF1 loss and how
this leads to neuroﬁbroma pathogenesis. Addi-
tional events involved in the transformation of a
neuroﬁbroma to an MPNST are indicated below.
Although multiple events are indicated here, note
that it is quite possible that many of these ab-
normalities may be speciﬁc to as yet undeﬁned
MPNST subtypes. Consistent with this,
initial
comparisons
and wild-type
MPNSTs indicated that some of the indicated
suppressor mutations were speciﬁcally
tumor
associated with PRC2 mutant
tumors. EGFR,
epidermal growth factor receptor; MPNST, malig-
nant peripheral nerve sheath tumor; PDGFR,
platelet-derived growth factor
receptor; PRC2,
Polycomb repressive complex 2; PTEN, phosphate
and tensin homologue; TGF, transforming growth
factor.

PRC2-mutant

of

þ/ 

þ/ 

suppressor mutations to promote peripheral nervous system
mice
tumorigenesis. Crossing Cnp-hEGFR mice with Nf1
does not enhance tumorigenesis, much as was seen in inbred
P0-GGFb3;Nf1
mice. However, Cnp-hEGFR mice with
partial (Cnp-hEGFR;Dhh-Cre;Ptenﬂox/þ
mice) or complete
(Cnp-hEGFR;Dhh-Cre;Ptenﬂox/ﬂox mice) deletion of Pten in
Schwann cells99 develop neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs,
respectively. Likewise, Cnp-hEGFR mice that also express a
þ/R270H
dominant-negative Trp53 mutant (Cnp-hEGFR;Trp53
mice) develop neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs.100

Whole Genome aCGH and Forward Genetic Screens in
Mouse MPNST Models

Two distinct approaches were used thus far to identify
candidate driver genes in mouse MPNSTs, each of which is
designed to take advantage of the distinct phenotypes of
P0-GGFb3 and Cnp-hEGFR mice. The ﬁrst approach
parallels that used by The Cancer Genome Atlas and uses
whole genome aCGH, whole exome sequencing, and tran-
scriptome sequencing to identify candidate driver mutations.
Although ﬁndings from whole exome sequencing and

472

ajp.amjpathol.org - The American Journal of Pathology

transcriptome sequencing experiments have recently been
presented at national meetings, only aCGH results are
published,96,97,100 and so I focus on those experiments here.
Consistent with previous studies in other mouse tumors,
whole genome aCGH in P0-GGFb3 MPNSTs showed
that
the genomes of these mouse tumors were simpler
than that of their human counterparts.96 Copy number var-
iations that involve whole chromosomes or chromosome
arms were common, occurring an average of 5.3 times
(range, 3 to 10 times) per tumor genome. A smaller number
of focal copy number gains or losses were also evident in
each P0-GGFb3 MPNST. An examination of the genes
within 44 focal copy number gains or losses (26 gains, 18
losses) showed that 22 of these regions contained a total of
39 genes previously implicated in human neoplasia. One of
the most common losses, which was present in >50% of the
MPNSTs, was deletion of the Cdkn2a locus. The functions
of the other genes were varied and included loci
that
encoded proteins
regulating proliferation (Myc, Strn,
Tpd52), chromatin remodeling (Ep400), progress through
the cell cycle (Chfr, Chek2, Cdk2ap1, Cdk4), apoptosis
(Bbc3/PUMA, XIAP, Ddit3/GADD153),
transcriptional
control (Ncoa3, Nr4a3, Zscan22), cell motility (Sept6, Vcl),
and metabolism (Aldob, Mars, Alad). Genes encoding mem-
bers of key cytoplasmic signaling pathways such as Hippo
(Stk4), Notch (Dtx3), Hedgehog (Gli1), Arf (Agap2), Rho
(Arhgap9), and PI3 kinase (Pten) were also repeatedly affected.
Interestingly, several regions of recurrent copy number gain or
loss did not contain any genes previously implicated in cancer
pathogenesis, indicating that these regions may contain as yet
unknown oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes.

þ/ 

þ/ 

þ/ 

MPNSTs

from P0-GGFb3;Trp53
and Cnp-
þ/R270H mice have also been studied by
EGFR;Trp53
whole genome aCGH.97,100 Examination of a series of
P0-GGFb3;Trp53
MPNSTs
included World
that
Health Organization grade II,
III, and IV neoplasms
showed that grade II tumors had fewer unbalanced copy
number variations than grade IV lesions. Surprisingly,
however, the number of copy number variations in grade
III MPNSTs were not intermediate between grade II and
IV neoplasms;
instead, approximately one-half of the
grade III MPNSTs had gains and losses that occurred
with a frequency analogous to the grade IV tumors, with
the remainder resembling the grade II MPNSTs. Although
many of the candidate driver genes within the focal copy
number variation in P0-GGFb3;Trp53
MPNSTs were
also seen in P0-GGFb3 MPNSTs (eg, Myc), some genes
encoding members of other signaling pathways (Prkcdbp,
Mapk1, Rap1gds1, Arap, Crkl) were
affected in
P0-GGFb3;Trp53
MPNSTs, raising the question of
tumorigenesis in this mouse model
whether
involves
distinct
signaling cascades. The genomes of Cnp-
þ/R270H MPNSTs had a complexity similar
EGFR;Trp53
to that seen in P0-GGFb3 MPNSTs. Again, Myc was among
the genes recurrently ampliﬁed in these tumors; however, the
þ/R270H
signaling pathways affected in Cnp-EGFR;Trp53

þ/ 

Oncogenomics in MPNST Models

MPNSTs included the Erk5, phospholipase C, tec kinase, and
ephrin cascades.

The second approach that was used to identify driver genes
in MPNSTs relies on the use of the Sleeping Beauty trans-
poson system to accelerate tumorigenesis in Cnp-hEGFR and
þ/R270H mice.101 Examination of the com-
Cnp-EGFR;Trp53
mon integration sites in 269 neuroﬁbromas and 106 MPNSTs
identiﬁed 695 and 87 genes, respectively, that were recurrently
present in these tumors; 37 of these genes were detected in
both neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs. Intriguingly, tumor sup-
pressor genes predominated in these neoplasms, with 67 po-
tential tumor suppressor genes and 20 candidate oncogenes
identiﬁed. This collection of genes was then compared with
archived aCGH, single nucleotide polymorphism array, RNA
expression microarray, and methylome data from human
Schwann cells, neuroﬁbromas, and MPNSTs to identify a
subset of genes potentially relevant to human neuroﬁbroma
and MPNST pathogenesis. In addition to driver genes known
to be important for human MPNST pathogenesis (NF1,
CDKN2A, PTEN),
three signaling cascades (PI3K/AKT/
mTOR, MAPK/ERK/JNK/p38, and Wnt/CTNNB1) were
identiﬁed that were both repetitively targeted by Sleeping
Beauty and potentially relevant to human tumorigenesis. These
comparisons also identiﬁed the forkhead-box transcription
factor FOXR2 as an oncogene potentially important for the
development of MPNSTs. Thus, forward genetic screens with
Sleeping Beauty transposons clearly identiﬁed genes relevant
to the pathogenesis of human MPNSTs, underscoring the
effectiveness of using mouse models to understand the path-
ogenesis of human peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

Conclusions and Future Directions

in their infancy,

Although cross-species comparative oncogenomic studies of
MPNSTs are still
these analyses have
already begun to provide new insights into the mechanisms
responsible for the development of these deadly neoplasms
(Figure 3). However, there are some important caveats that
need to be considered as we move forward. First,
the
observation that different signaling pathways are being
affected in different mouse MPNST models raises the
question of whether particular mouse models are modeling
speciﬁc MPNST subtypes. Consequently, it likely will be
important to study multiple mouse models to assess this
possibility. Second, it must be remembered that the identi-
ﬁcation of driver genes in mouse MPNSTs via whole exome
sequencing,
sequencing is
computational (as it is in comparable studies of human
MPNSTs). Consequently, it is essential that candidate driver
genes be functionally validated by a variety of approaches,
including those described in the sections above. Third, it
should be recognized that cross-species comparative onco-
genomics will probably not effectively identify some
important types of mutations such as fusion genes. This
potential limitation reﬂects the fact that mouse MPNSTs do

and transcriptome

aCGH,

The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org

473

Carroll

not demonstrate the extreme degree of chromothripsis102
and subsequent rejoining of chromosomal breaks seen in
human MPNSTs. Nonetheless, it is increasingly evident that
cross-species comparative oncogenomics is a promising
approach to the challenges of performing genomics in rare
tumor types and undoubtedly will be increasingly important
as we turn our attention to these problematic neoplasms.

Acknowledgments

I thank Drs. Jody Fromm Longo and Amanda Prechtl for
their helpful comments on this manuscript.

References

1. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network: Comprehensive genomic
characterization deﬁnes human glioblastoma genes and core path-
ways. Nature 2008, 455:1061e1068

2. Parsons DW, Jones S, Zhang X, Lin JC, Leary RJ, Angenendt P,
Mankoo P, Carter H, Siu IM, Gallia GL, Olivi A, McLendon R,
Rasheed BA, Keir S, Nikolskaya T, Nikolsky Y, Busam DA,
Tekleab H, Diaz LA Jr, Hartigan J, Smith DR, Strausberg RL,
Marie SK, Shinjo SM, Yan H, Riggins GJ, Bigner DD, Karchin R,
Papadopoulos N, Parmigiani G, Vogelstein B, Velculescu VE,
Kinzler KW: An integrated genomic analysis of human glioblastoma
multiforme. Science 2008, 321:1807e1812

3. Johnson RA, Wright KD, Poppleton H, Mohankumar KM,
Finkelstein D, Pounds SB, Rand V, Leary SE, White E, Eden C,
Hogg T, Northcott P, Mack S, Neale G, Wang YD, Coyle B,
Atkinson J, DeWire M, Kranenburg TA, Gillespie Y, Allen JC,
Merchant T, Boop FA, Sanford RA, Gajjar A, Ellison DW,
Taylor MD, Grundy RG, Gilbertson RJ: Cross-species genomics
matches driver mutations and cell compartments to model ependy-
moma. Nature 2010, 466:632e636

4. Modena P, Lualdi E, Facchinetti F, Veltman J, Reid JF, Minardi S,
Janssen I, Giangaspero F, Forni M, Finocchiaro G, Genitori L,
Giordano F, Riccardi R, Schoenmakers EF, Massimino M, Sozzi G:
Identiﬁcation of tumor-speciﬁc molecular signatures in intracranial
ependymoma and association with clinical characteristics. J Clin
Oncol 2006, 24:5223e5233

5. Witt H, Mack SC, Ryzhova M, Bender S, Sill M, Isserlin R, et al:
Delineation of two clinically and molecularly distinct subgroups of
posterior fossa ependymoma. Cancer Cell 2011, 20:143e157

6. Wani K, Armstrong TS, Vera-Bolanos E, Raghunathan A,
Ellison D, Gilbertson R, Vaillant B, Goldman S, Packer RJ,
Fouladi M, Pollack I, Mikkelsen T, Prados M, Omuro A,
Sofﬁetti R, Ledoux A, Wilson C, Long L, Gilbert MR, Aldape K;
Collaborative Ependymoma Research Network: A prognostic gene
expression signature in infratentorial ependymoma. Acta Neuro-
pathol 2012, 123:727e738

7. Mack SC, Witt H, Piro RM, Gu L, Zuyderduyn S, Stutz AM, et al:
Epigenomic alterations deﬁne lethal CIMP-positive ependymomas of
infancy. Nature 2014, 506:445e450

8. Pajtler KW, Witt H, Sill M, Jones DT, Hovestadt V, Kratochwil F,
et al: Molecular classiﬁcation of ependymal tumors across all CNS
compartments, histopathological grades, and age groups. Cancer Cell
2015, 27:728e743

9. Parsons DW, Li M, Zhang X, Jones S, Leary RJ, Lin JC, et al: The
genetic landscape of the childhood cancer medulloblastoma. Science
2011, 331:435e439

10. Jones DT, Jager N, Kool M, Zichner T, Hutter B, Sultan M, et al:
Dissecting the genomic complexity underlying medulloblastoma.
Nature 2012, 488:100e105

Bouffet

E,

Bartels U, Albrecht

11. Khuong-Quang DA, Buczkowicz P, Rakopoulos P, Liu XY,
S,
Fontebasso AM,
Schwartzentruber
J, Letourneau L, Bourgey M, Bourque G,
Montpetit A, Bourret G, Lepage P, Fleming A, Lichter P, Kool M,
von Deimling A, Sturm D, Korshunov A, Faury D, Jones DT,
Majewski J, Pﬁster SM, Jabado N, Hawkins C: K27M mutation in
histone H3.3 deﬁnes clinically and biologically distinct subgroups of
pediatric diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas. Acta Neuropathol 2012,
124:439e447

12. Schwartzentruber J, Korshunov A, Liu XY, Jones DT, Pfaff E,
Jacob K, et al: Driver mutations in histone H3.3 and chromatin
remodelling genes in paediatric glioblastoma. Nature 2012, 482:
226e231

13. Wu G, Broniscer A, McEachron TA, Lu C, Paugh BS, Becksfort J,
Qu C, Ding L, Huether R, Parker M, Zhang J, Gajjar A, Dyer MA,
Mullighan CG, Gilbertson RJ, Mardis ER, Wilson RK, Downing JR,
Ellison DW, Baker SJ; St. Jude Children’s Research Hospitald
Washington University Pediatric Cancer Genome Project: Somatic
histone H3 alterations in pediatric diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas
and non-brainstem glioblastomas. Nat Genet 2012, 44:251e253

14. Aldape K, Zadeh G, Mansouri S, Reifenberger G, von Deimling A:
Glioblastoma: pathology, molecular mechanisms and markers. Acta
Neuropathol 2015, 129:829e848

15. Louis DN, Perry A, Burger P, Ellison DW, Reifenberger G, von
Deimling A, Aldape K, Brat D, Collins VP, Eberhart C, Figarella-
Branger D, Fuller GN, Giangaspero F, Giannini C, Hawkins C,
Kleihues P, Korshunov A, Kros JM, Beatriz Lopes M, Ng HK,
Ohgaki H, Paulus W, Pietsch T, Rosenblum M, Rushing E,
Soylemezoglu F, Wiestler O, Wesseling P; International Society of
Neuropathology–Haarlem:
Society Of Neuro-
pathologyeHaarlem consensus guidelines for nervous system tumor
classiﬁcation and grading. Brain Pathol 2014, 24:429e435

International

16. Verhaak RG, Hoadley KA, Purdom E, Wang V, Qi Y,
Wilkerson MD, Miller CR, Ding L, Golub T, Mesirov JP, Alexe G,
Lawrence M, O’Kelly M, Tamayo P, Weir BA, Gabriel S,
Winckler W, Gupta S, Jakkula L, Feiler HS, Hodgson JG, James CD,
Sarkaria JN, Brennan C, Kahn A, Spellman PT, Wilson RK,
Speed TP, Gray JW, Meyerson M, Getz G, Perou CM, Hayes DN;
Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network: Integrated genomic anal-
ysis identiﬁes clinically relevant subtypes of glioblastoma character-
ized by abnormalities in PDGFRA, IDH1, EGFR, and NF1. Cancer
Cell 2010, 17:98e110

17. Paugh BS, Broniscer A, Qu C, Miller CP, Zhang J, Tatevossian RG,
Olson JM, Geyer JR, Chi SN, da Silva NS, Onar-Thomas A,
Baker JN, Gajjar A, Ellison DW, Baker SJ: Genome-wide analyses
identify recurrent ampliﬁcations of receptor tyrosine kinases and cell-
cycle regulatory genes in diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma. J Clin
Oncol 2011, 29:3999e4006

18. Puget S, Philippe C, Bax DA, Job B, Varlet P, Junier MP,
Andreiuolo F, Carvalho D, Reis R, Guerrini-Rousseau L, Roujeau T,
Dessen P, Richon C, Lazar V, Le Teuff G, Sainte-Rose C,
Geoerger B, Vassal G, Jones C, Grill J: Mesenchymal transition and
PDGFRA ampliﬁcation/mutation are key distinct oncogenic events in
pediatric diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas. PLoS One 2012, 7:e30313
19. Saratsis AM, Kambhampati M, Snyder K, Yadavilli S, Devaney JM,
Harmon B, Hall J, Raabe EH, An P, Weingart M, Rood BR,
Magge SN, MacDonald TJ, Packer RJ, Nazarian J: Comparative
multidimensional molecular analyses of pediatric diffuse intrinsic
pontine glioma reveals distinct molecular subtypes. Acta Neuropathol
2014, 127:881e895

20. Pugh TJ, Weeraratne SD, Archer TC, Pomeranz Krummel DA,
Auclair D, Bochicchio J, et al: Medulloblastoma exome sequencing
uncovers subtype-speciﬁc somatic mutations. Nature 2012, 488:
106e110

21. Northcott PA, Shih DJ, Peacock J, Garzia L, Morrissy AS, Zichner T,
et al: Subgroup-speciﬁc structural variation across 1,000 medullo-
blastoma genomes. Nature 2012, 488:49e56

474

ajp.amjpathol.org - The American Journal of Pathology

22. Kool M, Korshunov A, Remke M, Jones DT, Schlanstein M,
Northcott PA, Cho YJ, Koster J, Schouten-van Meeteren A, van
Vuurden D, Clifford SC, Pietsch T, von Bueren AO, Rutkowski S,
McCabe M, Collins VP, Backlund ML, Haberler C, Bourdeaut F,
Delattre O, Doz F, Ellison DW, Gilbertson RJ, Pomeroy SL,
Taylor MD, Lichter P, Pﬁster SM: Molecular subgroups of medul-
loblastoma: an international meta-analysis of transcriptome, genetic
aberrations, and clinical data of WNT, SHH, Group 3, and Group 4
medulloblastomas. Acta Neuropathol 2012, 123:473e484

23. Lewis JJ, Brennan MF: Soft tissue sarcomas. Curr Probl Surg 1996,

33:817e872

24. Carroll SL: Molecular mechanisms promoting the pathogenesis of

Schwann cell neoplasms. Acta Neuropathol 2012, 123:321e348

25. Messiaen LM, Callens T, Mortier G, Beysen D, Vandenbroucke I,
Van Roy N, Speleman F, Paepe AD: Exhaustive mutation analysis
of the NF1 gene allows identiﬁcation of 95% of mutations and
reveals a high frequency of unusual splicing defects. Hum Mutat
2000, 15:541e555

26. Wimmer K, Roca X, Beiglbock H, Callens T, Etzler J, Rao AR,
Krainer AR, Fonatsch C, Messiaen L: Extensive in silico analysis of
NF1 splicing defects uncovers determinants for splicing outcome
upon 5’ splice-site disruption. Hum Mutat 2007, 28:599e612

27. Wimmer K, Yao S, Claes K, Kehrer-Sawatzki H, Tinschert S, De
Raedt T, Legius E, Callens T, Beiglbock H, Maertens O, Messiaen L:
Spectrum of single- and multiexon NF1 copy number changes in a
cohort of 1,100 unselected NF1 patients. Genes Chromosomes Can-
cer 2006, 45:265e276

28. Widemann BC, Dombi E, Gillespie A, Wolters PL, Belasco J,
Goldman S, Korf BR, Solomon J, Martin S, Salzer W, Fox E,
Patronas N, Kieran MW, Perentesis JP, Reddy A, Wright JJ, Kim A,
Steinberg SM, Balis FM: Phase 2 randomized, ﬂexible crossover,
double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial of the farnesyltransferase
inhibitor tipifarnib in children and young adults with neuroﬁbroma-
tosis type 1 and progressive plexiform neuroﬁbromas. Neuro Oncol
2014, 16:707e718

29. Brossier NM, Prechtl AM, Longo JF, Barnes S, Wilson LS, Byer SJ,
Brosius SN, Carroll SL: Classic Ras proteins promote proliferation
and
in
neuroﬁbromin-null malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor cells. J
Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2015, 74:568e586

phosphoproteome

alterations

survival

via

distinct

30. Appels NM, Beijnen JH, Schellens JH: Development of farnesyl

transferase inhibitors: a review. Oncologist 2005, 10:565e578

31. Jessen WJ, Miller SJ, Jousma E, Wu J, Rizvi TA, Brundage ME,
Eaves D, Widemann B, Kim MO, Dombi E, Sabo J, Hardiman
Dudley A, Niwa-Kawakita M, Page GP, Giovannini M, Aronow BJ,
Cripe TP, Ratner N: MEK inhibition exhibits efﬁcacy in human and
mouse neuroﬁbromatosis tumors. J Clin Invest 2013, 123:340e347
32. Watson AL, Anderson LK, Greeley AD, Keng VW, Rahrmann EP,
Halfond AL, Powell NM, Collins MH, Rizvi T, Moertel CL,
Ratner N, Largaespada DA: Co-targeting the MAPK and
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways in two genetically engineered mouse
models of schwann cell tumors reduces tumor grade and multiplicity.
Oncotarget 2014, 5:1502e1514

33. Johannessen CM, Reczek EE, James MF, Brems H, Legius E,
Cichowski K: The NF1 tumor suppressor critically regulates TSC2
and mTOR. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005, 102:8573e8578

34. Johannessen CM, Johnson BW, Williams SM, Chan AW, Reczek EE,
Lynch RC, Rioth MJ, McClatchey A, Ryeom S, Cichowski K:
TORC1 is essential for NF1-associated malignancies. Curr Biol 2008,
18:56e62

35. Hirota S, Nomura S, Asada H, Ito A, Morii E, Kitamura Y:
Possible involvement of c-kit receptor and its ligand in increase of
mast cells in neuroﬁbroma tissues. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1993,
117:996e999

36. Ryan JJ, Klein KA, Neuberger TJ, Leftwich JA, Westin EH,
Kauma S, Fletcher JA, DeVries GH, Huff TF: Role for the stem cell
factor/KIT complex in Schwann cell neoplasia and mast cell

Oncogenomics in MPNST Models

proliferation associated with neuroﬁbromatosis. J Neurosci Res 1994,
37:415e432

37. Yang FC, Ingram DA, Chen S, Hingtgen CM, Ratner N, Monk KR,
Clegg T, White H, Mead L, Wenning MJ, Williams DA, Kapur R,
Atkinson SJ, Clapp DW: Neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient Schwann cells
secrete a potent migratory stimulus for Nf1þ/- mast cells. J Clin
Invest 2003, 112:1851e1861

38. Ingram DA, Yang FC, Travers JB, Wenning MJ, Hiatt K, New S,
Hood A, Shannon K, Williams DA, Clapp DW: Genetic and
biochemical evidence that haploinsufﬁciency of the Nf1 tumor sup-
pressor gene modulates melanocyte and mast cell fates in vivo. J Exp
Med 2000, 191:181e188

39. Ingram DA, Hiatt K, King AJ, Fisher L, Shivakumar R, Derstine C,
Wenning MJ, Diaz B, Travers
JB, Hood A, Marshall M,
Williams DA, Clapp DW: Hyperactivation of p21(ras) and the
hematopoietic-speciﬁc Rho GTPase, Rac2, cooperate to alter the
proliferation of neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient mast cells in vivo and
in vitro. J Exp Med 2001, 194:57e69

40. Yang FC, Chen S, Clegg T, Li X, Morgan T, Estwick SA, Yuan J,
Khalaf W, Burgin S, Travers J, Parada LF, Ingram DA, Clapp DW:
Nf1þ/- mast cells induce neuroﬁbroma like phenotypes through
secreted TGF-beta signaling. Hum Mol Genet 2006, 15:2421e2437
41. Kim HA, Rosenbaum T, Marchionni MA, Ratner N, DeClue JE:
Schwann cells from neuroﬁbromin deﬁcient mice exhibit activation of
p21ras, inhibition of cell proliferation and morphological changes.
Oncogene 1995, 11:325e335

42. Atit RP, Crowe MJ, Greenhalgh DG, Wenstrup RJ, Ratner N: The
Nf1 tumor suppressor regulates mouse skin wound healing, ﬁbroblast
proliferation, and collagen deposited by ﬁbroblasts. J Invest Dermatol
1999, 112:835e842

43. Korkiamaki T, Yla-Outinen H, Koivunen J, Karvonen SL, Peltonen J:
Altered calcium-mediated cell signaling in keratinocytes cultured
from patients with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Am J Pathol 2002, 160:
1981e1990

44. Kourea HP, Orlow I, Scheithauer BW, Cordon-Cardo C,
Woodruff JM: Deletions of the INK4A gene occur in malignant pe-
ripheral nerve sheath tumors but not in neuroﬁbromas. Am J Pathol
1999, 155:1855e1860

45. Nielsen GP, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO,

Ino Y, Moller MB,
Rosenberg AE, Louis DN: Malignant transformation of neuroﬁbromas in
neuroﬁbromatosis 1 is associated with CDKN2A/p16 inactivation. Am J
Pathol 1999, 155:1879e1884

46. Mawrin C, Kirches E, Boltze C, Dietzmann K, Roessner A,
Schneider-Stock R: Immunohistochemical and molecular analysis of
p53, RB, and PTEN in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Virchows Arch 2002, 440:610e615

47. Mantripragada KK, Spurlock G, Kluwe L, Chuzhanova N, Ferner RE,
Frayling IM, Dumanski JP, Guha A, Mautner V, Upadhyaya M:
High-resolution DNA copy number proﬁling of malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors using targeted microarray-based comparative
genomic hybridization. Clin Cancer Res 2008, 14:1015e1024

48. Gregorian C, Nakashima J, Dry SM, Nghiemphu PL, Smith KB,
Ao Y, Dang J, Lawson G, Mellinghoff IK, Mischel PS, Phelps M,
Parada LF, Liu X, Sofroniew MV, Eilber FC, Wu H: PTEN dosage is
essential
trans-
formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009, 106:19479e19484

for neuroﬁbroma development and malignant

49. Bradtmoller M, Hartmann C, Zietsch J, Jaschke S, Mautner VF,
Kurtz A, Park SJ, Baier M, Harder A, Reuss D, von Deimling A,
Heppner FL, Holtkamp N: Impaired Pten expression in human ma-
lignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours. PLoS One 2012, 7:e47595
50. Danielsen SA, Lind GE, Kolberg M, Holand M, Bjerkehagen B,
Sundby Hall K, van den Berg E, Mertens F, Smeland S, Picci P,
Lothe RA: Methylated RASSF1A in malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors identiﬁes neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 patients with infe-
rior prognosis. Neuro Oncol 2015, 17:63e69

51. Yang J, Ylipaa A, Sun Y, Zheng H, Chen K, Nykter M, Trent J,
and molecular

Ratner N, Lev DC, Zhang W: Genomic

The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org

475

Carroll

characterization of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor iden-
tiﬁes the IGF1R pathway as a primary target for treatment. Clin
Cancer Res 2011, 17:7563e7573

52. Carroll SL, Stonecypher MS: Tumor suppressor mutations and
growth factor signaling in the pathogenesis of NF1-associated pe-
ripheral nerve sheath tumors: II. The role of dysregulated growth
factor signaling. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2005, 64:1e9

53. Nebesio TD, Ming W, Chen S, Clegg T, Yuan J, Yang Y,
Estwick SA, Li Y, Li X, Hingtgen CM, Yang FC: Neuroﬁbromin-
deﬁcient Schwann cells have increased lysophosphatidic acid
dependent survival and migration-implications for increased neuro-
ﬁbroma formation during pregnancy. Glia 2007, 55:527e536

54. Mo W, Chen J, Patel A, Zhang L, Chau V, Li Y, Cho W, Lim K,
Xu J, Lazar AJ, Creighton CJ, Bolshakov S, McKay RM, Lev D,
Le LQ, Parada LF: CXCR4/CXCL12 mediate autocrine cell- cycle
progression in NF1-associated malignant peripheral nerve sheath tu-
mors. Cell 2013, 152:1077e1090

55. Zietsch J, Ziegenhagen N, Heppner FL, Reuss D, von Deimling A,
Holtkamp N: The 4q12 amplicon in malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors: consequences on gene expression and implications for
sunitinib treatment. PLoS One 2010, 5:e11858

56. Forus A, Weghuis DO, Smeets D, Fodstad O, Myklebost O, van
Kessel AG: Comparative genomic hybridization analysis of human
sarcomas: I. Occurrence of genomic imbalances and identiﬁcation of
a novel major amplicon at 1q21-q22 in soft tissue sarcomas. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 1995, 14:8e14

57. Lothe RA, Karhu R, Mandahl N, Mertens F, Saeter G, Heim S,
Borresen-Dale AL, Kallioniemi OP: Gain of 17q24-qter detected by
comparative genomic hybridization in malignant tumors from patients
with von Recklinghausen’s neuroﬁbromatosis. Cancer Res 1996, 56:
4778e4781

58. Mechtersheimer G, Otano-Joos M, Ohl S, Benner A, Lehnert T,
Willeke F, Moller P, Otto HF, Lichter P, Joos S: Analysis of chro-
mosomal imbalances in sporadic and NF1-associated peripheral nerve
sheath tumors by comparative genomic hybridization. Genes Chro-
mosomes Cancer 1999, 25:362e369

59. Mertens F, Rydholm A, Bauer HF, Limon J, Nedoszytko B,
Szadowska A, Willen H, Heim S, Mitelman F, Mandahl N: Cyto-
genetic ﬁndings in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Int J
Cancer 1995, 61:793e798

60. Mertens F, Dal Cin P, De Wever I, Fletcher CD, Mandahl N,
Mitelman F, Rosai J, Rydholm A, Sciot R, Tallini G, van Den
Berghe H, Vanni R, Willen H: Cytogenetic characterization of pe-
ripheral nerve sheath tumours: a report of the CHAMP study group. J
Pathol 2000, 190:31e38

61. Berner JM, Sorlie T, Mertens F, Henriksen J, Saeter G, Mandahl N,
Brogger A, Myklebost O, Lothe RA: Chromosome band 9p21 is
frequently altered in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors:
studies of CDKN2A and other genes of the pRB pathway. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 1999, 26:151e160

62. Schmidt H, Wurl P, Taubert H, Meye A, Bache M, Holzhausen HJ,
Hinze R: Genomic imbalances of 7p and 17q in malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors are clinically relevant. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 1999, 25:205e211

63. Schmidt H, Taubert H, Meye A, Wurl P, Bache M, Bartel F,
Holzhausen HJ, Hinze R: Gains in chromosomes 7, 8q, 15q and 17q
are characteristic changes in malignant but not in benign peripheral
nerve sheath tumors from patients with Recklinghausen’s disease.
Cancer Lett 2000, 155:181e190

64. Schmidt H, Taubert H, Wurl P, Bache M, Bartel F, Holzhausen HJ,
Hinze R: Cytogenetic characterization of six malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors: comparison of karyotyping and comparative
genomic hybridization. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 2001, 128:14e23
65. Kresse SH, Skarn M, Ohnstad HO, Namlos HM, Bjerkehagen B,
Myklebost O, Meza-Zepeda LA: DNA copy number changes in high-
grade malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors by array CGH. Mol
Cancer 2008, 7:48

66. Zhang M, Wang Y, Jones S, Sausen M, McMahon K, Sharma R,
Wang Q, Belzberg AJ, Chaichana K, Gallia GL, Gokaslan ZL,
Riggins GJ, Wolinksy JP, Wood LD, Montgomery EA, Hruban RH,
Kinzler KW, Papadopoulos N, Vogelstein B, Bettegowda C: Somatic
mutations of SUZ12 in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Nat
Genet 2014, 46:1170e1172

67. Lee W, Teckie S, Wiesner T, Ran L, Prieto Granada CN, Lin M,
Zhu S, Cao Z, Liang Y, Sboner A, Tap WD, Fletcher JA,
Huberman KH, Qin LX, Viale A, Singer S, Zheng D, Berger MF,
Chen Y, Antonescu CR, Chi P: PRC2 is recurrently inactivated
through EED or SUZ12 loss in malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors. Nat Genet 2014, 46:1227e1232

68. Miller SJ, Rangwala F, Williams J, Ackerman P, Kong S, Jegga AG,
Kaiser S, Aronow BJ, Frahm S, Kluwe L, Mautner V, Upadhyaya M,
Muir D, Wallace M, Hagen J, Quelle DE, Watson MA, Perry A,
Gutmann DH, Ratner N: Large-scale molecular comparison of human
schwann cells to malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor cell lines
and tissues. Cancer Res 2006, 66:2584e2591

69. Pasmant E, Luscan A, Varin J, Laurendeau I, Parfait B, Vidaud D:
Relevance of MPNST cell lines as models for NF1 associated-tumors.
J Neurooncol 2013, 114:353e355

70. Carroll SL, Ratner N: How does the Schwann cell lineage form tu-

mors in NF1? Glia 2008, 56:1590e1605

71. Maser RS, Choudhury B, Campbell PJ, Feng B, Wong KK,
Protopopov A, et al: Chromosomally unstable mouse tumours have
genomic alterations similar to diverse human cancers. Nature 2007,
447:966e971

72. Plaat BE, Molenaar WM, Mastik MF, Hoekstra HJ, te Meerman GJ, van
den Berg E: Computer-assisted cytogenetic analysis of 51 malignant
peripheral-nerve-sheath tumors: sporadic vs. neuroﬁbromatosis-type-1-
associated malignant schwannomas. Int J Cancer 1999, 83:171e178

73. Young NP, Crowley D, Jacks T: Uncoupling cancer mutations reveals
critical timing of p53 loss in sarcomagenesis. Cancer Res 2011, 71:
4040e4047

74. Yu H, Tardivo L, Tam S, Weiner E, Gebreab F, Fan C, Svrzikapa N,
Hirozane-Kishikawa T, Rietman E, Yang X, Sahalie J, Salehi-
Ashtiani K, Hao T, Cusick ME, Hill DE, Roth FP, Braun P, Vidal M:
Next-generation sequencing to generate interactome datasets. Nat
Methods 2011, 8:478e480

75. Maser RS, Choudhury B, Campbell PJ, Feng B, Wong KK,
Protopopov A, et al: Chromosomally unstable mouse tumours have
genomic alterations similar to diverse human cancers. Nature 2007,
447:966e971

76. Garber M, Grabherr MG, Guttman M, Trapnell C: Computational
methods for transcriptome annotation and quantiﬁcation using RNA-
seq. Nat Methods 2011, 8:469e477

77. Endersby R, Zhu X, Hay N, Ellison DW, Baker SJ: Nonredundant
functions for Akt isoforms in astrocyte growth and gliomagenesis in
an orthotopic
transplantation model. Cancer Res 2011, 71:
4106e4116

78. Varela

I, Klijn C, Stephens PJ, Mudie LJ, Stebbings L,
Galappaththige D, van der Gulden H, Schut E, Klarenbeek S,
Campbell PJ, Wessels LF, Stratton MR, Jonkers J, Futreal PA,
Adams DJ: Somatic structural rearrangements in genetically engi-
neered mouse mammary tumors. Genome Biol 2010, 11:R100

79. Kim M, Gans JD, Nogueira C, Wang A, Paik JH, Feng B, Brennan C,
Hahn WC, Cordon-Cardo C, Wagner SN, Flotte TJ, Duncan LM,
Granter SR, Chin L: Comparative oncogenomics identiﬁes NEDD9 as
a melanoma metastasis gene. Cell 2006, 125:1269e1281

80. Zender L, Spector MS, Xue W, Flemming P, Cordon-Cardo C,
Silke J, Fan ST, Luk JM, Wigler M, Hannon GJ, Mu D, Lucito R,
Powers S, Lowe SW: Identiﬁcation and validation of oncogenes in
liver cancer using an integrative oncogenomic approach. Cell 2006,
125:1253e1267

81. Uren AG, Kool J, Matentzoglu K, de Ridder J, Mattison J, van
Uitert M, Lagcher W, Sie D, Tanger E, Cox T, Reinders M,
Hubbard TJ, Rogers J, Jonkers J, Wessels L, Adams DJ, van

476

ajp.amjpathol.org - The American Journal of Pathology

Lohuizen M, Berns A: Large-scale mutagenesis in p19(ARF)- and
p53-deﬁcient mice identiﬁes cancer genes and their collaborative
networks. Cell 2008, 133:727e741

82. Starr TK, Allaei R, Silverstein KA, Staggs RA, Sarver AL,
Bergemann TL, Gupta M, O’Sullivan MG, Matise I, Dupuy AJ,
Collier LS, Powers S, Oberg AL, Asmann YW, Thibodeau SN,
Tessarollo L, Copeland NG,
Jenkins NA, Cormier RT,
Largaespada DA: A transposon-based genetic screen in mice iden-
tiﬁes genes altered in colorectal cancer. Science 2009, 323:
1747e1750

83. Dupuy AJ, Rogers LM, Kim J, Nannapaneni K, Starr TK, Liu P,
Largaespada DA, Scheetz TE, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG: A modi-
ﬁed sleeping beauty transposon system that can be used to model a
wide variety of human cancers in mice. Cancer Res 2009, 69:
8150e8156

84. Brannan CI, Perkins AS, Vogel KS, Ratner N, Nordlund ML,
Reid SW, Buchberg AM, Jenkins NA, Parada LF, Copeland NG:
Targeted disruption of the neuroﬁbromatosis type-1 gene leads to
developmental abnormalities in heart and various neural crest-derived
tissues. Genes Dev 1994, 8:1019e1029

85. Jacks T, Shih TS, Schmitt EM, Bronson RT, Bernards A,
Weinberg RA: Tumour predisposition in mice heterozygous for a
targeted mutation in Nf1. Nat Genet 1994, 7:353e361

86. Zhu Y, Ghosh P, Charnay P, Burns DK, Parada LF: Neuroﬁbromas in
NF1: Schwann cell origin and role of tumor environment. Science
2002, 296:920e922

87. Yang FC, Ingram DA, Chen S, Zhu Y, Yuan J, Li X, Yang X,
Knowles S, Horn W, Li Y, Zhang S, Yang Y, Vakili ST, Yu M,
Burns D, Robertson K, Hutchins G, Parada LF, Clapp DW: Nf1-
dependent tumors require a microenvironment containing Nf1þ/e
and c-kit-dependent bone marrow. Cell 2008, 135:437e448

88. Cichowski K, Shih TS, Schmitt E, Santiago S, Reilly K,
McLaughlin ME, Bronson RT, Jacks T: Mouse models of tumor
development
in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Science 1999, 286:
2172e2176

89. Vogel KS, Klesse LJ, Velasco-Miguel S, Meyers K, Rushing EJ,
Parada LF: Mouse tumor model for neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Science
1999, 286:2176e2179

90. Joseph NM, Mosher JT, Buchstaller J, Snider P, McKeever PE,
Lim M, Conway SJ, Parada LF, Zhu Y, Morrison SJ: The loss of Nf1
transiently promotes self-renewal but not tumorigenesis by neural
crest stem cells. Cancer Cell 2008, 13:129e140

91. King D, Yang G, Thompson MA, Hiebert SW: Loss of
neuroﬁbromatosis-1 and p19(ARF) cooperate to induce a multiple
tumor phenotype. Oncogene 2002, 21:4978e4982

92. Stonecypher MS, Byer SJ, Grizzle WE, Carroll SL: Activation of the
neuregulin-1/ErbB signaling pathway promotes the proliferation of

Oncogenomics in MPNST Models

neoplastic Schwann cells in human malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors. Oncogene 2005, 24:5589e5605

93. Kohli L, Kaza N, Lavalley NJ, Turner KL, Byer S, Carroll SL,
Roth KA: The pan erbB inhibitor PD168393 enhances lysosomal
dysfunction-induced apoptotic death in malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor cells. Neuro Oncol 2012, 14:266e277

94. Eckert JM, Byer SJ, Clodfelder-Miller BJ, Carroll SL: Neuregulin-1
beta and neuregulin-1 alpha differentially affect the migration and
invasion of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor cells. Glia 2009,
57:1501e1520

95. Huijbregts RP, Roth KA, Schmidt RE, Carroll SL: Hypertrophic
neuropathies and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in trans-
genic mice overexpressing glial growth factor beta3 in myelinating
Schwann cells. J Neurosci 2003, 23:7269e7280

96. Kazmi SJ, Byer SJ, Eckert JM, Turk AN, Huijbregts RP, Brossier NM,
Grizzle WE, Mikhail FM, Roth KA, Carroll SL: Transgenic mice over-
expressing neuregulin-1 model neuroﬁbroma-malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor progression and implicate speciﬁc chromosomal copy
number variations in tumorigenesis. Am J Pathol 2013, 182:646e667

97. Brosius SN, Turk AN, Byer SJ, Brossier NM, Kohli L, Whitmire A,
Mikhail FM, Roth KA, Carroll SL: Neuregulin-1 overexpression and
Trp53 haploinsufﬁciency cooperatively promote de novo malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor pathogenesis. Acta Neuropathol 2014,
127:573e591

98. Ling BC, Wu J, Miller SJ, Monk KR, Shamekh R, Rizvi TA,
Decourten-Myers G, Vogel KS, DeClue JE, Ratner N: Role for the
epidermal growth factor receptor in neuroﬁbromatosis-related pe-
ripheral nerve tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell 2005, 7:65e75

99. Keng VW, Watson AL, Rahrmann EP, Li H, Tschida BR,
Moriarity BS, Choi K, Rizvi TA, Collins MH, Wallace MR,
Ratner N, Largaespada DA: Conditional inactivation of Pten with
EGFR overexpression in Schwann cells models sporadic MPNST.
Sarcoma 2012, 2012:620834

100. Rahrmann EP, Moriarity BS, Otto GM, Watson AL, Choi K,
Collins MH, Wallace M, Webber BR, Forster CL, Rizzardi AE,
Schmechel SC, Ratner N, Largaespada DA: Trp53 haploinsufﬁciency
modiﬁes EGFR-driven peripheral nerve sheath tumorigenesis. Am J
Pathol 2014, 184:2082e2098

101. Rahrmann EP, Watson AL, Keng VW, Choi K, Moriarity BS,
Beckmann DA, Wolf NK, Sarver A, Collins MH, Moertel CL,
Wallace MR, Gel B, Serra E, Ratner N, Largaespada DA: Forward
genetic screen for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor formation
identiﬁes new genes and pathways driving tumorigenesis. Nat Genet
2013, 45:756e766

102. Kloosterman WP, Koster J, Molenaar JJ: Prevalence and clinical
implications of chromothripsis in cancer genomes. Curr Opin Oncol
2014, 26:64e72

The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org

477

