review

review
Merlin: a tumour suppressor with functions at the cell 
cortex and in the nucleus
Wei Li1*+, Jonathan Cooper1*, Matthias A. Karajannis2 & Filippo G. Giancotti1++
1Cell Biology Program, Sloan–Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, Memorial Sloan–Kettering Cancer Center, New York,  
and 2NYU Cancer Institute and Department of Pediatrics, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, USA

Inhibition of proliferation by cell-to-cell contact is essential for tis-
sue organization, and its disruption contributes to tumorigenesis. 
The  FERM  domain  protein  Merlin,  encoded  by  the  NF2  tumour 
suppressor gene, is an important mediator of contact inhibition. 
Merlin  was  thought  to  inhibit  mitogenic  signalling  and  activate 
the Hippo pathway by interacting with diverse target-effectors at 
or near the plasma membrane. However, recent studies highlight 
that Merlin pleiotropically affects signalling by migrating into the 
nucleus  and  inducing  a  growth-suppressive  programme  of  gene 
expression through its direct inhibition of the CRL4DCAF1 E3 ubiq-
uitin  ligase.  In  addition,  Merlin  promotes  the  establishment  of 
epithelial adhesion and polarity by recruiting Par3 and aPKC to 
E-cadherin-dependent junctions, and by ensuring the assembly of 
tight junctions. These recent advances suggest that Merlin acts at 
the cell cortex and in the nucleus in a similar, albeit antithetic, 
manner to the oncogene β-catenin.
Keywords: Merlin; type 2 neurofibromatosis; contact inhibition; 
tumour suppression; Hippo
EMBO reports (2012) 13, 204–215; published online 21 February 2012;  
doi:10.1038/embor.2012.11
See the Glossary for abbreviations used in this article.

Introduction
Normal cells cease to proliferate when they come into contact with 
each other and assemble stable intercellular junctions. Contact inhi-
bition of proliferation is essential for tissue organization and its loss 
is a characteristic of cancer [1]. Since its discovery as the tumour 
suppressor  that  is  inactivated  in  neurofibromatosis  type  2  (NF2) 
almost two decades ago [2,3], the FERM domain protein Merlin has 
emerged as a major effector of contact inhibition [4–7]. Furthermore, 
genetic  studies  in  mice  have  shown  that  Merlin  has  a  relatively 

1Cell Biology Program, Sloan–Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, Memorial Sloan–
Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, Box 216, New York, New York 10065, USA 
2NYU Cancer Institute and Department of Pediatrics, NYU Langone Medical Center, 
New York, New York 10016, USA 
*These authors contributed equally to this work 
+Corresponding author. Tel: +1 212 639 7044; Fax: +1 212 794 6236; 
E-mail: liw@mskcc.org 
++Corresponding author. Tel: +1 212 639 6998; Fax: +1 212 794 6236; 
E-mail: f-giancotti@ski.mskcc.org 

Received 23 October 2011; accepted 12 January 2012;  
published online 21 February 2012

broad tumour suppressor function (Sidebar A). In addition to NF2, 
loss of Merlin function contributes to the development of sporadic 
meningiomas, ependymomas and schwannomas, a significant frac-
tion of malignant pleural mesotheliomas, and a small subset of renal 
cell carcinomas, melanomas, glioblastomas and colorectal cancers 
in humans (Sidebar B; [8–14]). As for other oncogenic mutations, it 
remains unclear why loss of Merlin contributes to tumorigenesis in 
some but not other tissues (Sidebar C). Cell-type-specificity in the 
wiring of signalling pathways, previous accumulation of cooperat-
ing mutations and/or differences in the stromal microenvironment 
could all contribute to the tissue specificity of the phenotype.

Although Nf2-knockout embryos deteriorate at an early develop-
mental stage due to defects in extraembryonic structures [15], tissue-
specific ablation experiments have provided insight into some of the 
developmental roles of Merlin. Deletion of Nf2 in the skin causes 
defects in epithelial adhesion and polarity that disrupt its barrier func-
tion [16]. Inactivation of Nf2 in the liver causes a large expansion 
of progenitor cells, suggesting that Merlin inhibits stem-cell renewal 
or amplification [17,18]. Intriguingly, deletion of Nf2 in the entire 
haematopoietic  compartment  leads  to  an  expansion  of  progenitor 
cells that is largely secondary to the expansion of their perivascular 
niche [19], suggesting that Merlin can regulate stem-cell expansion 
by a non-cell-autonomous mechanism.

Merlin has significant sequence homology to members of the 
Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin  (ERM)  family  of  proteins,  which  in  their 
open  conformation  link  various  cell-adhesion  receptors  to  the  
cortical actin cytoskeleton [20]. On this basis, it has been argued 
that Merlin mediates both contact inhibition and tumour suppres-
sion  by  directly  modulating  mitogenic  signal  transduction  at  or 
near the plasma membrane [21,22]. Analysis of various cell types 
indicated that Merlin can potentially affect a variety of mitogenic 
pathways,  such  as  Rac–PAK  signalling  [7,23–25],  activation  of 
mTORC1 independently of Akt [26,27], the EGFR–Ras–ERK path-
[26,27], the EGFR–Ras–ERK path-
,27], the EGFR–Ras–ERK path-
way,  the  PI3K–Akt  pathway  and  FAK–Src  signalling  [28–31].  
In  addition,  genetic  studies  in  Drosophila  and  mice  showed  
that  Merlin  contributes  to  the  activation  of  the  Hippo  tumour- 
suppressor pathway [18,32,33].

Against the backdrop of this rich biology, recent studies have 
revealed that Merlin can interact with α-catenin and Par3 at nas-
cent adherens junctions [16], as well as with the scaffold and sig-
[16], as well as with the scaffold and sig-
, as well as with the scaffold and sig-
nalling protein Angiomotin at tight junctions [34]. In addition, it 
has become clear that Merlin translocates to the nucleus to modify 

204  

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION

The tumour suppressor Merlin

gene  expression  through  inhibition  of  the  E3  ubiquitin  ligase 
CRL4DCAF1 [35]. In this review, we discuss these recent results and 
the models of Merlin function they suggest, in an effort to provide  
a framework for future studies.

Merlin structure and modifications
ERM proteins consist of an amino-terminal FERM domain followed 
by  a  coiled-coil  segment  and  a  hydrophilic  tail  [20].  Although 
Merlin  has  the  same  domain  organization  and  considerable 
sequence  homology  to  canonical  ERM  proteins,  it  also  contains 
unique sequence motifs [36,37]. In particular, the FERM domain of 
Merlin contains an evolutionarily conserved Blue box motif (resi-
dues 177–183), which is absent in canonical ERM proteins, whereas 
the carboxy-terminal domain of the protein lacks a canonical actin-
binding motif that is present in all ERM proteins. In addition, Merlin 
has an extended 17 amino-acid-long N-terminal segment that is not 
found in other ERM proteins (Fig 1A).

Canonical ERM proteins are maintained in a dormant state by 
an intramolecular association between the FERM domain and the 
C-terminal tail [38–40]. In response to upstream activation of Rho, 
Rho kinase phosphorylates a threonine residue in the C-terminal 
domain  of  ERM  proteins,  disrupting  the  head-to-tail  associa-
tion that maintains the closed conformation (Fig 1B). Once ERM 
proteins  adopt  the  open  conformation,  their  FERM  domain  can 
associate  with  the  cytoplasmic  segment  of  cell-adhesion  recep-
tors—such as CD44 and ICAM—and their C-terminal domain can 
interact  with  actin  filaments,  regulating  the  organization  of  the 
cortical cytoskeleton [38,41,42].

Biochemical and mutational studies suggest that Merlin under-
goes  a  similar  conformational  transition  in  response  to  PAK-
mediated  phosphorylation  of  Ser  518  (Fig  1C;  [43]).  However, 
recent evidence suggests that additional post-translational modifi-
cations might be required to fully disengage the α-helical segment 
of Merlin from the FERM domain [44]. The putatively open form of 
Merlin might associate with the cytoskeleton by forming head-to-
tail heterodimers with canonical ERM proteins [45–47], as well as 
through additional potential mechanisms [48], whereas the closed 
form of Merlin seems to mediate growth inhibition in vitro and is 
thereby considered active [25,43,49–51]. Several lines of evidence 
support the latter point. Mutation of Ser 518 to alanine enhances 
the  growth  inhibitory  activity  of  Merlin,  whereas  its  change  to 
aspartic acid eliminates this activity [52]. Overexpression of a Blue 
box mutant form of Merlin—presumed to be constitutively open 
[37,39,40]—induces overproliferation in the wing of Drosophila, 
and the murine analogue promotes cellular transformation in vitro, 
both presumably through a dominant-negative mechanism [4,53]. 
Finally, numerous missense mutations detected in patients affected 
by NF2 map to the F2 segment of the FERM domain and the most 
parsimonious  truncation  mutants  lack  only  the  C-terminal  seg-
ment, which is predicted to interact with the F2 segment (Fig 2). 
Furthermore, structural considerations based on the analysis of the 
crystal structure of the closed form of Moesin—which is the only 
closed  structure  available—suggest  that  virtually  all  pathogenic 
missense  mutations  found  in  NF2,  including  the  few  affecting 
the α-helical portion of Merlin, disrupt the extended surface that  
mediates the interaction of the FERM domain with the C-terminal 
segment of the protein [39,40]. Interestingly, a recent study found 
that  Merlin  isoform  2—which  lacks  the  five  C-terminal  residues 
found in the canonical Merlin isoform 1 necessary for interdomain 

review

eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1
protein kinase B
adenosine monophosphate
atypical PKC
AXL receptor tyrosine kinase
cell division control protein 42 homologue
cullin-ring E3 ligase 4
chromosome region maintenance protein 1
DDB1- and CUL4-associated factor 1
DNA damage-binding protein 1
epidermal growth factor receptor
v-erb-b2 erythroblastic leukaemia viral oncogene homologue 2/3
Erbb2 interacting protein
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase
focal adhesion kinase
4.1 protein/Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin
human embryonic kidney 293
intercellular adhesion molecule
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor
kidney and brain protein
large tumour suppressor 1/2
Madine–Darby kidney cancer
mouse embryonic fibroblasts
membrane-organizing extension spike protein

Glossary
4E-BP1 
Akt 
AMP 
aPKC 
AXL 
Cdc42 
CRL4 
CRM1 
DCAF1 
DDB1 
EGFR 
ErbB2/3 
Erbin 
ERK 
FAK 
FERM 
HEK-293 
ICAM 
IGF1R 
Kibra 
Lats1/2 
MDCK 
MEFs 
Moesin 
MST1/2  macrophage stimulating 1/2
mTORC1/2  mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1/2
MYPT1 
PAK 
Pals1 
Par3 
Patj 
PDGFR 
PI3K 
PIKE-L 
PIP2 
PKA 
PKCα 
PP1δ 
PTEN 
Rac 
Ras 
Rich1 
Roc1/Rbx1  RING box protein 1
S6K1 
TAZ 
TEAD 
TGF-β 
TSC1/2 
YAP 

myosin phosphatase targeting subunit 1
p21-activated kinase
protein associated with Lin-7 1
partitioning defective 3 homologue
Pals1-associated tight junction protein
platelet-derived growth factor receptors
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
phosphoinositide 3-kinase enhancer isoform 1 
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
protein kinase A
protein kinase C alpha type 
serine/threonine-protein phosphatase PP1-δ catalytic subunit
phosphatase and tensin homologue
Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate
rat sarcoma
RhoGAP interacting with CIP4 homologues 1

S6 kinase 1
transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif  
TEA domain family member 
transforming growth factor-β
tuberous sclerosis complex 1/2
Yes-associated protein

binding in vitro [50]—suppresses Nf2–/– Schwann cell proliferation 
to the same extent as Merlin isoform 1 [54]. As these results contra-
[54]. As these results contra-
. As these results contra-
dict previous findings [50,55], further investigation is required to 
understand how Merlin’s conformation affects its activity and how 
Merlin isoform 2 functions (Sidebar C).

The levels of closed, active Merlin increase substantially in cells 
undergoing growth arrest due to contact inhibition, loss of matrix 
adhesion, deprivation of growth factors or exposure to hyaluronic 
acid [6,56], suggesting that Merlin integrates various anti-mitogenic 
signals  (Fig  3A).  Promitogenic  signals—which  are  initiated  by  
integrins  and  receptor  tyrosine  kinases  and  transduced  by  Cdc42 

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION 

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 205

review

The tumour suppressor Merlin

Sidebar A | Mouse models of NF2
Nf2-knockout mice succumb in utero, whereas heterozygous Nf2 mutant 
mice develop multiple malignancies, especially if an allele of p53 is 
simultaneously inactivated. The tumours arising in Nf2 mutant mice include 
hepatocellular carcinomas and osteosarcomas among others, but not 
schwannomas or meningiomas, suggesting that Merlin is a haploinsufficient 
tumour suppressor in several tissues [117]. Conditional biallelic 
inactivation of Nf2 in Schwann cells leads to Schwann cell hyperplasia and 
schwannoma formation [118], mimicking human neurofibromatosis type 2, 
which results from loss of heterozygosity at the Nf2 locus [8]. Furthermore, 
biallelic inactivation of Nf2 in arachnoidal cells leads to the formation 
of meningiomas, which have significant histological similarity to the 
corresponding human tumours [119]. In a similar fashion, Nf2+/– mice have 
increased sensitivity to the carcinogenic effect of inhaled asbestos [120], 
and conditional deletion of Nf2 in mesothelial cells cooperates with loss of 
Ink4a/Arf and p53 to drive malignant mesothelioma [121]. Biallelic loss 
of Merlin in the liver was recently shown to result in hepatomegaly and 
formation of malignant tumours [17,18]. Although the issue has not been 
completely resolved, it seems that biallelic Nf2 loss in the liver leads to the 
expansion of a progenitor population able to differentiate at least partly 
along the ductal lineage [99]. The complete penetrance observed in this 
model indicates that Merlin is a potent regulator of liver size and tumour 
suppression, and future studies using this model could provide great insight 
into the normal biological role of Merlin and its tumour suppressor activity.

and  Rac—activate  PAK,  which  directly  phosphorylates  Merlin  at 
Ser  518.  This  phosphorylation  disrupts  the  binding  between  the 
N-terminal FERM domain and the C-terminal tail, thereby inactivat-
ing Merlin [7,25]. Conversely, engagement of cadherins or loss of 
mitogenic signalling inactivates PAK, leading to an accumulation of 
the closed form of Merlin [56]. Although most studies have placed 
PAK upstream from Merlin, there is also evidence suggesting that 
Merlin can suppress PAK activation [24,57]. Recent studies suggest 
that this potential feed-forward mechanism is restricted to epithelial 
cells that express Erbin. Binding to Erbin allows Merlin to inactivate 
PAK2, disabling one branch of non-canonical TGF-β signalling [58]. 
Ser 518 can also be phosphorylated by PKA, suggesting that Merlin 
can also be inactivated by the cyclic AMP–PKA pathway, a signalling 
axis that regulates gene expression, cell growth and cell cycle pro-
gression  in  Schwann  cells  [59].  Increases  in  dephosphorylated 
Merlin might be a result not only of PAK inhibition but also of the 
activation of a Merlin phosphatase—such as MYPT1-PP1δ—which 
dephosphorylates  Ser  518,  thus  activating  Merlin  [26].  Over-
expression  of  CPI-17,  an  MYPT1  cellular  inhibitor,  induces  neo-
plastic  transformation  in  vitro,  underscoring  the  importance  of 
Ser  518  dephosphorylation  [29].  However,  whether  MYPT1-
mediated dephosphorylation of Merlin is necessary and sufficient 
for activation of Merlin in vivo remains to be determined.

Phosphorylation  at  Ser  518  seems  to  be  the  primary  post-
translational  modification  that  drives  the  activation–inactivation 
cycle.  Nevertheless,  additional  phosphorylation  events  or  other 
post-translational  modifications  might  be  required  to  disengage 
the  extended  contacts  that  the  α-helical  and  C-terminal  seg-
ments of Merlin form with the FERM domain in the closed con-
formation  (Sidebar  C;  [39]).  In  agreement  with  this  hypothesis, 
band-shift experiments suggest that Merlin is post-translationally 
modified at multiple sites in response to mitogenic stimuli [56]. 
Overexpression studies suggest that AKT can phosphorylate Merlin 
at Thr  230  and  Ser  315,  stabilizing  the  open  conformation  and 

1

17

Ser 10

(cid:40)

Merlin

Band 4.1

Ezrin

Radixin

Moesin

FERM domain
98

112

212 220

311

α-Helical domain

C-term 
domain
595

506

Thr 230

Ser 315

Ser 518

270

406

588

585

583

577

Unique N-term

F-actin binding

(cid:41)

(cid:42)

Open

Closed

P

MYPT1

PAK

Mer

CRL4DCAF1

PIP2

RhoK

P

F-actin

Binding of phosphatidylinositol 
4,5-bisphosphate and 
phosphorylation of C-terminal 
threonine

Nucleus

Dephosphorylation of Ser 518

ERM protein activation via 
reduced affinity between 
N-terminal FERM domain and 
C-terminus, unmasking of sites 
for binding F-actin and membrane 
proteins, promoting regulation 
of cortical actin cytoskeleton

Increased intramolecular assocation 
between N-terminal FERM domain 
and C-terminus maintains Merlin in 
a closed conformation, promoting 
nuclear translocation and growth 
inhibition

Fig 1 | Merlin and ERM protein domain organization and phosphoregulation. 
(A) Merlin and other canonical ERM proteins have similar domain organizations 
consisting of an amino-terminal (N-term) FERM domain that is divided into 
three subdomains, an α-helical coiled-coil domain and a carboxy-terminal 
(C-term) hydrophilic tail. Canonical ERM proteins contain an actin-binding 
C-terminal ERM-associated domain (C-ERMAD; pink), whereas Merlin does 
not. It also has an extended N-terminal motif (green) unique among ERM 
proteins, illustrating its divergent structure with respect to other ERM proteins. 
Merlin phosphorylation sites are indicated. (B) Canonical ERM proteins are 
maintained in an inactive state by intramolecular interaction between the 
C-terminal tail and FERM domain. Phosphorylation of a C-terminal threonine 
by Rho kinase—which might be aided by ERM protein recruitment to membrane 
regions rich in phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate—activates the protein by 
disrupting the head-to-tail interaction. (C) Conversely, Merlin’s dephosphorylated 
and closed form is active and functions in tumour suppression and contact 
inhibition. Phosphorylation by PAK and PKA at Ser 518 renders the protein 
inactive in its putatively open form. ERM, Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin; FERM, 4.1 
protein/Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin; MYPT1, myosin phosphatase targeting subunit 
1; PAK, p21-activated kinase; PKA, protein kinase A;  PIP2, phosphatidylinositol 
4,5-bisphosphate; RhoK, Ras homologue gene family, member K.

206  

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION

The tumour suppressor Merlin

review

disrupting  binding  to  PIKE-L—a  GTPase  that  binds  to  PI3K  and 
enhances its activity [60]. These observations suggest that consti-
[60]. These observations suggest that consti-
. These observations suggest that consti-
tutive activation of PI3K–Akt signalling, as occurs in cells lacking 
PTEN or carrying activating mutations in PI3K, could lead to inac-
tivation  of  Merlin  and  potentially  eliminate  a  negative-feedback 
loop that restrains the activation of PI3K. In addition, Akt-mediated 
phosphorylation  has  been  proposed  to  promote  Merlin  ubiqui-
tination  and  proteasome-mediated  degradation  [60].  However, 
the  significance  of  these  events  remains  unclear  because  cyclo-
heximide chase experiments suggest that endogenous Merlin is not 
significantly degraded by the ubiquitin–proteasome system (UPS; 
[35]). Finally, PKA phosphorylation of Ser 10 was recently shown 
to alter the organization of the actin cytoskeleton without affecting 
Ser 518 phosphorylation [61].

Merlin localization
Due  to  its  homology  with  classical  ERM  proteins  and  seemingly 
prevalent co-localization with cortical actin below the plasma mem-
brane, Merlin has been proposed to regulate mitogenic signalling by 
organizing  membrane  domains  [48]. The  accumulation  of  Merlin 
at cell-to-cell junctions in confluent epithelial and endothelial cells 
[5,7], within lamellipodia in various types of cell [62–64], and on the 
surface of endocytic vesicles in Drosophila epithelial tissues [53,65] 
is consistent with this general hypothesis (Sidebar C).

Recent  studies  have  shown  that  the  distribution  of  Merlin  can 
change  dynamically  in  response  to  various  signals  and  is  more 
diverse  than  previously  anticipated.  For  example,  analysis  of  the 
behaviour of the Blue box and the S518A mutant forms of Merlin 
suggests that the open conformer of Merlin generated by integrin-
mediated activation of PAK accumulates underneath matrix adhe-
sions  [7].  Skin-epithelium-specific  deletion  of  Merlin  in  mouse 
shows that the protein transiently associates with primordial inter-
cellular adhesions and regulates their maturation into adherens junc-
tions, as well as the formation of tight junctions [16]. Although this 
study failed to detect any association of Merlin with mature adher-
ens or tight junctions, another recent study indicated that Merlin is 
enriched at tight junctions in confluent MDCK cells and co-localizes 
with E-cadherin at the paranodes and Schmidt–Lanterman incisures 
of myelinating Schwann cells [34]. Finally, a significant fraction of 
Merlin is known to be associated with the soluble, cytosolic frac-
tion in many cell types [64,66], and a smaller amount can move to a 
detergent-insoluble fraction that has been interpreted as lipid rafts in 
response to contact inhibition [67].

The above results support the hypothesis that Merlin functions 
at or near the plasma membrane. Nevertheless, the closed form of 
Merlin has recently been shown to suppress tumorigenesis by trans-
locating  to  the  nucleus,  where  it  inhibits  the  E3  ubiquitin  ligase 
CRL4DCAF1 [35]. These findings are fully consistent with the widely 
held view that only the closed form of Merlin is able to suppress 
tumorigenesis [43,50,52] and with reports suggesting that Merlin 
shuttles in and out of the nucleus [68,69]. However, most previous 
studies had failed to detect Merlin in the nucleus, possibly because 
the  antibodies  used  are  directed  against  an  epitope  of  nuclear 
Merlin that is masked under standard fixation and permeabilization 
conditions. In fact, Merlin was observed in the nucleus in multiple 
cell types by using an antibody that recognizes its C-terminus and 
an  enhanced  permeabilization  technique  [35].  Similar  problems 
initially hampered the detection of β-catenin in the nucleus [70,71]. 
In addition, consistent with the nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling model, 

Sidebar B | Clinical features of NF2
Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder 
with an incidence of approximately 1 in 40,000. It is caused by inactivation 
of the NF2 gene located on chromosome 22q [2,3]. NF2 patients develop 
multiple central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral nervous system (PNS) 
tumours. The locations and types of CNS and PNS tumours seen in these 
patients are highly specific. Schwannomas arise from Schwann cells that 
form the myelin sheath surrounding the sensory and motor neurons. The 
hallmark of NF2 is the development of bilateral vestibular schwannomas (VS), 
which arise at the vestibular branch of the VIIIth cranial nerve. In addition 
to VS, most NF2 patients develop schwannomas in other locations, such 
as other cranial nerves and peripheral nerves, including nerve roots. Most 
NF2 patients experience progressive hearing loss in adolescence or young 
adulthood due to bilateral VS. Life-threatening neurological complications 
occur when these tumours reach a critical size. In addition, schwannomas 
involving other cranial nerves can impair swallowing, vision and facial 
function. Other CNS and PNS tumours seen in NF2 patients include 
meningiomas, which arise from arachnoid cap cells, and ependymomas, 
which arise from ependymal cells lining the ventricles and central spinal 
canal. There is a clear association between genotype and phenotype in NF2 
patients, with nonsense/frameshift mutations being associated with earlier 
onset of symptoms, larger tumour burden and shorter life expectancy [122]. 
Sporadic VS, which occur in non-NF2 patients, consistently lack expression 
of detectable Merlin [123], and genetic inactivation of the Nf2 gene also 
occurs in the majority of sporadic meningiomas [124–126], indicating 
similarities in tumour biology between sporadic and NF2-related VS and 
meningiomas. Sporadic VS have an incidence of roughly 3,000 per year in 
the USA, which seems to be rising [127], and sporadic meningiomas are the 
most common type of brain tumour, accounting for approximately 25% of 
primary intracranial tumours in the USA [128]. Despite major advances 
in neuroimaging and neurosurgical techniques over the past decades—
including microsurgery and stereotaxis —the neurosurgical management of 
NF2 patients remains challenging. The identification of effective drugs to treat 
these patients would also be relevant for large patient populations without 
NF2, as there is no known effective treatment option for unresectable or 
progressive sporadic meningiomas.

Merlin was recently found to move along microtubules towards the 
nucleus in Drosophila, in a kinesin-1- and dynein-dependent man-
ner [72]. Thus, Merlin could potentially have a similar mechanism 
of intracellular transport in mammals (Sidebar C). Although Merlin 
does not have a canonical nuclear localization sequence, a dele-
tion mutant lacking four amino acids near the N-terminus does not 
localize to the nucleus, suggesting that these residues are essential 
for  Merlin  nuclear  translocation  (W.L.  and  F.G.G.,  unpublished 
observation). In addition, Merlin contains a motif in exon 15 that 
promotes export via the CRM1–exportin pathway [68], and trun-
[68], and trun-
 and trun-
cation  mutants  lacking  this  sequence  have  a  prominent  nuclear 
localization [35,54]. In the closed form, intramolecular interactions 
could block the recognition of this export sequence, contributing to 
Merlin nuclear translocation.

Recent  mutational  analyses  have  attempted  to  distinguish 
between plasma membrane and nuclear models of Merlin func-
tion. Merlin has been reported to associate with the plasma mem-
brane by binding to phosphoinositides, particularly PIP2, through 
six charged residues within the FERM domain that are conserved 
in  other  ERM  proteins.  Although  the  interaction  of  Merlin  with 
phospho inositides is dispensable for Ser 518 phosphoregulation, it 
seems necessary for Merlin’s localization to the plasma membrane 
and for some aspects of growth suppression [73]. In addition, dele-
[73]. In addition, dele-
. In addition, dele-
tion of the 17 N-terminal residues that are not found in other ERM 

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION 

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 207

The tumour suppressor Merlin

E106G

V219M

F119del
L141P
A211D

L234R
H242D
E270G

Q324L
T352M
L360P
E392V
K413E
E463K

K533T
L535P

review

K42P
K44N
L46R
F47L
F62S
L64P
M77V
K79E
F96del

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
u
M

F1

F2

F3

1

17

98

112

212 220

311

FERM domain

(cid:95)-Helical domain

506

595

C-term domain

Fig 2 | Merlin missense mutations and single residue deletions in NF2. The position, frequency and type of mutation are plotted on a schematic diagram of Merlin. 
The pathogenicity of mutations supported by biological evidence is shown in pink, by genetic evidence in grey and by both biological and genetic evidence in 
brown. These mutations either correlate with disease in multiple members of a family, are found in two or more unrelated patients and/or there is biological 
evidence of their pathogenicity. Data were obtained from Ahronowitz et al, 2007 [18] and Li et al, 2010 [35]. FERM, 4.1 protein/Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin.

closed to the putatively open form of Merlin?

changes?

Sidebar C | In need of answers
(i)  What is the atomic structure of unphosphorylated, closed Merlin?
(ii)  What is the impact of tumour-derived missense mutations?
(iii)  Which conformational changes underlie the transition from the 
 
(iv)  Which post-translational events drive these conformational 
 
(v)  What are the mechanisms that govern the association of Merlin with 
 
the cortical cytoskeleton at various subcellular locations?
(vi)  Which mechanisms govern Merlin nuclear entry and exit?
(vii)  Does Merlin mediate contact inhibition and tumour suppression 
 
(viii)  How does Merlin contribute to each of these two functions?
(ix)  Why does Merlin deficiency drive tumour development in only a 
 
(x)  Which oncogenic mutations cooperate with inactivation of Merlin  
 

subset of tissue types and anatomical locations?

through distinct or overlapping mechanisms?

to drive tumorigenesis in sensitive tissues?

proteins has been shown to prevent the association of Merlin with 
the  cortical  cytoskeleton  in  confluent  hepatocytes,  preventing 
downregulation of EGFR [21]. However, an elegant analysis of a 
series of Merlin–Ezrin chimeric constructs revealed that the sup-
pression  of  proliferation  exerted  by  Merlin  does  not  require  this 
N-terminal  sequence  or  association  with  the  actin  cytoskeleton 
in Schwann cells, which are a primary target of  NF2-dependent 
tumori genesis  [54].  In  fact,  this  study  has  confirmed  that  the 
sequences of Merlin that are involved in the intramolecular inter-
action—the F2 subdomain of the FERM domain and the C-terminal 
segment—are essential for growth inhibition in Schwann cells.

Inhibition of receptor tyrosine kinase activation
Merlin has been proposed to suppress proliferation by reducing the 
amount  of  transmembrane  growth  factor  receptors  at  the  plasma 
membrane [22,74,75]. Genetic analysis in Drosophila showed that 
Merlin, cooperating with the FERM domain protein Expanded, pro-
motes  endocytosis  of  several  transmembrane  receptors,  including 

some  involved  in  mitogenic  signalling  [75].  Imaginal  epi thelial 
cells lacking functional Merlin and Expanded have elevated lev-
els  of  Notch,  EGFR,  Patched,  Smoothened  and  DE-cadherin  at 
their surface. Pulse–chase labelling of Notch in living tissue indi-
cated that Notch protein clearance from the membrane and deg-
radation is deficient in these double mutant cells. This suggested 
that Merlin, cooperating with Expanded, controls the clearance of 
transmembrane  receptors,  regardless  of  their  activation  status. A 
similar phenomenon was observed in mouse Schwann cells, which 
were found to accumulate elevated levels of ErbB2, ErbB3, IGF1R 
and PDGFR at their surface when Nf2 is deleted [74]. However, at 
least in Schwann cells, loss of Merlin was proposed to not decrease 
internalization  but  rather  accelerate  export  of  membrane  recep-
tors to the cell surface. Thus, although the results of both studies 
attribute  to  Merlin  a  role  in  regulating  subcellular  trafficking  of 
multiple  transmembrane  receptors,  the  underlying  mechanisms 
appear to be divergent. Genetic studies in Drosophila indicate that 
such trafficking regulation functions through the Hippo signalling  
pathway [76,77], as receptor accumulation on the surface of imagi-
[76,77], as receptor accumulation on the surface of imagi-
, as receptor accumulation on the surface of imagi-
nal epithelial cells can similarly be seen when other components of 
the Hippo pathway are depleted. Importantly, such accumulation 
depends on Yorkie [77]. Finally, studies on contact inhibition sug-
[77]. Finally, studies on contact inhibition sug-
. Finally, studies on contact inhibition sug-
gest that Merlin controls EGFR signalling by regulating the avail-
ability  of  activatable  EGFR  at  the  cell  surface  [21,22]. Activated 
EGFR was found to partition in a higher density membrane frac-
tion in MEFs, osteoblasts and liver-derived cells that have become 
fully confluent. Loss of Merlin attenuates this effect, leading to the 
hypothesis  that  Merlin  sequesters  EGFR  at  a  specific  membrane 
compartment where the activated receptor cannot access its down-
stream targets. Notably, membrane extracts, rather than total cell 
lysates, were used to examine the activation state of downstream 
signalling  components—such  as  ERK  and Akt—leaving  open  the 
question  of  whether  effectors  in  the  cytosolic  compartment  are 
also influenced. Thus, both genetic studies in Drosophila and cell 
biological studies in mammalian cells support the hypothesis that 
Merlin controls the number of activatable growth factor receptors 

208  

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION

The tumour suppressor Merlin

(cid:40)

CD44

Cadherins

Active
Mer

Nucleus

MYPT1

PAK

P

Mer

Inactive

Ligand

GPCR

Active
Mer

cAMP

Nucleus

PKA

PAK

P

Mer

Inactive

Rac

Integrins

(cid:95) (cid:96)

Receptor 
tyrosine kinases

review

(cid:41)

RTK 
transport

EGFR

Kibra

Mer

P

Sav1

Mst 1/2

P

P

Mob1

Lats 1/2

14-3-3

P

P

YAP/TAZ

Rac

Mer

mTORC1

PAKs

Mer

SOS

RAS

ERK

PIKE-L

PI3K

AKT

Cytoplasmic
retention,
degradation

PP2A

YAP/TAZ

TEAD

Mer

CRL4DCAF1

Fig 3 | Merlin activation and downstream signalling. The convergence of several upstream adhesion receptors regulates Merlin (Mer) activation and subsequently 
controls downstream mitogenic pathways. (A) The assembly of cell-to-cell adhesions and CD44 activation by hyaluronic-acid-rich matrix activates MYPT1, 
which dephosphorylates Merlin Ser 518 and maintains it in a closed and active conformation. Conversely, in sparse cells exposed to growth factors, integrins and 
receptor tyrosine kinases activate PAK, phosphorylating Ser 518. PKA—activated by increased cAMP—also phosphorylates Ser 518. (B) Merlin can affect a variety 
of mitogenic signalling pathways, including Rac–PAK signalling, mTORC1, EGFR–Ras–ERK and the PI3K–Akt pathway. In addition, Merlin contributes to the 
activation of the Hippo tumour-suppressor pathway. The active form of Merlin can enter the nucleus, bind to and inactivate the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4DCAF1. 
Akt,  protein kinase B; cAMP, cyclic AMP; CRL4, cullin-ring E3 ligase 4; DCAF1, DDB1- and CUL4-associated factor 1; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; 
ERK, extracellular-signal-regulated kinase; mTORC1, mammalian target of Rapamycin complex 1; MYPT1, myosin phosphatase targeting subunit 1; PAK, p21-
activated kinase; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PKA, protein kinase A; Rac, Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate; Ras, rat sarcoma.

at the cell surface (Fig 3B), but the biochemical mechanisms under-
lying this phenomenon are unclear and its significance in tumour 
suppression remains to be tested (Sidebar C).

Inhibition of Rac signalling
It has long been known that cultured schwannoma and meningioma 
cells have abundant lamellipodia and membrane ruffles, which are 
reminiscent of fibroblasts expressing activated forms of Rac [78–80]. 
Loss  of  Merlin  was  later  shown  to  activate  Rac  signalling,  which 
has been attributed to the release of negative regulation that Merlin 
exerts on PAK, consistent with the hypothesis that Merlin functions 
both  upstream  and  downstream  from  PAK  in  a  positive  feedback 
loop (Fig 3B; [7,23–25,79]). Furthermore, biochemical and imaging 
studies indicated that the closed form of Merlin inhibits the recruit-
ment of Rac to the plasma membrane in confluent cells [7]. Notably, 
inactivation of Merlin enables normal confluent cells to exit contact 
inhibition  and  re-enter  the  cell  cycle,  which  could  occur  at  least 
partly through the activation of Rac signalling [7]. In agreement with 

this model, the expression of a membrane-targeted, but not constitu-
tively active, form of Rac enables exit from contact inhibition, albeit 
not as efficiently as inactivation of Merlin [7]. Another mechanism 
for the regulation of Rac signalling by Merlin was recently reported 
[34]. Merlin can form a tight-junction-associated protein complex 
with Angiomotin, Patj and Pals1; Merlin binds tightly to Angiomotin 
and  displaces  Rich1,  a  small  GTPase-activating  protein  (GAP)  for 
Rac1, thereby inhibiting Rac1 and PAK. As anticipated from previ-
ous studies, inhibition of PAK attenuates Raf to ERK signalling [7]. 
These results suggest that loss of Merlin activates Rac signalling by 
multiple, potentially synergistic mechanisms. 

Inhibition of mTORC1 signalling
Merlin  is  a  negative  regulator  of  the  mTORC1  kinase  complex, 
which regulates cell growth, proliferation, motility and survival by 
phosphorylating  p70–S6K1  and  4E-BP1  [81].  Integrin-mediated 
adhesion was found to promote activation of mTORC1 signalling 
through PAK-mediated inactivation of Merlin, and Merlin-deficient 

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION 

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 209

review

The tumour suppressor Merlin

mesothelioma  cell  lines  were  shown  to  have  activated  mTORC1 
signalling, whereas other cell lines do not [27]. Similarly, consti-
[27]. Similarly, consti-
. Similarly, consti-
tutive  activation  of  mTORC1  signalling  was  found  in  meningi-
oma and vestibular schwannoma cells from NF2 patients [26,27]. 
Surprisingly, loss of Merlin was shown to activate mTORC1 inde-
pendently  of  AKT  or  ERK,  which  activate  mTORC1  signalling  in 
response to various mitogenic stimuli. Furthermore, re-expression of 
Merlin attenuates mTORC1 activity in Merlin-deficient cells, which 
requires  the TSC1–TSC2  complex. The  mechanism  by  which  loss 
of Merlin induces hyperactivation of mTORC1 remains unknown. 
However, recent studies have shown that Rac can recruit mTORC1 
to  the  plasma  membrane  [82],  raising  the  possibility  that  Merlin 
antagonizes mTORC1 signalling by limiting Rac recruitment to the 
plasma  membrane  (Fig  3B;  [7]). The  significance  of  mTORC1  as 
an important downstream effector of Merlin is emphasized by the 
observation that the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin inhibits the pro-
liferation of meningioma cells from NF2 patients and mesothelioma 
cells lacking Merlin [26,27].

(Lats1/2)—has  been  well  characterized 

Activation of the Hippo pathway
Increasing  evidence  implicates  the  Hippo  signalling  pathway  as 
a  major  mediator  of  contact  inhibition  of  growth.  In  agreement 
with this model, genetic analysis in Drosophila and mice showed 
that  this  pathway  restrains  cell  proliferation  and  promotes  apop-
tosis to limit organ size and suppress tumorigenesis [83–85]. The 
core  kinase  cascade  of  this  pathway—Hippo  (MST1/2)–Salvador 
(WW45)–Warts 
in 
Drosophila  and  is  conserved  in  mammals,  whereas  its  upstream 
regulation, which is rather complex, seems to have diverged after 
the separation of arthropods and chordates. In Drosophila, the atyp-
ical cadherin Fat and the apical polarity protein Crumbs activate the 
core kinase cascade through the FERM domain protein Expanded 
[84,86].  Interestingly,  genetic  epistasis  experiments  showed  that 
Merlin cooperates with Expanded to activate the Hippo pathway 
in the fly [32]. Mammalian cells lack a clear functional homologue 
of Fat [87,88]. A recent study suggested that the FERM6/Willin pro-
[87,88]. A recent study suggested that the FERM6/Willin pro-
. A recent study suggested that the FERM6/Willin pro-
tein—which  is  a  putative  homologue  of  human  Expanded—can 
activate the Hippo pathway in HEK-293 cells [89], but this prop-
[89], but this prop-
, but this prop-
erty of FERM6 cannot be recapitulated in the human breast can-
cer  cell  line  MDA-MB-231,  in  which  FERM6  expression  inhibits 
proliferation [90]. Therefore, whether FERM6/Willin is a functional 
homologue  of  Expanded  is  still  uncertain.  Similarly,  engagement 
of  E-cadherin  has  been  reported  to  be  sufficient  to  activate  the 
Hippo pathway in human MCF10A mammary epithelial cells and 
MDA-MB-231 cells [91]. However, studies in the HaCaT human 
keratinocyte cell line did not support this role of E-cadherin in acti-
vation of the Hippo pathway [92], so the issue remains unresolved. 
Nevertheless, loss of Crumbs [93] or the tight junction component 
Angiomotin [94–96] inactivates the Hippo pathway in mammalian 
cells,  suggesting  that  signals  originating  from  both  adherens  and 
tight junctions can contribute to its activation.

Although several studies support the hypothesis that Merlin can 
activate  the  Hippo  pathway,  the  molecular  mechanisms  remain 
largely  undefined.  Overexpression  of  Merlin  promotes  phospho-
rylation and nuclear extrusion of YAP, a downstream target of the 
Hippo kinase cascade [33,94], which functions as a co-activator of 
TEAD transcription factors (Fig 3B; [97,98]). By contrast, silencing 
of  Merlin  induces TEAD-dependent  transcription  [92]. Two  stud-
[92]. Two  stud-
. Two  stud-
ies  have  recently  shown  that  liver-specific  deletion  of  Nf2  using 

albumin-Cre results in massive liver overgrowth, followed by the 
development  of  multiple  malignant  tumours  that  seem  to  arise 
from hyperplastic lesions of a relatively differentiated ductal pop-
ulation  [99],  and  finally  overt  hepatocellular  carcinoma  [17,18]. 
Interestingly,  simultaneous  deletion  of  Yap  suppresses  liver  over-
growth and the ensuing tumorigenesis in Nf2 mutant mice [18]. This 
effect is remarkable, as loss of a single Yap allele is sufficient to sup-
press liver overgrowth and tumorigenesis triggered by Nf2 loss, sug-
gesting that YAP is necessary for this Merlin-deficient phenotype. 
This robust genetic evidence, and the fact that Nf2 deficiency in 
the liver reduces YAP phosphorylation, suggests that Merlin could 
regulate YAP signalling [18]. However, as YAP is necessary for the 
expansion of liver epithelial progenitors [18], its deficiency might 
suppress Merlin-dependent tumorigenesis by reducing the size of 
the  stem  cell  or  transit-amplifying  compartment  that  sustains  the 
enlargement of the liver, as well as its subsequent neoplastic trans-
formation. Furthermore, treatment with the EGFR kinase inhibitor 
Erlotinib inhibits AKT activation and reduces hepatic tumour cell 
proliferation in mice with a liver-specific deletion of Nf2, suggest-
ing that upregulation of EGFR signalling might also contribute to 
tumour development [17]. Although most of the genetic evidence 
suggests  that YAP  is  necessary  for  liver  overgrowth  and  tumori-
genesis driven by loss of Merlin [18], further studies will be needed 
to compare the effect of conditional ablation of YAP or the EGFR on 
hepatomegaly and liver tumorigenesis. It will also be important to 
assess whether YAP is necessary for tumorigenesis in other mouse 
models of Merlin-deficient tumorigenesis.

Several  mechanisms  have  been  invoked  to  explain  the  effect 
that  Merlin  exerts  on  YAP-dependent  transcription.  Two  addi-
tional upstream components of the Hippo pathway in Drosophila 
have  been  recently  identified:  Kibra  [100–102]  and  Angiomotin 
[94–96].  Genetic  analysis  in Drosophila suggests that Kibra func-
tions upstream from the Hippo kinase cascade. Although Merlin is 
required for some functions of Kibra, including control of organ size 
[100], evidence supports that both Kibra and Merlin cooperate with 
Expanded. Indeed, Merlin, Expanded and Kibra interact to form a 
protein complex [100–102] that subsequently binds to the Hippo–
Salvador  complex  [102]. The  biochemical  mechanism  under lying 
this  interaction  and  how  it  can  activate  the  kinase  cascade  are 
unknown, but overexpression studies suggest that Merlin can bind 
to Kibra and activate the canonical Hippo kinase cascade also in 
mammalian cells (Fig 3B; [18]).

Angiomotin has been shown to have a distinct role in Hippo sig-
nalling in mammalian cells [94–96,103]. It localizes to primordial 
tight  junctions  in  response  to  the  assembly  of  the  apical  polarity 
complex [104] and retains YAP and the related co-activator TAZ at 
the cell cortex, preventing them from acting in the nucleus [96,103]. 
Furthermore,  it  has  been  suggested  that  Angiomotin  can  also  
bind to Mst2 and Lats2 and function as a scaffold to enhance signal 
propagation through the canonical kinase cascade to YAP [94].

Nuclear inhibition of CRL4DCAF1
Tandem affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry showed 
that  wild-type  Merlin—but  not  mutants  obtained  from  tumours, 
such as L64P—interacts with the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4DCAF1 with 
high  affinity  [35].  Merlin  binds  directly  to  DCAF1,  the  substrate 
receptor  subunit  of  CRL4DCAF1,  and  inhibits  CRL4DCAF1-mediated 
ubiquitination of target proteins. The closed form of Merlin, which 
is able to mediate growth inhibition, translocates to the nucleus and 

210  

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION

The tumour suppressor Merlin

(cid:40)

(cid:41)

TJs

Crumbs

PALS1

(cid:42)

Kibra

1

Mst

AJs

Mer
(cid:95) cat

(cid:96) cat

14-3-3

P

YAP

LATS

P

YAP

P

YAP

2

PP2A

YAP

TEAD

J
T
A
P

Mer

1

Mst

LATS

2

AMOT

YAP

P

Rich

Rac

PAK

RAF

ERK

Assembly of adherens junctions (AJs)

Assembly of tight junctions (TJs)

review

AJs

P

Mer

Mer

PAK

Mer

CRL4DCAF1

(cid:95) (cid:96)

Engagement of cadherins 
Loss of integrin-mediated adhesion

1

2

Activation of canonical Hippo 
pathway via (cid:95)-catenin

Sequestration of phosphorylated 
YAP and protection from PP2A

1

2

Displacement of Rich and 
inhibition of Rac

Scaffolding of Hippo pathway 
components and sequestration of 
phosphorylated YAP

Inhibition of PAK, nuclear 
translocation of Merlin, and 
inhibition of CRL4DCAF1

Fig 4 | Emerging mechanisms of Merlin-mediated epithelial adhesion, polarity and inhibition of proliferation. (A) Merlin (Mer) is recruited to nascent adherens 
junctions by α-catenin and contributes to the activation of Hippo signalling by cooperating with Kibra to activate the classical core kinase cascade, or by enabling 
α-catenin to sequester phosphorylated YAP in the cytoplasm through 14-3-3 proteins. (B) Upon assembly of tight junctions, Merlin binds to Angiomotin and 
displaces the Rac GAP Rich, thereby inhibiting Rac. In addition, Merlin might assist Angiomotin in coordinating the activation of the Hippo core kinase cascade. 
(C) Engagement of E-cadherin or loss of integrin-mediated adhesion leads to inactivation of PAK, promoting an accumulation of the de-phosphorylated (active) 
form of Merlin. Active Merlin enters the nucleus and inhibits the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4DCAF1, thereby suppressing the expression of multiple pro-oncogenic genes. 
CRL4, cullin-ring E3 ligase 4; DCAF1, DDB1- and CUL4-associated factor 1; ERK, extracellular-signal-regulated kinase; LATS1/2, large tumour suppressor 1/2; 
Mst1/2, macrophage stimulating 1/2; PAK, p21-activated kinase; PALS1, protein associated with Lin-7 1; PATJ, Pals1-associated tight junction protein; Rac, Ras-related 
C3 botulinum toxin substrate; TEAD, TEA domain family member; YAP, Yes-associated protein.

binds to CRL4DCAF1, whereas the putatively open form, which is inac-
tive, does so to a much more limited extent. Genetic epistasis analy-
sis in human Schwann cells, endothelial cells, mesothelial cells and 
mouse schwannoma cells indicates that Merlin inhibits growth and 
suppresses  tumorigenesis  by  inhibiting  CRL4DCAF1.  For  example, 
depletion of DCAF1 blocked the hyperproliferation caused by loss of 
Merlin in human Schwann cells and endothelial cells. Conversely, 
enforced expression of a Merlin-insensitive mutant of DCAF1 coun-
teracted the anti-mitogenic effect of Merlin in human mesothelioma 
cells. In addition, re-expression of Merlin and silencing of DCAF1 
induced  an  overlapping  tumour-suppressive  gene  expression  pro-
gramme  in  Merlin-deficient  mouse  schwannoma  cells,  suggest-
ing that Merlin inactivation induces oncogenic gene expression by 
deregulating  CRL4DCAF1  activity.  Notably,  a  detailed  biochemical 
and functional analysis of several tumour-derived mutants of Merlin 
revealed  that  pathogenic  mutations  fall  into  three  main  classes: 
some of the missense mutants that map to the FERM domain are 
defective in nuclear translocation; others fail to bind to DCAF1; and 

the C-terminal truncation mutants accumulate in the nucleus and 
bind to DCAF1 but fail to suppress E3 ligase activity. Finally, deple-
tion  of  DCAF1  suppresses  the  ability  of  Merlin-deficient  schwan-
noma  cells  to  hyperproliferate  in  vitro,  to  grow  in  soft  agar  or  to 
form tumours after subcutaneous injection in nude mice. Together, 
these findings suggest that Merlin needs to enter the nucleus, bind 
to DCAF1 and suppress CRL4DCAF1 in order to inhibit tumorigenesis, 
although additional mechanisms are also possible.

CRL4DCAF1 belongs to a large subfamily of cullin-ring E3 ligases. 
These ligases consist of a catalytic subunit (Roc1/Rbx1), a scaffold 
(cullin 4), an adaptor protein (DDB1) and one of multiple WD40-
domain-containing substrate receptors [105,106]. DCAF1 is the sub-
105,106]. DCAF1 is the sub-
. DCAF1 is the sub-
strate receptor of CRL4DCAF1. Members of the CRL4 E3 ligase family 
regulate chromatin remodelling, DNA replication and the response 
to DNA damage. Although the physiological substrates of CRL4DCAF1 
have not yet been identified, gene expression analysis suggests that 
CRL4DCAF1 regulates a broad gene expression programme, consisting 
of more than 1,000 genes [35]. CRL4DCAF1 could exert this effect by 

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION 

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 211

review

The tumour suppressor Merlin

promoting the poly- or mono-ubiquitination of histones, chromatin-
remodelling  factors  or  transcription  factors,  as  it  has  been  estab-
lished for other members of the CRL4 subfamily [107–110]. Indirect 
targets  of  CRL4DCAF1  include  important  growth  regulators,  such  as 
receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), their downstream target-effectors, 
and  various  cell  cycle  regulators  and  anti-apoptotic  proteins.  For 
example, AXL, a RTK recently found to regulate mesothelioma pro-
liferation and invasiveness [111], seems to be inhibited at the tran-
[111], seems to be inhibited at the tran-
, seems to be inhibited at the tran-
scriptional level by Merlin expression as well as DCAF1 knockdown 
[35]. Irrespective of the specific mechanism by which CRL4DCAF1 reg-
ulates gene expression, the breadth of the oncogenic gene expres-
sion programme it induces and the identity of some of the genes 
regulated suggest that Merlin could suppress several mitogenic sig-
nalling pathways by inhibiting CRL4DCAF1. Notably, Merlin expres-
sion or silencing of DCAF1 coordinately regulates a subset of Hippo 
pathway target genes, suggesting a connection between CRL4 DCAF1 
and YAP-dependent transcription [35]. 

Cortical and nuclear models
In addition to rescuing normal cells from contact inhibition, loss 
of Merlin accelerates their transit through the G1 phase of the cell 
cycle [26,27,112], suggesting that Merlin functions as a brake on 
cell cycle progression in both sparse and confluent cells. In addi-
tion, Merlin promotes the maturation of adherens junctions and 
the assembly of tight junctions in skin epithelium [5,16], suggest-
[5,16], suggest-
, suggest-
ing that loss of Merlin can contribute to disruption of cell adhe-
sion and polarity during tumorigenesis. These observations imply 
that Merlin restrains tumorigenesis by promoting epithelial adhe-
sion  and  polarity  and  by  restraining  proliferation.  As  discussed 
above, Merlin exerts these effects through multiple, non-mutually 
exclusive mechanisms (Fig 4).

The first model of Merlin function, which emphasizes the role 
of contact inhibition in tumour suppression, places it downstream 
from  the  E-cadherin–catenin  complex  and  upstream  from  Hippo 
signalling (Fig 4A). In one variant of this model, Merlin is recruited 
to nascent adherens junctions by binding to α-catenin [16] and acti-
[16] and acti-
 and acti-
vates the canonical Hippo kinase cascade through Kibra [18,91]. 
In  the  other  variant,  Merlin  fosters  maturation  of  adherens  junc-
tions  [16],  enabling  α-catenin  to  bind  to  14-3-3  and  thereby  to 
the phosphorylated inactive form of YAP [92]. Disassembly of the 
junctions or loss of α-catenin—which is a tumour suppressor on its 
own [113]—releases phosphorylated YAP from adherens junctions. 
Finally, dephosphorylation by PP2A allows activation and nuclear 
accumulation  of  YAP  [92].  These  mechanisms  probably  medi-
[92].  These  mechanisms  probably  medi-
.  These  mechanisms  probably  medi-
ate  contact  inhibition,  but  their  contribution  to  Merlin-mediated 
tumour suppression remains to be examined.

The second model proposes that Merlin enforces contact inhi-
bition  and  suppresses  tumorigenesis  by  binding  to  Angiomotin 
(Fig  4B).  In  one  variant  of  this  model,  the  binding  of  Merlin  to 
Angiomotin  displaces  the  Rac  GAP  Rich,  suppressing  Rac–PAK 
signalling [34]. In another variant, binding of Merlin is necessary 
for  Angiomotin  to  function  as  a  scaffold  in  the  activation  of  the 
Hippo pathway. This latter possibility is consistent with the ability 
of Angiomotin to function as an upstream component of the Hippo 
pathway [94–96,103] but inconsistent with the fact that Angiomotin 
is required for tumour development in a xenograft model of NF2 
[34]. Although Merlin binding to Angiomotin might contribute to 
contact inhibition, as suggested by studies implicating inhibition of 
Rac in this process [7], its role in tumour suppression remains to be 

fully investigated. In fact, Merlin binds to Angiomotin through the 
α-helical and C-terminal segments, independently of whether it is in 
its open or closed conformation [34].

The  third  model  is  based  on  the  fact  that  the  closed  form  of 
Merlin  translocates  into  the  nucleus  to  bind  to  DCAF1—thereby 
suppressing  CRL4DCAF1-mediated  E3  ligase  activity—whereas  the 
putatively open form does not (Fig 4C; [35]). The contribution of 
this pathway to contact inhibition remains to be tested; however, its 
involvement in tumour suppression is supported by strong genetic 
evidence,  including  the  analysis  of  a  large  number  of  tumour-
derived  missense  mutants  of  Merlin.  Furthermore,  this  model  is 
compatible with a role for YAP in NF2-dependent tumorigenesis. 
In fact, the observation that some of the genes regulated by YAP are 
concordantly regulated by CRL4DCAF1 suggests that CRL4DCAF1 could 
regulate YAP-dependent transcription [35]. As Merlin can promote 
phosphorylation of YAP independently of MST1/2 [91], CRL4DCAF1 
could inhibit the Hippo pathway by acting on a target downstream 
from  MST.  In  addition,  CRL4DCAF1  probably  ubiquitinates  other 
targets. Future challenges include the identification of the physio-
logical  targets  of  CRL4DCAF1  and  understanding  how  it  regulates 
oncogenic gene expression.

Conclusions and perspectives
Recent studies strengthen the idea that Merlin can function in the 
nucleus as well as at the cell cortex. At the cell cortex, Merlin pro-
motes the assembly of cell junctions by recruiting Par3–aPKC [16] 
as well as by locally inhibiting Rac signalling [7,34]. Once formed, 
both adherens and tight junctions can function as signalling hubs 
for  the  initiation  of  antimitogenic  signals.  Merlin  can  contrib-
ute to the initiation of some of these signals through interactions 
with Kibra, α-catenin or Angiomotin at the cell cortex, although 
additional signals are probably required to enforce contact inhi-
bition. In particular, inactivation of PAK allows the accumulation 
of the closed form of Merlin, which migrates into the nucleus to 
inhibit CRL4DCAF1 and induce a growth-suppressive programme of 
gene expression [35]. Conversely, mitogenic stimulation induces 
activation  of  PAK  and  thereby  accumulation  of  the  putatively 
open  form  of  Merlin,  which  remains  in  the  cytoplasm,  remov-
ing a block to cell cycle progression [7,25]. Taken together, these 
findings  suggest  that  Merlin-mediated  tumour  suppression  func-
tions in an opposite manner to the Wnt–β-catenin signalling path-
way  [114,115].  Confirmation  of  this  general  model  will  require 
a careful assessment of the contribution of each of the signalling 
mechanisms outlined above to both contact inhibition and tumour 
suppression (Sidebar C). Considering the recent progress made in 
this field, it is reasonable to anticipate a quick answer to the most 
important outstanding questions. With a more definitive view of 
Merlin-mediated tumour suppression, it will be possible to design 
therapies that inhibit the oncogenic signalling pathways activated 
by the loss of Merlin [116].

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We apologize to colleagues whose work could not be cited here due to space 
limitations. We thank members of our laboratory for discussions. This work 
was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant R01 CA152975 (to 
F.G.G.) and Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA08748. W.L. is the recipient 
of a Young Investigator Award from the Children’s Tumor Foundation.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

212  

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION

The tumour suppressor Merlin

REFERENCES
1.  Hanahan D, Weinberg R (2011) Hallmarks of cancer: the next 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

generation. Cell 144: 646–674
Rouleau GA et al (1993) Alteration in a new gene encoding a putative 
membrane-organizing protein causes neuro-fibromatosis type 2. Nature 
363: 515–521
Trofatter J, MacCollin M, Rutter J, Murrell J (1993) A novel moesin-, 
exrin-, radixin-like gene is a candidate for the neurofibromatosis 2 
tumor-suppressor. Cell 72: 791–800
Johnson KC, Kissil JL, Fry JL, Jacks T (2002) Cellular transformation by a 
FERM domain mutant of the Nf2 tumor suppressor gene. Oncogene 21: 
5990–5997
Lallemand D, Curto M, Saotome I, Giovannini M, McClatchey AI (2003) 
NF2 deficiency promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis by destabilizing 
adherens junctions. Genes Dev 17: 1090–1100

6.  Morrison H, Sherman LS, Legg J, Banine F, Isacke C, Haipek CA, 

Gutmann DH, Ponta H, Herrlich P (2001) The NF2 tumor suppressor 
gene product, merlin, mediates contact inhibition of growth through 
interactions with CD44. Genes Dev 15: 968–980

8. 

7.  Okada T, Lopez-Lago M, Giancotti FG (2005) Merlin/NF-2 mediates 
contact inhibition of growth by suppressing recruitment of Rac to the 
plasma membrane. J Cell Biol 171: 361–371
Ahronowitz I, Xin W, Kiely R, Sims K, MacCollin M, Nunes FP (2007) 
Mutational spectrum of the NF2 gene: a meta-analysis of 12 years of 
research and diagnostic laboratory findings. Hum Mutat 28: 1–12
Bianchi AB et al (1994) Mutations in transcript isoforms of the 
neurofibromatosis 2 gene in multiple human tumour types. Nat Genet 6: 
185–192

9. 

10.  Cheng JQ, Lee WC, Klein MA, Cheng GZ, Jhanwar SC, Testa JR (1999) 

Frequent mutations of NF2 and allelic loss from chromosome band 
22q12 in malignant mesothelioma: evidence for a two-hit mechanism of 
NF2 inactivation. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 24: 238–242

11.  Dalgliesh GL et al (2010) Systematic sequencing of renal carcinoma 

12. 

reveals inactivation of histone modifying genes. Nature 463: 360–363
Jacoby LB, MacCollin M, Barone R, Ramesh V, Gusella JF (1996) 
Frequency and distribution of NF2 mutations in schwannomas. Genes 
Chromosomes Cancer 17: 45–55

13.  Lau Y-KI, Murray LB, Houshmandi SS, Xu Y, Gutmann DH, Yu Q (2008) 

Merlin is a potent inhibitor of glioma growth. Cancer Res 68: 5733–5742

14.  Rustgi AK, Xu L, Pinney D, Sterner C, Beauchamp R, Schmidt S, 

Gusella JF, Ramesh V (1995) Neurofibromatosis 2 gene in human 
colorectal cancer. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 84: 24–26

15.  McClatchey AI, Saotome I, Ramesh V, Gusella JF, Jacks T (1997) The 
Nf2 tumor suppressor gene product is essential for extraembryonic 
development immediately prior to gastrulation. Genes Dev 11:  
1253–1265

16.  Gladden AB, Hebert AM, Schneeberger EE, McClatchey AI (2010) 

The NF2 tumor suppressor, merlin, regulates epidermal development 
through the establishment of a junctional polarity complex. Dev Cell 19: 
727–739

17.  Benhamouche S, Curto M, Saotome I, Gladden AB, Liu CH, 

Giovannini M, McClatchey AI (2010) Nf2/merlin controls progenitor 
homeostasis and tumorigenesis in the liver. Genes Dev 24: 1718–1730
18.  Zhang N, Bai H, David KK, Dong J, Zheng Y, Cai J, Giovannini M, Liu P, 

Anders RA, Pan D (2010) The merlin/NF2 tumor suppressor functions 
through the YAP oncoprotein to regulate tissue homeostasis in mammals. 
Dev Cell 19: 27–38

19.  Larsson J, Ohishi M, Garrison B, Aspling M, Janzen V, Adams GB, 

Curto M, McClatchey AI, Schipani E, Scadden DT (2008) Nf2/
merlin regulates hematopoietic stem cell behavior by altering 
microenvironmental architecture. Cell Stem Cell 3: 221–227

20.  Bretscher A, Edwards K, Fehon RG (2002) ERM proteins and merlin: 

integrators at the cell cortex. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3: 586–599

21.  Cole BK, Curto M, Chan AW, McClatchey AI (2008) Localization to the 
cortical cytoskeleton is necessary for Nf2/merlin-dependent epidermal 
growth factor receptor silencing. Mol Cell Biol 28: 1274–1284

22.  Curto M, Cole BK, Lallemand D, Liu CH, McClatchey AI (2007) Contact-

dependent inhibition of EGFR signaling by Nf2/merlin. J Cell Biol 177: 
893–903

23.  Kaempchen K, Mielke K, Utermark T, Langmesser S, Hanemann CO 
(2003) Upregulation of the Rac1/JNK signaling pathway in primary 
human schwannoma cells. Hum Mol Genet 12: 1211–1221

review

26. 

25. 

24.  Kissil JL, Wilker EW, Johnson KC, Eckman MS, Yaffe MB, Jacks T (2003) 
Merlin, the product of the Nf2 tumor suppressor gene, is an inhibitor of 
the p21-activated kinase, Pak1. Mol Cell 12: 841–849
Shaw RJ et al (2001) The Nf2 tumor suppressor, merlin, functions in Rac-
dependent signaling. Dev Cell 1: 63–72
James MF, Han S, Polizzano C, Plotkin SR, Manning BD, Stemmer-
Rachamimov AO, Gusella JF, Ramesh V (2009) NF2/merlin is a novel 
negative regulator of mTOR complex 1, and activation of mTORC1 is 
associated with meningioma and schwannoma growth. Mol Cell Biol 29: 
4250–4261
Lopez-Lago MA, Okada T, Murillo MM, Socci N, Giancotti FG (2009) 
Loss of the tumor suppressor gene NF2, encoding merlin, constitutively 
activates integrin-dependent mTORC1 signaling. Mol Cell Biol 29:  
4235–4249

27. 

28.  Ammoun S, Flaiz C, Ristic N, Schuldt J, Hanemann CO (2008) 

Dissecting and targeting the growth factor-dependent and growth factor-
independent extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway in human 
schwannoma. Cancer Res 68: 5236–5245
Jin H, Sperka T, Herrlich P, Morrison H (2006) Tumorigenic transformation 
by CPI-17 through inhibition of a merlin phosphatase. Nature 442:  
576–579

29. 

30.  Poulikakos PI, Xiao GH, Gallagher R, Jablonski S, Jhanwar SC, Testa JR 

(2006) Re-expression of the tumor suppressor NF2/merlin inhibits 
invasiveness in mesothelioma cells and negatively regulates FAK. 
Oncogene 25: 5960–5968

31.  Rong R, Tang X, Gutmann DH, Ye K (2004) Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) 
tumor suppressor merlin inhibits phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase through 
binding to PIKE-L. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101: 18200–18205

32.  Hamaratoglu F, Willecke M, Kango-Singh M, Nolo R, Hyun E, Tao C, 

Jafar-Nejad H, Halder G (2006) The tumour-suppressor genes NF2/merlin 
and expanded act through Hippo signalling to regulate cell proliferation 
and apoptosis. Nat Cell Biol 8: 27–36

33.  Zhao B et al (2007) Inactivation of YAP oncoprotein by the Hippo 

pathway is involved in cell contact inhibition and tissue growth control. 
Genes Dev 21: 2747–2761

34.  Yi C et al (2011) A tight junction-associated merlin–angiomotin 

35. 

36. 

37. 

complex mediates merlin’s regulation of mitogenic signaling and tumor 
suppressive functions. Cancer Cell 19: 527–540
Li W et al (2010) Merlin/NF2 suppresses tumorigenesis by inhibiting the 
E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4(DCAF1) in the nucleus. Cell 140: 477–490
Fehon RG, McClatchey AI, Bretscher A (2010) Organizing the cell cortex: 
the role of ERM proteins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11: 276–287
Shimizu T, Seto A, Maita N, Hamada K, Tsukita S, Tsukita S, Hakoshima T 
(2002) Structural basis for neurofibromatosis type 2. Crystal structure of 
the merlin FERM domain. J Biol Chem 277: 10332–10336

39. 

38.  Gary R, Bretscher A (1995) Ezrin self-association involves binding of 
an N-terminal domain to a normally masked C-terminal domain that 
includes the F-actin binding site. Mol Biol Cell 6: 1061–1075
Li Q, Nance MR, Kulikauskas R, Nyberg K, Fehon R, Karplus PA, 
Bretscher A, Tesmer JJG (2007) Self-masking in an intact ERM-merlin 
protein: an active role for the central [alpha]-helical domain. J Mol Biol 
365: 1446–1459

40.  Pearson MA, Reczek D, Bretscher A, Karplus PA (2000) Structure of 

the ERM protein moesin reveals the FERM domain fold masked by an 
extended actin binding tail domain. Cell 101: 259–270

41.  Heiska L, Alfthan K, Gronholm M, Vilja P, Vaheri A, Carpen O (1998) 

Association of ezrin with intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and -2 
(ICAM-1 and ICAM-2). J Biol Chem 273: 21893–21900

42.  Tsukita S, Oishi K, Sato N, Sagara J, Kawai A (1994) ERM family members 

as molecular linkers between the cell surface glycoprotein CD44 and 
actin-based cytoskeletons. J Cell Biol 126: 391–401

43.  Rong R, Surace EI, Haipek CA, Gutmann DH, Ye K (2004) Serine 518 

phosphorylation modulates merlin intramolecular association and 
binding to critical effectors important for NF2 growth suppression. 
Oncogene 23: 8447–8454

44.  Hennigan RF, Foster LA, Chaiken MF, Mani T, Gomes MM, Herr AB, 

Ip W (2010) Fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis of merlin 
conformational changes. Mol Cell Biol 30: 54–67

45.  Gronholm M, Sainio M, Zhao F, Heiska L, Vaheri A, Carpen O (1999) 

Homotypic and heterotypic interaction of the neurofibromatosis 2 tumor 
suppressor protein merlin and the ERM protein ezrin. J Cell Sci 112: 
895–904

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION 

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 213

review

The tumour suppressor Merlin

46.  Meng J-J, Lowrie DJ, Sun H, Dorsey E, Pelton PD, Bashour A-M, Groden J, 

68.  Kressel M, Schmucker B (2002) Nucleocytoplasmic transfer of the NF2 

Ratner N, Ip W (2000) Interaction between two isoforms of the NF2 
tumor suppressor protein, merlin, and between merlin and ezrin, suggests 
modulation of ERM proteins by merlin. J Neurosci Res 62: 491–502

tumor suppressor protein merlin is regulated by exon 2 and a CRM1-
dependent nuclear export signal in exon 15. Hum Mol Genet 11:  
2269–2278

47.  Nguyen R, Reczek D, Bretscher A (2001) Hierarchy of merlin and ezrin 

69.  Muranen T, Gronholm M, Renkema GH, Carpen O (2005) Cell cycle-

N- and C-terminal domain interactions in homo- and heterotypic 
associations and their relationship to binding of scaffolding proteins 
EBP50 and E3KARP.J Biol Chem 276: 7621–7629

48.  McClatchey AI, Giovannini M (2005) Membrane organization and 
tumorigenesis—the NF2 tumor suppressor, merlin. Genes Dev 19:  
2265–2277

49.  Kissil JL, Johnson KC, Eckman MS, Jacks T (2002) Merlin phosphorylation 

50. 

by p21-activated kinase 2 and effects of phosphorylation on merlin 
localization. J Biol Chem 277: 10394–10399
Sherman L, Xu HM, Geist RT, Saporito-Irwin S, Howells N, Ponta H, 
Herrlich P, Gutmann DH (1997) Interdomain binding mediates tumor 
growth suppression by the NF2 gene product. Oncogene 15: 2505–2509
51.  Xiao GH, Beeser A, Chernoff J, Testa JR (2002) p21-activated kinase links 

52. 

53. 

54. 

Rac/Cdc42 signaling to merlin. J Biol Chem 277: 883–886
Surace EI, Haipek CA, Gutmann DH (2004) Effect of merlin 
phosphorylation on neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) gene function. Oncogene 
23: 580–587
LaJeunesse DR, McCartney BM, Fehon RG (1998) Structural analysis 
of Drosophila merlin reveals functional domains important for growth 
control and subcellular localization. J Cell Biol 141: 1589–1599
Lallemand D, Saint-Amaux AL, Giovannini M (2009) Tumor-suppression 
functions of merlin are independent of its role as an organizer of the actin 
cytoskeleton in Schwann cells. J Cell Sci 122: 4141–4149

55.  Bashour AM, Meng JJ, Ip W, MacCollin M, Ratner N (2002) The 

neurofibromatosis type 2 gene product, merlin, reverses the F-actin 
cytoskeletal defects in primary human Schwannoma cells. Mol Cell Biol 
22: 1150–1157
Shaw RJ, McClatchey AI, Jacks T (1998b) Regulation of the 
neurofibromatosis type 2 tumor suppressor protein, merlin, by adhesion 
and growth arrest stimuli. J Biol Chem 273: 7757–7764

56. 

57.  Hirokawa Y, Tikoo A, Huynh J, Utermark T, Hanemann CO, 

Giovannini M, Xiao GH, Testa JR, Wood J, Maruta H (2004) A clue to 
the therapy of neurofibromatosis type 2: NF2/merlin is a PAK1 inhibitor. 
Cancer J 10: 20–26

58.  Wilkes MC, Repellin CE, Hong M, Bracamonte M, Penheiter SG, Borg JP, 
Leof EB (2009) Erbin and the NF2 tumor suppressor merlin cooperatively 
regulate cell-type-specific activation of PAK2 by TGF-beta. Dev Cell 16: 
433–444

59.  Alfthan K, Heiska L, Gronholm M, Renkema GH, Carpen O (2004) 

Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylates merlin at serine 
518 independently of p21-activated kinase and promotes merlin–ezrin 
heterodimerization. J Biol Chem 279: 18559–18566

60.  Tang X, Jang SW, Wang X, Liu Z, Bahr SM, Sun SY, Brat D, Gutmann DH, 
Ye K (2007) Akt phosphorylation regulates the tumour-suppressor merlin 
through ubiquitination and degradation. Nat Cell Biol 9: 1199–1207
Laulajainen M, Muranen T, Carpen O, Gronholm M (2008) Protein kinase 
A-mediated phosphorylation of the NF2 tumor suppressor protein merlin 
at serine 10 affects the actin cytoskeleton. Oncogene 27: 3233–3243

61. 

63. 

62.  Gonzalez-Agosti C, Xu L, Pinney D, Beauchamp R, Hobbs W, Gusella J, 
Ramesh V (1996) The merlin tumor suppressor localizes preferentially in 
membrane ruffles. Oncogene 13: 1239–1247
Scherer SS, Gutmann DH (1996) Expression of the neurofibromatosis 2 
tumor suppressor gene product, merlin, in Schwann cells. J Neurosci Res 
46: 595–605
Shaw RJ, McClatchey AI, Jacks T (1998a) Localization and functional 
domains of the neurofibromatosis type II tumor suppressor, merlin. Cell 
Growth Differ 9: 287–296

64. 

65.  McCartney B, Fehon R (1996) Distinct cellular and subcellular patterns 
of expression imply distinct functions for the Drosophila homologues of 
moesin and the neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor, merlin. J Cell Biol 
133: 843–852

66.  Xu L, Gonzalez-Agosti C, Beauchamp R, Pinney D, Sterner C, Ramesh V 
(1998) Analysis of molecular domains of epitope-tagged merlin isoforms 
in Cos-7 cells and primary rat Schwann cells. Exp Cell Res 238: 231–240
Stickney JT, Bacon WC, Rojas M, Ratner N, Ip W (2004) Activation of the 
tumor suppressor merlin modulates its interaction with lipid rafts. Cancer 
Res 64: 2717–2724

67. 

70. 

71. 

dependent nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of the neurofibromatosis 2 tumour 
suppressor merlin. Oncogene 24: 1150–1158
Funayama N, Fagotto F, McCrea P, Gumbiner BM (1995) Embryonic axis 
induction by the armadillo repeat domain of beta-catenin: evidence for 
intracellular signaling. J Cell Biol 128: 959–968
Schneider S, Steinbeisser H, Warga RM, Hausen P (1996) Beta-catenin 
translocation into nuclei demarcates the dorsalizing centers in frog and fish 
embryos. Mech Dev 57: 191–198

72.  Bensenor LB, Barlan K, Rice SE, Fehon RG, Gelfand VI (2010) Microtubule-
mediated transport of the tumor-suppressor protein merlin and its mutants. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107: 7311–7316

73.  Mani T, Hennigan RF, Foster LA, Conrady DG, Herr AB, Ip W (2011) FERM 

74. 

domain phosphoinositide binding targets merlin to the membrane and is 
essential for its growth-suppressive function. Mol Cell Biol 31: 1983–1996
Lallemand D, Manent J, Couvelard A, Watilliaux A, Siena M, Chareyre F, 
Lampin A, Niwa-Kawakita M, Kalamarides M, Giovannini M (2009) 
Merlin regulates transmembrane receptor accumulation and signaling at 
the plasma membrane in primary mouse Schwann cells and in human 
schwannomas. Oncogene 28: 854–865

75.  Maitra S, Kulikauskas RM, Gavilan H, Fehon RG (2006) The tumor 

suppressors merlin and expanded function cooperatively to modulate 
receptor endocytosis and signaling. Curr Biol 16: 702–709

76.  Genevet A, Polesello C, Blight K, Robertson F, Collinson LM, Pichaud F, 

Tapon N (2009) The Hippo pathway regulates apical-domain size 
independently of its growth-control function. J Cell Sci 122: 2360–2370

77.  Hamaratoglu F, Gajewski K, Sansores-Garcia L, Morrison C, Tao C, 

78. 

Halder G (2009) The Hippo tumor-suppressor pathway regulates apical-
domain size in parallel to tissue growth. J Cell Sci 122: 2351–2359
James MF, Lelke JM, Maccollin M, Plotkin SR, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, 
Ramesh V, Gusella JF (2008) Modeling NF2 with human arachnoidal 
and meningioma cell culture systems: NF2 silencing reflects the benign 
character of tumor growth. Neurobiol Dis 29: 278–292

79.  Pelton PD, Sherman LS, Rizvi TA, Marchionni MA, Wood P, Friedman RA, 

Ratner N (1998) Ruffling membrane, stress fiber, cell spreading and 
proliferation abnormalities in human schwannoma cells. Oncogene 17: 
2195–2209

80.  Rosenbaum C, Kluwe L, Mautner VF, Friedrich RE, Muller HW, 

Hanemann CO (1998) Isolation and characterization of Schwann cells 
from neurofibromatosis type 2 patients. Neurobiol Dis 5: 55–64

81.  Zoncu R, Efeyan A, Sabatini DM (2011) mTOR: from growth signal 

82. 

integration to cancer, diabetes and ageing. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12: 21–35
Saci A, Cantley LC, Carpenter CL (2011) Rac1 regulates the activity of 
mTORC1 and mTORC2 and controls cellular size. Mol Cell 42: 50–61
83.  Harvey K, Tapon N (2007) The Salvador–Warts–Hippo pathway—an 

emerging tumour-suppressor network. Nat Rev Cancer 7: 182–191

84.  Pan D (2010) The Hippo signaling pathway in development and cancer. 

Dev Cell 19: 491–505

85.  Zhao B, Li L, Lei Q, Guan K-L (2010) The Hippo–YAP pathway in organ 

size control and tumorigenesis: an updated version. Genes Dev 24:  
862–874

86.  Oh H, Irvine KD (2010) Yorkie: the final destination of Hippo signaling. 

Trends Cell Biol 20: 410–417

87.  Mao Y, Mulvaney J, Zakaria S, Yu T, Morgan KM, Allen S, Basson MA, 
Francis-West P, Irvine KD (2011) Characterization of a Dchs1 mutant 
mouse reveals requirements for Dchs1–Fat4 signaling during mammalian 
development. Development 138: 947–957
Saburi S, Hester I, Fischer E, Pontoglio M, Eremina V, Gessler M, 
Quaggin SE, Harrison R, Mount R, McNeill H (2008) Loss of Fat4 disrupts 
PCP signaling and oriented cell division and leads to cystic kidney disease. 
Nat Genet 40: 1010–1015

88. 

89.  Angus L et al (2012) Willin/FRMD6 expression activates the Hippo 

signaling pathway kinases in mammals and antagonizes oncogenic YAP. 
Oncogene 31: 238–250

90.  Visser-Grieve S, Hao Y, Yang X (2011) Human homolog of Drosophila 

expanded, hEx, functions as a putative tumor suppressor in human cancer 
cell lines independently of the Hippo pathway. Oncogene [Epub ahead of 
print] doi:10.1038/onc.2011.318

214  

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION

The tumour suppressor Merlin

review

91.  Kim N-G, Koh E, Chen X, Gumbiner BM (2011) E-cadherin mediates 
contact inhibition of proliferation through Hippo signaling-pathway 
components. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108: 11930–11935
Schlegelmilch K et al (2011) Yap1 acts downstream of [alpha]-catenin to 
control epidermal proliferation. Cell 144: 782–795

92. 

93.  Varelas X, Samavarchi-Tehrani P, Narimatsu M, Weiss A, Cockburn K, 

Larsen BG, Rossant J, Wrana JL (2010) The Crumbs complex couples cell 
density sensing to Hippo-dependent control of the TGF-[beta]–SMAD 
pathway. Dev Cell 19: 831–844

117.  McClatchey AI, Saotome I, Mercer K, Crowley D, Gusella JF, 

Bronson RT, Jacks T (1998) Mice heterozygous for a mutation at the Nf2 
tumor suppressor locus develop a range of highly metastatic tumors. 
Genes Dev 12: 1121–1133

118.  Giovannini M, Robanus-Maandag E, van der Valk M, Niwa-Kawakita M, 

Abramowski V, Goutebroze L, Woodruff JM, Berns A, Thomas G 
(2000) Conditional biallelic Nf2 mutation in the mouse promotes 
manifestations of human neurofibromatosis type 2. Genes Dev 14: 
1617–1630

94.  Paramasivam M, Sarkeshik A, Yates JR 3rd, Fernandes MJ, McCollum D 

119.  Kalamarides M, Niwa-Kawakita M, Leblois H, Abramowski V, 

(2011) Angiomotin family proteins are novel activators of the LATS2 kinase 
tumor suppressor. Mol Biol Cell 22: 3725–3733

95.  Wang W, Huang J, Chen J (2011) Angiomotin-like proteins associate with 

Perricaudet M, Janin A, Thomas G, Gutmann DH, Giovannini M 
(2002) Nf2 gene inactivation in arachnoidal cells is rate-limiting for 
meningioma development in the mouse. Genes Dev 16: 1060–1065

and negatively regulate YAP1. J Biol Chem 286: 4364–4370

120.  Fleury-Feith J, Lecomte C, Renier A, Matrat M, Kheuang L, 

96.  Zhao B, Li L, Lu Q, Wang LH, Liu C-Y, Lei Q, Guan K-L (2011) Angiomotin 

is a novel Hippo pathway component that inhibits YAP oncoprotein. 
Genes Dev 25: 51–63

97.  Vassilev A, Kaneko KJ, Shu H, Zhao Y, DePamphilis ML (2001) TEAD/TEF 

transcription factors utilize the activation domain of YAP65, a Src/Yes-
associated protein localized in the cytoplasm. Genes Dev 15: 1229–1241

98.  Zhao B et al (2008) TEAD mediates YAP-dependent gene induction and 

growth control. Genes Dev 22: 1962–1971

99.  Breuhahn K, Schirmacher P (2010) A cellular view of Nf2 in liver 

homeostasis and tumorigenesis. Dev Cell 19: 363–364

100.  Baumgartner R, Poernbacher I, Buser N, Hafen E, Stocker H (2010) The 

WW domain protein Kibra acts upstream of hippo in Drosophila. Dev Cell 
18: 309–316

101.  Genevet A, Wehr MC, Brain R, Thompson BJ, Tapon N (2010) Kibra is 
a regulator of the salvador/warts/hippo signaling network. Dev Cell 18: 
300–308

102.  Yu J, Zheng Y, Dong J, Klusza S, Deng WM, Pan D (2010) Kibra functions as 

a tumor suppressor protein that regulates hippo signaling in conjunction 
with merlin and expanded. Dev Cell 18: 288–299

103.  Chan SW, Lim CJ, Chong YF, Pobbati AV, Huang C, Hong W (2011) Hippo 

pathway-independent restriction of TAZ and YAP by angiomotin. J Biol 
Chem 286: 7018–7026

104.  Wells CD et al (2006) A Rich1/Amot complex regulates the Cdc42 GTPase 

and apical-polarity proteins in epithelial cells. Cell 125: 535–548

105.  Lee J, Zhou P (2007) DCAFs, the missing link of the CUL4-DDB1 ubiquitin 

ligase. Mol Cell 26: 775–780

106.  O’Connell BC, Harper JW (2007) Ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS): 

what can chromatin do for you? Curr Opin Cell Biol 19: 206–214

107.  Higa LA, Wu M, Ye T, Kobayashi R, Sun H, Zhang H (2006) CUL4-DDB1 

ubiquitin ligase interacts with multiple WD40-repeat proteins and 
regulates histone methylation. Nat Cell Biol 8: 1277–1283

108.  Jin J, Arias EE, Chen J, Harper JW, Walter JC (2006) A family of diverse 
Cul4–Ddb1-interacting proteins includes Cdt2, which is required for 
S phase destruction of the replication factor Cdt1. Mol Cell 23: 709–721

109.  Sugasawa K et al (2005) UV-induced ubiquitylation of XPC protein 
mediated by UV-DDB-ubiquitin ligase complex. Cell 121: 387–400
110.  Wertz IE, O’Rourke KM, Zhang Z, Dornan D, Arnott D, Deshaies RJ, 

Dixit VM (2004) Human de-etiolated-1 regulates c-Jun by assembling a 
CUL4A ubiquitin ligase. Science 303: 1371–1374

111.  Ou WB, Corson JM, Flynn DL, Lu WP, Wise SC, Bueno R, Sugarbaker DJ, 

Fletcher JA (2011) AXL regulates mesothelioma proliferation and 
invasiveness. Oncogene 30: 1643–1652

112.  Xiao GH, Gallagher R, Shetler J, Skele K, Altomare DA, Pestell RG, 
Jhanwar S, Testa JR (2005) The NF2 tumor suppressor gene product, 
merlin, inhibits cell proliferation and cell cycle progression by repressing 
cyclin D1 expression. Mol Cell Biol 25: 2384–2394

113.  Silvis MR, Kreger BT, Lien W-H, Klezovitch O, Rudakova GM, 

Camargo FD, Lantz DM, Seykora JT, Vasioukhin V (2011) {alpha}-Catenin 
is a tumor suppressor that controls cell accumulation by regulating the 
localization and activity of the transcriptional coactivator Yap1. Sci Signal 
4: ra33 

114.  Clevers H (2006) Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in development and disease. 

Cell 127: 469–480

115.  Nelson WJ, Nusse R (2004) Convergence of Wnt, beta-catenin, and 

cadherin pathways. Science 303: 1483–1487

116.  Ammoun S, Hanemann CO (2011) Emerging therapeutic targets in 

schwannomas and other merlin-deficient tumors. Nat Rev Neurol 7: 
392–399

Abramowski V, Levy F, Janin A, Giovannini M, Jaurand MC (2003) 
Hemizygosity of Nf2 is associated with increased susceptibility to 
asbestos-induced peritoneal tumours. Oncogene 22: 3799–3805

121.  Jongsma J, van Montfort E, Vooijs M, Zevenhoven J, Krimpenfort P, 

van der Valk M, van de Vijver M, Berns A (2008) A conditional mouse 
model for malignant mesothelioma. Cancer Cell 13: 261–271
122.  Selvanathan SK, Shenton A, Ferner R, Wallace AJ, Huson SM, 
Ramsden RT, Evans DG (2009) Further genotype–phenotype 
correlations in neurofibromatosis 2. Clin Genet [Epub ahead of print] 
doi:10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01327.x 

123.  Roche PH, Bouvier C, Chinot O, Figarella-Branger D (2008) Genesis 
and biology of vestibular schwannomas. Prog Neurol Surg 21: 24–31

124.  De Vitis LR, Tedde A, Vitelli F, Ammannati F, Mennonna P, 

Bigozzi U, Montali E, Papi L (1996) Screening for mutations in the 
neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) gene in sporadic meningiomas. Hum 
Genet 97: 632–637

125.  Lekanne Deprez RH et al (1995) Cytogenetic, molecular genetic and 
pathological analyses in 126 meningiomas. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 
54: 224–235

126.  Papi L, De Vitis LR, Vitelli F, Ammannati F, Mennonna P, Montali E, 

Bigozzi U (1995) Somatic mutations in the neurofibromatosis type 2 
gene in sporadic meningiomas. Hum Genet 95: 347–351

127.  Tos M, Stangerup SE, Caye-Thomasen P, Tos T, Thomsen J (2004) What is 
the real incidence of vestibular schwannoma? Arch Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 130: 216–220

128.  Claus EB, Bondy ML, Schildkraut JM, Wiemels JL, Wrensch M, Black PM 

(2005) Epidemiology of intracranial meningioma. Neurosurgery 57: 
1088–1095 

Jonathan Cooper, Filippo G. Giancotti & Wei Li

Matthias A. Karajannis

©2012 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION 

EMBO reports  VOL 13 | NO 3 | 2012 215

