VIEWS

     IN THE SPOTLIGHT    
  Paths  of Resistance to EGFR Inhibitors: Is NF Enough?    
    Ophélia     Maertens     1  ,  2    and     Karen     Cichowski     1  ,  2  ,  3   

       Summary:  Although the majority of patients with  EGFR -mutant lung cancer respond well to EGF receptor (EGFR) 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), all patients eventually develop resistance. The mechanism of acquired resistance 
is still unknown for a considerable subset of cases. This study reveals the  NF1  tumor suppressor gene as a new 
mediator of resistance to EGFR TKIs and provides a mechanistic rationale for developing combination therapies. 
Cancer Discov; 4(5); 519–21. ©2014 AACR.  
 See related article by de Bruin et al., p. 606 (4).               

    Activating  mutations  in   EGFR   occur  in  10%  to  15%  of 
human non–small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) and are the most 
prevalent  genetic  drivers  of  lung  cancer  in  never-smokers. 
Accordingly,  the  EGF  receptor  (EGFR)  tyrosine  kinase 
inhibitors  (TKI)  erlotinib  and  geﬁ tinib  have  been  approved 
for use in this molecular subtype of NSCLC ( 1 ). The majority 
(∼60%)  of  patients  with  lung  cancer  who  harbor  activating 
EGFR   mutations  respond  to  these  TKIs,  which  have  been 
shown  to  be  superior  to  conventional  chemotherapy  with 
respect to response rates and progression-free survival. How-
ever, in nearly all cases, tumors ultimately acquire resistance 
( 2 ).  Thus,  although  the  relative  success  of  EGFR  inhibitors 
represents  a  paradigm  for  developing  “effective”  targeted 
therapies, the overall median survival of patients with  EGFR -
mutant lung cancer is still only a little over 2 years. As such, 
identifying mechanisms of resistance to inform the develop-
ment of second-line therapies or more durable ﬁ rst-line treat-
ments is of paramount importance. 

 The  most  common  mechanism  of  resistance  to  EGFR 
TKIs is a secondary mutation in  EGFR  itself (T790M), which 
renders  the  activated  kinase  insensitive  to  these  agents  ( 1 ). 
T790M mutations account for 60% of cases of acquired resist-
ance to erlotinib and geﬁ tinib. Accordingly, agents that target 
the T790M-mutant kinase have been developed and are cur-
rently being evaluated in the clinic ( 2 ). However, several addi-
tional mechanisms of resistance have been reported, many of 
which impinge on the MEK–ERK or PI3K pathways (reviewed 
in refs.  1  and  2 ). Enhanced MET signaling caused by ampli-
ﬁ cation  of   MET   or  overexpression  of  its  ligand,  hepatocyte 
growth factor (HGF), has been found in EGFR TKI–resistant 
tumors.  Enhanced  MET  signaling  is  thought  to  promote 
resistance  by  preventing  effective  suppression  of  the  PI3K 
pathway.  Consistent  with  the  importance  of  PI3K  in  some 

    1 Genetics 

 Division,  Department  of  Medicine, 
  Authors’  Afﬁ  liations: 
Brigham  and  Women’s  Hospital;     2 Harvard  Medical  School;  and     3 Ludwig 
Center at Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts 
   Corresponding  Author:   Karen  Cichowski,  Brigham  and  Women’s  Hospi-
tal, 77  Avenue Louis Pasteur, Genetics-NRB 0458C, Boston, MA 02115. 
Phone: 617-525-4722; Fax: 617-525-5801; E-mail:  kcichowski@rics.bwh
.harvard.edu  
doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-0286
                    ©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.   

resistance  mechanisms,   PTEN   loss  and   PIK3CA   mutations 
have  been  detected  in  TKI-resistant  NSCLC  cell  lines  and 
patients,  albeit  with  low  frequency.  Conversely,  hyperactiva-
tion of the RAS–MEK–ERK pathway has also been implicated 
in EGFR TKI resistance, although the molecular mechanisms 
have  not  been  fully  elucidated.  Lung  cancers  with  acquired 
resistance to EGFR TKIs occasionally harbor activating  BRAF
mutations,  although   KRAS   and   NRAS   mutations  have  not 
been  observed.  More  recently,  hyperactivation  of  the  MEK 
pathway  has  been  shown  to  broadly  mediate  resistance  to 
mutant-speciﬁ c 
in  T790M-expressing  human 
and  mouse  cancers  via   MAPK1   ampliﬁ cation  and  suppres-
sion  of  feedback  mechanisms  ( 3 ).  Additional  mechanisms 
of resistance include AXL upregulation,  MED12  loss, IGF-IR 
upregulation,  and  HER2  activation  ( 1,  2 ).  Nevertheless,  the 
mechanism of acquired resistance is still unknown for about 
one third of resistant NSCLCs. Moreover, it is likely that het-
erogeneous tumors use multiple mechanisms. 

inhibitors 

 To  discover  new  mechanisms  of  resistance,  de  Bruin  and 
colleagues  ( 4 )  performed  a  genome-wide  RNA  interference 
screen to identify genes that when inactivated confer resist-
ance  to  erlotinib.  In  this  study,  published  in  this  issue  of 
 Cancer Discovery ,  the  authors  identiﬁ ed  the   NF1   tumor  sup-
pressor  as  one  such  gene,  and  then  validated  their  ﬁ ndings 
in  functional  cell-based  assays,  mouse  models,  and  human 
tumor samples. Importantly, these studies not only reveal a 
new resistance gene, but also provide a mechanistic rationale 
for developing potential combination therapies. 

  NF1  encodes a RAS GTPase-activating protein (RAS GAP) 
known  as  neuroﬁ bromin.  Accordingly,   NF1   mutations  or 
suppression trigger the activation of RAS and downstream 
 NF1
effector  pathways.  Loss-of-function  mutations  in 
underlie  the  familial  cancer  syndrome  neuroﬁ bromatosis 
type  I;  however,   NF1   plays  a  broader  role  in  sporadic  can-
cers and has been shown to be mutated and/or inactivated 
in  glioblastoma,  melanoma,  and  NSCLC,  among  others 
( 5–9 ).  Cellular  and/or  animal  models  have  established  a 
functional  role  for   NF1   inactivation  in  glioblastoma  and 
melanoma  ( 7,  8 ,   10 );  however,  this  is  the  ﬁ rst  study  to 
investigate  the  biologic  consequences  of   NF1   inactivation 
in lung cancer. 

 After  identifying   NF1   in  the  erlotinib  screen,  de  Bruin  
and  colleagues  (4)  conﬁ rmed  that   NF1   ablation  promoted 
resistance to erlotinib in both cell culture and xenograft models. 

 

MAY  2014(cid:2)CANCER DISCOVERY | 519 

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on January 28, 2015. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research. 

VIEWS

A

mEGFR

B

mEGFR

C

mEGFR

D

mEGFR

RAS

GDP

RAS

GTP

NF1

RAF

MEK

ERK

PI3K

AKT

mTOR

RTKi

RAS

GDP

RAS

GTP

PI3K

AKT

mTOR

NF1

RAF

MEK

ERK

RTKi

RAS

GDP

RAS

GTP

PI3K

AKT

mTOR

NF1

RAF

MEK

ERK

RTKi

RAS

GDP

RAS

GTP

NF1

RAF

MEKi

MEK

ERK

PI3K

AKT

mTOR

 Figure 1.       NF1  loss  confers resistance to EGFR TKIs in NSCLC. A, in the presence of activating  EGFR  mutations (mEGFR) the PI3K and ERK pathways 
are hyperactivated. B and C, EGFR TKIs suppress these pathways; however, when  NF1  is lost the MEK–ERK pathway cannot be effectively inhibited. 
D, cotargeting MEK resensitizes these tumors to EGFR inhibitors. Notably,  NF1  loss may also enhance resistance driven by secondary  EGFR  mutations as 
well as other RTKs. A thicker border around the hexagons indicates hyperactivation. RTKi, RTK  inhibitor; MEKi, MEK inhibitor.  

 

Using  an  inducible  transgenic  model  of  NSCLC,  they  also 
showed  that   Nf1   (mRNA)  was  signiﬁ cantly  downregulated 
in 10 of 18 tumors that had acquired resistance to erlotinib  
in  vivo ,  supporting  their  functional  cellular  studies  in  an 
independent  model.  To  evaluate  the  clinical  relevance  of 
these ﬁ ndings, the authors examined matched pre- and post-
EGFR  TKI-treated  human  tumor  samples  and  found  that 
 NF1   mRNA  levels  were  also  decreased  by  more  than  2-fold 
in 4 of 10 tumors that had acquired resistance to TKIs, with 
little  variation  of   NF1   expression  in  other  samples.  Finally, 
they  showed  that  low   NF1   mRNA  levels  in  tumors  from 
patients  before  EGFR  TKI  therapy  were  associated  with 
decreased overall median survival (7.6 vs. 19.1 months), sug-
gesting that the level of  NF1  expression may predict respon-
siveness to TKIs. 

 As  noted  previously,  several  mechanisms  of  resistance  to 
EGFR  inhibitors  have  been  reported,  many  of  which  affect 
PI3K–AKT  or  ERK  signaling.  Given  that  both  pathways  are 
regulated by the  NF1  tumor suppressor,  NF1  (loss) is uniquely 
poised to mediate resistance to EGFR TKIs. On a mechanistic 
level, de Bruin and colleagues ( 4 ) demonstrated that  NF1  loss 
confers  its  effects  by  hyperactivating  RAS  and,  conversely, 
that  the  catalytic  RAS  GAP  domain  is  sufﬁ cient  to  restore 
sensitivity  to  erlotinib.  The  authors  further  suggest  that  it 
is  the  hyperactivation  of  MEK–ERK,  or  more  precisely  the 
inability  of  erlotinib  to  completely  inhibit  ERK,  that  pro-
motes TKI resistance in NSCLC. Notably, combined erlotinib 
and selumetinib, a MEK inhibitor, exert more potent effects 
in  NF1 -deﬁ cient xenografts than erlotinib alone ( Fig. 1 ). Syn-
ergistic  effects  were  also  observed  in  the  transgenic  NSCLC 
model,  although  the  spectrum  of  resistance  mechanisms  in 
the  latter  model  is  likely  a  mix  of  both   Nf1 -  and  non- Nf1 –
related  events.  In  both  instances,  however,  it  is  difﬁ cult  to 
rule out a potential contributory role for the PI3K pathway, 
especially  under  physiologic   in  vivo   conditions,  where  the 
NF1–RAS–PI3K  axis  may  also  be  important.  Nevertheless, 
these  studies  clearly  demonstrate  that  aberrant  MEK–ERK 
pathway  activation,  which  is  triggered  by  loss  of   NF1 ,  is  an 
important mechanism that mediates resistance to erlotinib, 

suggesting that the combination of EGFR and MEK inhibi-
tors  may  be  more  effective  in   EGFR -mutant  NSCLC  than 
monotherapy ( Fig. 1 ). These drug combinations are currently 
being evaluated in the clinic, although increased toxicity has 
been observed in patients receiving both agents ( 4 ). The hope 
is  that  second-generation  mutant-speciﬁ c  EGFR  inhibitors 
might reduce this toxicity.  

 An additional interesting facet of this study is that  NF1  loss 
occurs in the context of both primary  EGFR  mutations and 
the secondary T790M mutation. In this respect, it is impor-
tant  to  be  precise  about  neuroﬁ bromin  function.  Loss  of 
 NF1  alone is not sufﬁ cient to promote RAS activation in the 
absence of growth factors. Instead, neuroﬁ bromin normally 
attenuates  RAS  signaling  downstream  of  speciﬁ c  growth 
factor  receptors.  As  such,  loss  of   NF1   might  be  expected 
to  enhance  signaling  downstream  of  EGFR T790M .  Similarly, 
it  is  conceivable  that   NF1   loss  may  cooperate  with  other 
mechanisms of resistance, amplifying signaling downstream 
of  other  receptor  tyrosine  kinases  (RTK)  such  as  MET  and 
HER2. Interestingly, NF1 seems to be playing a broader role 
in drug resistance. For example,  NF1  loss has been shown to 
confer  resistance  to  BRAF  inhibitors  in  melanoma  through 
both  the  PI3K  and  MEK  pathways  in  mouse  models  and 
in  human  cells,  and  the  NF1  protein  is  absent  in  a  subset 
of  BRAF  inhibitor–treated  human  tumors  ( 7 ).  Subsequent 
BRAF  inhibitor  resistance  screens  independently  identiﬁ ed 
 NF1  as a resistance gene ( 11, 12 ). Although sequencing studies 
have now conﬁ rmed that  NF1  is mutated in a subset of BRAF 
inhibitor–treated  melanomas  ( 12,  13 ),  to  date  homozygous 
mutations/deletions  have  not  been  observed.  However,  like 
PTEN, NF1 and other RAS GAPs are frequently inactivated 
by epigenetic and nongenetic mechanisms in cancer, and loss 
of NF1 protein expression seems to be more common than 
biallelic alterations in both melanoma and glioblastoma ( 6 , 
 8 ,  9 ). A similar paradigm may be occurring in NSCLC. In this 
study, the authors found no evidence of  NF1  mutations but 
readily  detected  suppression  of   NF1   mRNA  levels  in  EGFR 
TKI–resistant  human  and  mouse  tumors.  The  unanswered 
question  is  what  is  the  primary  mechanism  of   NF1   loss, 

520 | CANCER DISCOVERY(cid:3)MAY  2014 

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on January 28, 2015. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research. 

VIEWS

especially  in  the  context  of  drug  resistance?  Moreover,  how 
low must  NF1  levels be reduced to promote a phenotype? The 
current study reveals the  NF1  tumor suppressor gene as a new 
mediator  of  resistance  to  EGFR  TKIs,  although  additional 
work  is  required  to  discover  the  speciﬁ c  non-mutational 
mechanisms that inactivate  NF1 . In the meantime, the chal-
lenge will be to develop a reliable means of quantifying NF1 
suppression and to better understand the threshold and con-
sequences of reduced NF1 levels, so that these insights may 
ultimately be exploited in the clinic.  

 Disclosure of Potential Conﬂ  icts of Interest 

 No potential conﬂ icts of interest were  disclosed.    

  Published online May 2, 2014.

  REFERENCES  
       1.         Pao     W   ,    Chmielecki     J   .  Rational, biologically based treatment of EGFR-
mutant non–small-cell lung cancer .  Nat Rev Cancer     2010 ; 10 : 760 – 74 .  
      2.         Chong      CR   ,     Janne      PA   .   The  quest  to  overcome  resistance  to  EGFR-

targeted therapies in cancer .  Nat Med     2013 ; 19 : 1389 – 400 .  

      3.         Ercan     D   ,    Xu     C   ,    Yanagita     M   ,    Monast     CS   ,    Pratilas     CA   ,    Montero     J   ,   et al. 
   Reactivation  of  ERK  signaling  causes  resistance  to  EGFR  kinase 
inhibitors .  Cancer Discov     2012 ; 2 : 934 – 47 .  

      4.         de  Bruin      EC   ,     Cowell      C   ,     Warne      PH   ,     Jiang      M   ,     Saunders      RE   ,     Melnick   
  MA   ,   et al.    Reduced  NF1  expression confers resistance to EGFR inhibi-
tion in lung cancer .  Cancer Discov     2014;4:606–19  .  

      5.         Ding      L   ,     Getz      G   ,     Wheeler      DA   ,     Mardis      ER   ,     McLellan      MD   ,     Cibulskis   
  K   ,   et al.    Somatic mutations affect key pathways in lung adenocarci-
noma .  Nature     2008 ; 455 : 1069 – 75 .  

      6.         Hodis      E   ,     Watson      IR   ,     Kryukov      GV   ,     Arold      ST   ,     Imielinski      M   ,     Theuril-
lat      JP   ,    et  al.     A  landscape  of  driver  mutations  in  melanoma .   Cell   
  2012 ; 150 : 251 – 63 .  

      7.         Maertens     O   ,    Johnson     B   ,    Hollstein     P   ,    Frederick     DT   ,    Cooper     ZA   ,    Mes-
siaen     L   ,   et al.    Elucidating distinct roles for NF1 in melanomagenesis . 
 Cancer Discov     2013 ; 3 : 338 – 49 .  

      8.         McGillicuddy     LT   ,    Fromm     JA   ,    Hollstein     PE   ,    Kubek     S   ,    Beroukhim     R   , 
   De Raedt     T   ,   et al.    Proteasomal and genetic inactivation of the NF1 
tumor suppressor in gliomagenesis .  Cancer Cell     2009 ; 16 : 44 – 54 .  

      9.         Parsons     DW   ,    Jones     S   ,    Zhang     X   ,    Lin     JC   ,    Leary     RJ   ,    Angenendt     P   ,   et al. 
   An integrated genomic analysis of human glioblastoma multiforme . 
 Science     2008 ; 321 : 1807 – 12 .  

     10.         Zhu     Y   ,    Guignard     F   ,    Zhao     D   ,    Liu     L   ,    Burns     DK   ,    Mason     RP   ,   et al.    Early 
inactivation of p53 tumor suppressor gene cooperating with NF1 loss 
induces malignant astrocytoma .  Cancer Cell     2005 ; 8 : 119 – 30 .  

     11.         Wang     T   ,    Wei     JJ   ,    Sabatini     DM   ,    Lander     ES   .  Genetic screens in human 

cells using the CRISPR-Cas9 system .  Science     2014 ; 343 : 80 – 4 .  

     12.         Whittaker     SR   ,    Theurillat     JP   ,    Van Allen     E   ,    Wagle     N   ,    Hsiao     J   ,    Cowley   
  GS   ,   et al.    A genome-scale RNA interference screen implicates NF1 loss 
in resistance to RAF inhibition .  Cancer Discov     2013 ; 3 : 350 – 62 .  

     13.         Van Allen     EM   ,    Wagle     N   ,    Sucker     A   ,    Treacy     DJ   ,    Johannessen     CM   ,    Goetz   
  EM   ,   et al.    The genetic landscape of clinical resistance to RAF inhibi-
tion in metastatic melanoma .  Cancer Discov     2014 ; 4 : 94 – 109 .    

 

MAY  2014(cid:2)CANCER DISCOVERY | 521 

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on January 28, 2015. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research. 

Paths of Resistance to EGFR Inhibitors: Is NF Enough?
  
Ophélia Maertens and Karen Cichowski
  
Cancer Discovery 

2014;4:519-521. 

  
  
  
  

  
  

Updated version
  

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org/content/4/5/519
 
  

Cited Articles
  
Citing articles
  

This article cites by 13 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org/content/4/5/519.full.html#ref-list-1
 
  
This article has been cited by 2 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org/content/4/5/519.full.html#related-urls
 
  

E-mail alerts
  
Reprints and 
Subscriptions
  
Permissions
  

Sign up to receive free email-alerts

 related to this article or journal.

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org
.
  
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
.
permissions@aacr.org
  

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on January 28, 2015. © 2014 American Association for Cancer
Research. 

