caSe StuDY

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

Audiologic and radiographic response of NF2-
related vestibular schwannoma to erlotinib therapy

Scott R Plotkin*, Marybeth A Singh, Caroline C O’Donnell, Gordon J Harris, Andrea I McClatchey  
and Chris Halpin

SummarY
Background A 48-year-old man presented to a neurologist with 
complaints of bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus. The patient was a 
member of a large family affected by neurofibromatosis type 2 and first 
noted hearing loss 10 years before presentation. 
Investigations Medical and neurological examination, MRI scan of the 
brain and spinal cord, pure-tone audiometry, NU–6 monosyllabic word 
test with phoneme scoring, City University of New York topic-related 
sentences test, noise/voice test of minimal auditory capability battery.
Diagnosis Progressive neurofibromatosis-type-2-related vestibular 
schwannomas.
Management Annual cranial MRI and audiology, surgical resection of 
right vestibular schwannoma, high-power behind-the-ear hearing aid, 
erlotinib therapy for progressive left vestibular schwannoma.
KeywoRds erlotinib, neurofibromatosis, schwannoma, vestibular
cme

SR Plotkin is Assistant Professor of Neurology and Director of the 
Neurofibromatosis Clinic, MA Singh is family Nurse Practitioner and 
Research Nurse, and CC O’Donnell is the Clinical Research Coordinator, at 
the Neurofibromatosis Clinic, Massachusetts General Hospital. GJ Harris is 
Associate Professor of Radiology at Harvard Medical School, Director of  
the 3D-imaging Service at Massachusetts General Hospital, and Director 
of the Tumor Imaging Metrics Core for the Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer 
Center. AI McClatchey is an Associate Professor of Pathology at Harvard 
Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital, and C Halpin is 
Assistant Professor of Otology and Laryngology at Harvard Medical School, 
and a member of the Department of Audiology at the Massachusetts Eye and 
Ear Infirmary, Boston, MA, USA.

Correspondence
*Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street,Yawkey 9E, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA 
splotkin@partners.org

Received 1 October 2007    Accepted 22 February 2008    Published online 17 June 2008
www.nature.com/clinicalpractice
doi:10.1038/ncponc1157

 Continuing Medical Education online

Medscape, LLC is pleased to provide online continuing 
medical  education  (CME)  for  this  journal  article, 
allowing clinicians the opportunity to earn CME credit. 
Medscape,  LLC  is  accredited  by  the  Accreditation 
Council for Continuing Medical Education (ACCME) to 
provide CME for physicians. Medscape, LLC designates 
this educational activity for a maximum of 0.5 AMA PRA  
Category 1 CreditsTM. Physicians should only claim credit  
commensurate with the extent of their participation in the 
activity. All other clinicians completing this activity will 
be issued a certificate of participation. To receive credit, 
please  go  to  http://www.medscape.com/cme/ncp  
and complete the post-test.

Learning objectives
Upon completion of this activity, participants should be 
able to: 
1 

List  the  types  of  tumors  associated  with  neuro-
fibromatosis type 2 (NF2).

2  Describe the birth incidence of NF2.
3 

List  the  191  National  Institutes  of  Health  (NIH) 
criteria for the diagnosis of NF2.

4  Describe  the  treatment  indications  and  options  

5 

for NF2.
Identify the potential use of erlotinib in patients with 
NF2.

Competing interests
The authors, the Journal Editor L Hutchinson and the 
CME  questions  author  D  Lie  declared  no  competing 
interests. 

THE CASE
A 48-year-old man presented to a neurologist for 
comprehensive evaluation. The patient complained 
of  bilateral  hearing  loss  and  tinnitus,  which  he 
had  first  noted  6 months  before  presentation.  
He initially experienced hearing problems 10 years 
earlier, and 8 years before presentation he visited 
his primary care physician for hearing evaluation. 
Auditory testing at that time demonstrated bilat-
eral sensorineural hearing loss that was attributed 
to occupational noise exposure. Over the following 
8 years, the patient experienced progressive decline 
in hearing and developed persistent imbalance.

At the time of presentation, the patient had a 
medical history of pancreatitis, renal calculi, and 
anxiety.  He  smoked  approximately  one-and-
a-half  packs  of  cigarettes  per  day  and  denied 

august 2008  vol 5  no 8          

nature clinical practice  onCologY  487

caSe StuDY

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

A

B

Figure 1 Cranial MRI scans of the patient before and after treatment with 
erlotinib. (A) A post-contrast T1-weighted coronal MRI scan of the patient 
before erlotinib therapy. The arrows indicate bilateral vestibular schwannomas 
characteristic of neurofibromatosis type 2. (B) A repeat MRI scan after 
11 months of erlotinib therapy showing the decreased size of the left vestibular 
schwannoma.

alcohol use. The patient was a member of a large 
family with a history of neurofibromatosis type 2  
(NF2):  his  father  and  two  siblings  had  been 
diagnosed  with  NF2.  Elemental  neurological 
examinations,  including  testing  of  cranial 
nerves, power, sensation, coordination, reflexes, 
and  gait,  were  normal.  Audiologic  evaluation 
revealed symmetric hearing loss with pure-tone 
thresholds of 45 decibels hearing level (dBHL) at 
250 Hz, 65 dBHL at 500 Hz, 70 dBHL at 1,000 Hz 
and  75 dBHL  at  2,000 Hz  (normal  range  0–
20 dBHL). The patient’s word recognition was 
48% in the right ear and 72% in the left ear. Brain 
MRI revealed bilateral vestibular schwannomas, 
each measuring 2.1 cm along the long axis, and 
the patient was diagnosed with NF2. No other 
enhancing lesions were identified. MRI of the 
cervical spine revealed a 5 mm focus of T2 hyper-
intense signal at C5–6, which enhanced after the 
administration of gadolinium contrast.

The patient was followed annually with cranial 
MRI and audiology. During the 7 years following 
presentation,  he  experienced  gradual  bilateral 
hearing loss due to progressive tumor growth. 
An  MRI  scan  7 years  after  diagnosis  demon-
strated  severe  brainstem  compression  and  he 
underwent  resection  of  the  right  vestibular 
schwannoma with post-operative anacusis in the 
affected ear. Over the next 7 years he lost hearing 
in  the  contralateral  ear,  and  his  MRI  revealed 
significant  brainstem  compression  related 
to  growth  of  his  left  vestibular  schwannoma. 
Audiometric  testing  up  to  125 dBHL  elicited 
no  responses  at  any  frequency.  The  patient, 

hoping to avoid further surgery, sought opinions 
regarding treatment options. Radiation therapy 
was  not  recommended  because  of  the  risk  of 
brainstem  herniation  during  treatment.  After 
lengthy discussions, the patient opted for treat-
ment with erlotinib on the basis of preclinical 
evidence suggesting an anti-proliferative effect 
in  Nf2-deficient  cells.1  He  started  receiving 
150 mg erlotinib daily for progressive vestibular 
schwannoma. The patient was seen monthly by 
his oncologist for the first 3 months, and then 
quarterly, with monthly visits to his internist for 
medical examination, and complete blood counts 
and chemistry panels. Cranial MRI and audio-
logy were performed every 3 months to monitor 
response to treatment. Volumetric MRI analysis 
was performed on all available MRI scans taken 
during the past 7 years to determine tumor size 
before and after treatment with erlotinib.2

Within 3 months of starting erlotinib therapy 
tumor volume in the left vestibular schwannoma 
stabilized (Figure 1) and the patient reported 
perception of loud noises. By 6 months, his left 
vestibular schwannoma decreased in volume and 
audiological examinations documented percep-
tion of pure-tone thresholds at low frequencies. 
At month 10, he began to use his hearing aid 
and  reported  hearing  voices. After  11 months 
of  erlotinib  therapy,  the  tumor  had  reduced 
in volume by 12% (Figure 2) and the patient 
reported  speechreading  ability  in  face-to-face 
settings when using his hearing aid.

During the 11 months of therapy, the patient 
tolerated  erlotinib  well  with  only  occasional 
episodes  of  grade  1  diarrhea,  as  rated  by  the 
Common  Terminology  Criteria  for  Adverse 
Events, version 3.0 (CTCAE 3.0). He denied rash 
or  nausea.  The  patient  experienced  recurrent 
arterial thrombi in the femoral arteries related 
to his pre-existing vascular disease. Laboratory 
examinations identified a subtherapeutic inter-
national  normalized  ratio  <2.0  on  routine 
coagulation studies at the time of thrombosis. 
At no point did the results of safety tests exceed 
institutional limits.

After 11 months of therapy, the patient under-
went detailed pure-tone audiometry3 and was 
tested  for  word  recognition,  speechreading 
ability, and noise/voice discrimination in order 
to confirm the re-emergence of useful hearing 
ability.  Pure-tone  audiometry  demonstrated 
tone  percepts  for  frequencies  from  250 Hz 
(80 dBHL) to 1,000 Hz (100 dBHL) in the left 
ear.  These  percepts  were  verified  as  tonal  as 

ncponc_2007_209f1.eps

488  nature clinical practice  onCologY 

   PlotKIn ET AL.   august 2008  vol 5  no 8

opposed to vibrotactile responses.4 His ability 
to recognize words was tested using the NU–6 
mono syllabic word test with phoneme scoring 
list 2B (110 dBHL). He correctly identified 15 
phonemes (10%), which exceeded the a priori 
probability of identifying 6 phonemes (4%) by 
chance.5 In addition, he identified 1 word (2%) 
correctly, which would not be expected to occur 
by chance.

The patient was then tested with his hearing 
aid in place (approximately 127  decibel sound 
pressure  level  in  the  ear).  He  was  first  tested 
with  the  minimal  auditory  capability  battery 
noise/voice  test  using  a  calibrated  speaker  at 
the  distance  of  1 m.6  This  test  requires  that  a 
patient distinguish between a spoken sentence 
and a sentence-like series of noises, and is the 
least demanding test of auditory information. 
The patient correctly identified the noise versus 
voice for 56% of items, which exceeds the a priori 
probability  of  correctly  distinguishing  50%.6 
The patient’s ability to speechread face-to-face 
using his hearing aid was verified using the City 
University of New York topic-related sentences 
test.7 He accurately recognized 60% of words 
from sentence block 7 when this text was read 
by his wife but, as expected, could only recog-
nize 10% of words when the text was read by an 
unfamiliar speaker on the standard-test video-
disk.  The  patient  could  not  perform  the  task 
without his hearing aid. Together, these audio-
metric results document modest levels of usable 
hearing in the left ear. The patient continues to 
receive erlotinib 19 months after the initiation 
of  treatment  and  has  maintained  his  current 
level  of  hearing  function  without  evidence 
of  tumor  growth.  His  current  health  status  is 
unchanged and he will remain on erlotinib for as 
long as he maintains a clinical response without  
significant toxicity.

DISCUSSION OF DIAGNOSIS
NF2, previously called central neurofibromatosis, 
is  a  tumor-suppressor  syndrome  characterized 
by the presence of schwannomas, meningiomas, 
and spinal cord gliomas.8 NF2 is transmitted in 
an autosomal dominant fashion, with a birth inci-
dence of 1 in 25,000.9 Symptoms of eighth cranial 
nerve dysfunction, including deafness, tinnitus, 
or  imbalance,  typically  appear  at  17–21 years 
of age.8 In children, symptoms can include non-
vestibular cranial nerve dysfunction, myelopathy, 
seizures,  skin  tumors,  and  juvenile  cataracts.8 
The  NIH  consensus  criteria  for  diagnosis  of  

caSe StuDY

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

20 –

Left vestibular schwannoma

Erlotinib treatment

Right vestibular schwannoma

15 –

10 –

5 –

0 –
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Year

)
3

m
c
(
 
e
m
u
o
V

l

Figure 2 Volumetric analysis of bilateral vestibular schwannomas. A graph of 
the tumor volume (cm3) as determined by longitudinal MRI. The shaded area 
indicates the period in which the patient was receiving erlotinib.

NF2,  established  in  1987  and  revised  in  1991, 
require  either  the  presence  of  bilateral  vesti-
bular  schwannomas  or  a  family  history  with 
unilateral vestibular schwannoma and any one 
of  the  following:  meningioma;  glioma;  neuro-
fibroma; schwannoma; or posterior subcapsular 
opacities.10,11  Alternative  diagnostic  criteria, 
such as the Manchester criteria or the National 
Neurofibromatosis Foundation criteria, have been 
proposed.12 Initial evaluation of individuals with 
NF2 should include a complete family and medical 
history; neurologic, audiologic, ophthalmologic 
and  skin  examinations;  and  MRI  scans  of  the 
brain and spinal cord.13 Asymptomatic patients 
with NF2 but without tumors should have MRI 
screening of brain and spinal cord every 2 years 
between  the  ages  of  12 years  and  20 years  and 
every 3 years thereafter.

TREATMENT AND MANAGEMENT
The  standard  treatment  options  for  bilateral 
vestibular  schwannomas  include  surveillance, 
surgical resection, and radiation therapy. Patients 
under surveillance are generally followed annu-
ally  with  MRI  scans  and  audiological  exami-
nations.13  Hearing  aids  prolong  the  period  of 
useful hearing but deafness is the rule for patients 
who do not undergo hearing-sparing surgery; 
however, watchful waiting might result in longer 
periods of useful hearing for many patients with 

ncponc_2007_209f2.eps

august 2008  vol 5  no 8   PlotKIn ET AL.       

nature clinical practice  onCologY  489

caSe StuDY

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

larger tumors because attempts to debulk these 
schwannomas can produce deafness.

The  surgical  management  of  bilateral  vesti-
bular schwannomas is the treatment approach 
that  has  been  studied  more  thoroughly  than 
others. The goal of surgery is to either preserve 
hearing (for small tumors) or to treat brainstem 
compression  and/or  hydrocephalus  (for  large 
tumors).8 In addition, surgery opens the possi-
bility  of  placement  of  an  auditory  brainstem 
implant in selected patients. The auditory brain-
stem implant is a prosthetic device that bypasses 
the cochlea and the auditory nerve to transmit 
auditory information directly to the brainstem.
Hearing  preservation  is  a  reasonable  goal 
for lesions less than 1.5 cm in size that are not 
multilobulated.  Hearing  preservation  rates 
following tumor resection via a middle cranial 
fossa  approach  are  about  70%  at  specialized 
centers.14  Unfortunately,  most  tumors  do  not 
meet these criteria at presentation, and surgery 
for hearing preservation is not possible. Thus, it 
is highly desirable to identify affected individuals 
early in life so that hearing-sparing surgery can 
be offered.

For  tumors  greater  than  1.5 cm  or  those 
that are multilobulated, the ability to preserve 
hearing after resection is low. In general, tumor 
resection  in  a  hearing  ear  should  be  deferred 
until the development of neurologic symptoms, 
increased  intracranial  pressure,  or  impending 
hydrocephalus. Tumor resection in a nonhearing 
ear should be performed as clinically indicated, 
with a focus on preserving other cranial nerve 
function.8

Radiation therapy for vestibular schwannomas 
has  become  more  popular  in  recent  years. 
Stereotactic radiosurgery in NF2 is associated 
with  actuarial  local  control  rates  of  85%  at 
5 years and 81% at 10 years.15 The measurable 
hearing preservation rate is about 40% with a 
20% risk of deafness in patients with service-
able hearing before treatment.16 Other poten-
tial complications of stereotactic radiosurgery 
include facial weakness, trigeminal neuropathy, 
and vestibular dysfunction.15 In addition, there 
is emerging evidence that patients with tumor-
suppressor syndromes who receive therapeutic 
radiation are at increased risk for developing a 
secondary malignancy years after treatment.17 
Although  this  association  is  more  robust  for 
NF1 than for NF2, patients should be cautioned 
about  potential  adverse  effects  before  they 
receive radiation therapy.

For many years there has been intense interest 
in developing chemotherapy for patients with 
NF2. Recently, Curto and colleagues have shown 
that loss of Nf2 in primary cells leads to failure of 
contact-dependent inhibition of proliferation.1 
By  use  of  a  combination  of  laboratory  tech-
niques, the group showed that, under normal 
conditions, the NF2 protein Merlin associates 
with EGFR (also known as ErbB1) via the scaf-
fold  protein  NHERF1  and  prevents  signaling 
from  the  activated  EGFR.  In  the  absence  of 
functional  Merlin,  EGFR  signaling  cannot  be 
down-regulated and Nf2-deficient cells prolif-
erate despite the presence of cell-to-cell contact. 
Treatment with EGFR inhibitors, such as erlo-
tinib or gefitinib, prevents the over-proliferation 
of these cells.1

This case report represents the first successful 
laboratory-to-clinic translation of research on 
NF2.  This  patient  was  offered  treatment  with 
erlotinib because this drug has been well studied 
in  clinical  oncology  and  is  approved  by  FDA 
for treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer.18 
Serious complications are rare and in patients 
who respond to treatment, long-term therapy 
with this agent is well tolerated—the discontinu-
ation rate because of the development of adverse 
effects  is  approximately  5%.18  Importantly, 
the  drug  is  orally  administered.  The  patient’s 
audiologic and radiographic response to treat-
ment was clinically significant, with a decrease 
in tumor volume and the re-establishment of 
useful hearing. These findings justify a prospec-
tive  clinical  trial  of  erlotinib  for  NF2-related 
vestibular  schwannomas.  Such  a  trial  should 
include  standardized  assessments  of  tumor 
volume and hearing, which would allow confir-
mation of the clinical benefit of erlotinib treat-
ment before this agent enters widespread use in 
the community.

CONCLUSIONS
This is the first case report demonstrating thera-
peutic activity of erlotinib for progressive vesti-
bular schwannoma in NF2. These data suggest 
that  targeted  therapies  might  be  effective  for 
NF2-related tumors and that hearing loss related 
to progressive vestibular schwannomas might be 
reversible in selected circumstances. Prospective 
clinical  trials  are  warranted  to  determine  the 
optimum dose and duration of erlotinib treat-
ment  for  progressive  vestibular  schwannomas 
in NF2 and to study the efficacy of this agent in 
other NF2-related tumors.

490  nature clinical practice  onCologY 

   PlotKIn ET AL.   august 2008  vol 5  no 8

caSe StuDY

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

References
1  Curto M et al. (2007) Contact-dependent inhibition of 

EGFR signaling by Nf2/Merlin. J Cell Biol 177: 893–903
2  Sorensen AG et al. (2001) Comparison of diameter and 
perimeter methods for tumor volume calculation. J Clin 
Oncol 19: 551–557

3  American National Standards Institute (2004) Methods 

for manual pure-tone threshold audiometry. S3.21  
New York: ANSI

4  Boothroyd A and Calkwell S (1981) Vibrotactile 
thresholds in pure-tone audiometry. In Hearing 
Measurement: a Book of Readings, edn 2 134–139 
(Eds Chaiklin JB et al.) New York: Addison Wesley

5  Halpin C: Measuring audiometric outcomes.  
In Evidence Based Otolaryngology 227–238  
(Eds Shin J et al.) New York: Springer, in press

6  Owens E et al. (1982) Interim assessment of candidates 

for cochlear implants. Arch Otolaryngol 108: 478–483

7  Boothroyd A et al. (1988) Voice fundamental frequency 

as an auditory supplement to the speechreading of 
sentences. Ear Hear 9: 306–312

8  Farrell CJ and Plotkin SR (2007) Genetic causes of 

brain tumors: neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, 
von Hippel–Lindau, and other syndromes. Neurol Clin 
25: 925–946

and neurofibromatosis 2 (bilateral acoustic 
neurofibromatosis). An update. Ann Intern Med  
113: 39–52

11  National Institutes of Health Consensus Development 

Conference (1988) Neurofibromatosis. Conference 
statement. Arch Neurol 45: 575–578

12  Baser ME et al. (2002) Evaluation of clinical diagnostic 

criteria for neurofibromatosis 2. Neurology 59:  
1759–1765

13  Evans DG et al. (2005) Management of the patient 
and family with neurofibromatosis 2: a consensus 
conference statement. Br J Neurosurg 19: 5–12

14  Otto SR et al. (2002) Multichannel auditory brainstem 

implant: update on performance in 61 patients.  
J Neurosurg 96: 1063–1071

15  Mathieu D et al. (2007) Stereotactic radiosurgery 

for vestibular schwannomas in patients with 
neurofibromatosis type 2: an analysis of tumor control, 
complications, and hearing preservation rates. 
Neurosurgery 60: 460–468

16  Rowe JG et al. (2003) Clinical experience with gamma 

knife stereotactic radiosurgery in the management 
of vestibular schwannomas secondary to type 2 
neurofibromatosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry  
74: 1288–1293

9  Evans DG et al. (2005) Incidence of vestibular 

17  Evans DG et al. (2006) Malignant transformation  

schwannoma and neurofibromatosis 2 in the North 
West of England over a 10 year period: higher 
incidence than previously thought. Otol Neurotol  
26: 93–97

10  Mulvihill JJ et al. (1990 ) NIH conference. 

Neurofibromatosis 1 (Recklinghausen disease) 

and new primary tumours after therapeutic radiation 
for benign disease: substantial risks in certain tumour 
prone syndromes. J Med Genet 43: 289–294

18  Shepherd FA et al. (2005) Erlotinib in previously 

treated non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med  
353: 123–132

Acknowledgments
This work was supported 
in part by grants from the 
Department of Defense 
NF050202 and from 
Neurofibromatosis, Inc., 
New England (SRP), 
and by a grant from the 
Children’s Tumor Foundation 
(GJH). The authors wish 
to acknowledge the 
past members of the 
Massachusetts General 
Hospital Neurofibromatosis 
Clinic including Priscilla 
Short, MD, Mia MacCollin, 
MD, Catherine Bove, RN, 
and Robert Martuza, MD, 
for their care of patients 
with NF2. Désirée Lie, 
University of California, 
Irvine, CA, is the author of 
and is solely responsible for 
the content of the learning 
objectives, questions and 
answers of the Medscape-
accredited continuing 
medical education activity 
associated with this article.

Competing interests
The authors declared no 
competing interests.

august 2008  vol 5  no 8   PlotKIn ET AL.       

nature clinical practice  onCologY  491

