R E V I E W S

THE MOLECULAR AND GENETIC
BASIS OF NEUROLOGICAL TUMOURS

Yuan Zhu and Luis F. Parada

There are no effective therapies for many tumours of the nervous system. This is, in part, a
consequence of their location within relatively inaccessible tissues. It is also likely, however, that
the unique characteristics of the cells that give rise to these tumours create a set of conditions
that facilitate tumour development. Here, we consider recent advances in molecular genetics, the
development of mouse models and developmental neurobiology as they relate to tumours of
neuroectodermal origin. It is likely that these advances will provide insight into underlying
mechanisms and provide a rational framework for the development of effective interventions.

In vertebrates, the embryonic neural tube (neuroecto-
derm) gives rise to the main cell types of the central
nervous system (CNS), including neurons, astrocytes
and oligodendrocytes. The NEURAL CREST derives from the
dorsal lip of the neural tube, and its cells migrate exten-
sively during embryonic development, giving rise to
various tissues, including the peripheral nervous sys-
tem (PNS). In both the CNS and PNS, the appearance
of neurons (neurogenesis) developmentally precedes
the appearance of glia (gliogenesis).

Neuroectodermal tumours (neurological tumours)
include all neoplasms that have either a CNS- or PNS-
derived cell of origin. The classification of neurological
tumours is based on the predominant cell type(s),
which is generally determined by morphological and
immunohistochemical criteria (FIG. 1). After develop-
ment ceases, neurons become post-mitotic and only a
small compartment of stem cells remain, whereas glial
cells retain the ability to proliferate throughout life. In
this context, it is perhaps not surprising that most adult
neurological tumours are of glial origin. These tumours
are termed gliomas, and include tumours that are com-
posed predominantly of astrocytes (astrocytomas),
oligodendrocytes (oligodendrogliomas), mixtures of
various glial cells (for example, oligoastrocytomas) and
ependymal cells (ependymomas)1–3. In the case of the
PNS, the neurofibroma and SCHWANNOMA are the two
most common glial tumours4 (FIG. 1).

Of all the various grading schemes, the World Health
Organization (WHO) grading system is most widely

used. The WHO grading system classifies gliomas into
grades I–IV based on the degree of malignancy, as deter-
mined by histopathological criteria. In the CNS, grade I
gliomas generally behave in a benign fashion and, in
many cases, might even be circumscribed, whereas grade
II–IV gliomas are malignant and diffusely infiltrate
throughout the brain. Astrocytomas are the most com-
mon CNS neoplasms, accounting for more than 60% of
all primary brain tumours. The most malignant form of
infiltrating astrocytic neoplasm — glioblastoma multi-
forme (GBM) (WHO grade IV astrocytoma) — is one
of the most aggressive human cancers, with a median
survival of less than 1 year. Importantly, this statistic has
not changed significantly over the past two decades1–3.

In the PNS, neurofibromas and schwannomas are
benign and belong to WHO grade I. Malignant PERIPH-
ERAL-NERVE-SHEATH tumours (MPNSTs) are grade III–IV,
and, like malignant astrocytomas, do not respond well
to  current  therapies4. Neurofibroma  is  a  complex
tumour type of the PNS and can occur sporadically, but
most commonly arises in individuals who are afflicted
with neurofibromatosis type 1 (see below) and who
have germ-line mutations in the tumour-suppressor
NF1 gene5–7. Moreover, most MPNSTs are derived from
pre-existing neurofibromas. So, in this review, we focus
on what recent lessons have been learned about the
molecular biology and genetics of astrocytoma, as an
example of CNS tumours, and compare these with
those of neurofibroma and its malignant form, MPNST,
as an example of PNS tumours.

NEURAL-CREST CELLS
Cells that originate in the dorsal
lip of the neural tube that
undergo epithelial-to-
mesenchymal transition and
migrate outwards to give rise to
all cells of the peripheral,
autonomic and enteric nervous
systems. These cells also give rise
to melanocytes and
neuroendocrine cells.

SCHWANNOMA
A neural-crest-derived tumour
that has morphological and
molecular features of Schwann
cells. These tumours are clonal
in origin.

Center for Developmental
Biology and Kent Waldrep
Foundation Center for Basic
Research on Nerve Growth
and Regeneration,
University of Texas
Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 
75390-9133, USA.
Correspondence to L.F.P.
e-mail: luis.parada@
utsouthwestern.edu
doi:10.1038/nrc866

616 |  AUGUST 2002 | VOLUME 2

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

a  CNS

Neuronal-restricted
progenitor cells

Neurons

Medulloblastoma

Neural 
progenitor 
cells

Neural stem cells

Oligodendrocytes

Oligodendroglioma

Glial-restricted
progenitor 
cells

Oligoastrocytoma

Astrocytes

Astrocytoma

b  PNS

Neural crest cells

Neurons

Neuroblastoma

Other cells 
(fibroblasts, perineural cells, mast cells)

Neurofibroma

Schwann cells

Schwannoma

MPNST

Figure 1 | Developmental scheme of neuroectodermal (neurons and glia) cells and the classification of neurological
tumours. a | In the central nervous system (CNS), multipotent neural stem cells in the ventricular/subventricular zones of the embryonic
neural tube give rise to three main cell types in the mature CNS — neurons, and oligodendrocytes and astrocytes. It is generally
believed that neural stem cells first differentiate into two distinct progenitor cells — neuronal-restricted progenitor cells and glial-
restricted progenitor cells, which further differentiate into neurons and glia, respectively. However, this view has been challenged by two
recent studies, which indicate that oligodendrocytes might share the same progenitor (neural progenitor cells) with motor neurons, but
not with astrocytes136,137 (dotted line). The classification of neurological tumours is based on their predominant cell type(s). For example,
astrocytoma is composed primarily of astrocytes, oligodendroglioma is composed primarily of oligodendrocytes, and oligoastrocytoma
contains both astrocytic and oligodendroglial components. A few paediatric brain tumours, such as medulloblastoma, are derived from
neuronal precursor cells. b | Neural-crest cells are neural-tube-derived multipotent stem cells, which give rise to various cell types,
including neurons and glial cells (Schwann cells) in the peripheral nervous system (PNS). Neuroblastoma mainly occurs in children and
derives from neuronal precursor cells of sympathetic neurons. Neurofibroma is a heterogeneous tumour that contains Schwann cells,
fibroblasts, perineural cells, neuronal processes and mast cells. Schwannoma is a homogeneous tumour that is composed of
Schwann cells. Most MPNSTs (malignant peripheral-nerve-sheath tumours) derive from neurofibromas.

Astrocytoma
Astrocytomas  have  the  propensity  to  infiltrate
throughout the brain. This feature is present even in
low-grade tumours, making complete surgical resec-
tion impossible. Unfortunately, these tumours are
largely resistant to radiation and chemotherapy. The
most promising prospects for overcoming the unique
features  of astrocytoma  are  likely  to  come  from
recent studies into the genetics and molecular biol-
ogy of these tumours. Particularly valuable insights
have been gained by human genetic studies, develop-
mental analysis of gliogenesis and efforts to model
gliomas in mice.

Grade IV astrocytoma can be divided into two sub-
types based on clinical characteristics: primary and sec-
ondary GBM. Primary GBM arises as a de novo process,
in  the  absence  of a  pre-existing  low-grade  lesion,
whereas secondary GBM develops progressively from
low-grade astrocytoma, generally over a period of 5–10
years1–3. Genetic studies of GBMs, particularly sec-
ondary GBMs, indicate that there are distinct genetic
pathways involved in the initiation and progression of
these neoplasms (FIG. 2).

Initiation pathways
p53. Certain genetic alterations are present in both low-
and high-grade astrocytomas. These findings led to the
hypothesis that these common mutations are involved
in early phases of tumour formation. The p53 tumour
suppressor — a transcription factor that regulates cell-
cycle progression and apoptosis in response to many
external insults (such as DNA damage and oncogenic
mutations)8 —  fits  this  profile. Patients  with  the
Li–Fraumeni syndrome — a familial cancer syndrome
that is characterized by the presence of a germ-line
mutation in the TP53 gene (which encodes p53 in
humans) — are predisposed to the development of var-
ious brain tumours, including astrocytomas9,10. Also,
mutations in the TP53 gene are found with equal fre-
quency in all grades of sporadic astrocytoma (more
than 60%)11–16. For example, one study reported that
TP53 mutations were already present in the first biopsy
of 41 out of 46 patients17. In more prevalent human
cancers, by  contrast, TP53 loss  is  associated  with
advanced stages18. The high incidence of TP53 muta-
tions, even in the low-grade astrocytomas, might point
to the unique capacity of these tumours (even in the

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

VOLUME 2 | AUGUST 2002 | 6 1 7

PERIPHERAL-NERVE SHEATH
A strong flexible cable that is
composed of collagen fibres and
a cellular tube (perineurum)
that ensheaths, insulates and
protects peripheral-nerve
bundles.

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

R E V I E W S

Summary 

• Tumours of neuroectodermal origin (neurological tumours) include all neoplasms of
the central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral nervous system (PNS). The
classification of neurological tumours is based on their predominant cell type(s) as
they relate to normal cell types that are present in the CNS and PNS.
• Glial cells retain proliferative properties throughout life. So, most neurological
tumours are of glial-lineage origin. In the CNS, gliomas include astrocytomas,
oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas. In the PNS, neurofibromas and
schwannomas are common tumours.
• Genetic pathways that are involved in the initiation and progression of astrocytomas
have been identified. In secondary glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), loss of p53 and
activation of the growth-factor–receptor-tyrosine-kinase signalling pathway initiates
tumour formation, whereas disruption of the retinoblastoma (RB) pathway
contributes to the progression of tumour development.
• Similar genetic pathways are disrupted in primary GBM, although through different
mechanisms. The rapid growth nature of the primary GBM indicates that this type of
malignancy might arise from the transformation of adult neural stem cells, which
either are present in the brain or can be de-differentiated from astrocytes in response to
oncogenic mutations.
• Dermal neurofibromas are thought to be derived from a component of mature
Schwann cells, whereas plexiform neurofibromas are believed to arise from an
embryonic Schwann-cell lineage. Most malignant peripheral-nerve-sheath tumours
are derived from neurofibromas — particularly plexiform neurofibromas.
• Disruption of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) in the Schwann-cell lineage initiates
neurofibroma formation. In the setting of plexiform neurofibroma, the heterozygous
state of tumour environment is important for tumour formation. The disruption of
the p53 pathway is involved in the malignant progression of neurofibroma.

case of well-differentiated lesions) to infiltrate surround-
ing tissue — a trait that other tumour types do not show
until advanced stages of neoplasia. The requisite early
loss of TP53 might reflect the need for astrocytoma cells

NF1 loss

Pilocytic astrocytoma
(grade I)

Astrocytes or
precursors

Low-grade astrocytoma
(grade II)

TP53 loss
PDGF/PDGFR overexpression

to evade apoptosis in order to migrate and survive in a
microenvironment that normally would not provide
adequate trophic support.

Although these genetic studies indicate an associa-
tion of TP53 mutations with the initiation of astrocy-
toma, a  causal  link  has  not  been  established.
Disruption of Trp53 (which encodes p53 in mice) in
the mouse germ line has provided more direct evi-
dence regarding its role in astrocytoma initiation.
Although Trp53 homozygous (p53–/–) and heterozy-
gous (p53+/–) mice do not develop astrocytomas19,20,
primary p53–/– astrocytes show increased growth and
susceptibility to transformation21,22. These observa-
tions indicate that loss of Trp53 alone is insufficient to
initiate astrocytoma formation, and indicate that
additional genetic or epigenetic events are required.

Receptor tyrosine kinases and RAS. Normal cells require
growth signals for survival and/or proliferation. Many
growth signals are mediated by diffusible growth factors
that are transmitted into the cell by a group of trans-
membrane proteins with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activ-
ity — receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). After binding to
a growth factor, RTKs undergo receptor dimerization,
autophosphorylation and recruitment of adaptor pro-
teins (such as GRB2 and SHC) that interact with and
activate various downstream effectors (FIG. 3). The small
GTP-binding protein, RAS, is an important down-
stream effector of the growth-factor–RTK signalling
pathway, and can activate at least three downstream 
cascades: RAF–MEK–MAPK (mitogen-activated pro-
tein kinase), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)–AKT
and  CDC42–RAC–RHO23
(FIG. 3). The  growth-
factor–RTK–RAS signalling cascade is one of the most
frequently targeted genetic pathways in human cancers,

Anaplastic astrocytoma
(grade IV)

Secondary GBM
(grade IV)

a

b

Initiation pathway

Progression pathway – RB loss/CDK4 amplification

INK4A loss, EGFR amplification/mutation,
PTEN loss, MDM2 amplification

Astrocytes or
precursors

Primary GBM 
(grade IV)

Figure 2 | Genetic pathways involved in the development of primary and secondary astrocytoma. a | Several genetic
pathways are involved in the initiation versus progression of secondary glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). For example, loss of TP53
and activation of the growth-factor–RTK (receptor tyrosine kinase)–RAS pathway (such as through overexpression of PDGF/PDGFR
(platelet-derived growth factor/PDGF receptor) or loss of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)) are involved in the initiation of pilocytic
(grade I) or low-grade (grade II) astrocytoma. These can progress to anaplastic astrocytoma (grade IV) or secondary GBM (grade IV),
which has been associated with disruption of the retinoblastoma (RB) pathway (through loss of RB or amplification/overexpression of
CDK4). b | In primary GBM, the same genetic pathways are dismantled, although through different mechanisms. For example,
disruption of the p53 pathway often occurs through loss of the gene that encodes ARF, or less frequently through amplification of
MDM2. Disruption of the RB pathway occurs through loss of the gene that encodes INK4A. Amplification and/or mutation of the
gene that encodes epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is the most frequently detected genetic defect that is associated with
primary GBM. Activity of the phosphatase PTEN is also frequently disrupted in this type of tumour.

618 |  AUGUST 2002 | VOLUME 2

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

Upregulation of PDGFR, EGFR signalling

PI3K

AKT

Survival

P

P

SHC GRB2

SOS

GEF

PTEN

RAS–GDP

RAS–GTP

RAF

MEK

ERK

p120GAP
NF1

CDC42

RAC

RHO

Gene
expression

Cytoskeleton

Figure 3 | Signalling pathway mediated by growth-factor–RTK. After ligand binding, receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs), such as the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) or epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR), dimerize, undergo autophosphorylation (P) and recruit adaptor
proteins (such as GRB2 and SHC) that activate various downstream effectors. RAS is an important
downstream effector of this signalling pathway and functions as a molecular switch by cycling
between the active GTP-bound form and the inactive GDP-bound form. RAS activity is regulated
positively by guanosine exchange factors (GEFs), such as SOS, and negatively by GTPase-
activating proteins (GAPs), such as p120GAP, and the NF1 gene product, neurofibromin. At least
three downstream effectors can be activated by RAS. The RAF-mediated signalling cascade
controls cell proliferation and differentiation in various cell types. The phosphotidylinositol-3 kinase
(PI3K) pathway promotes cell survival. The CDC42-mediated signalling pathway regulates not only
gene expression, but also cytoskeletal organization. Activation of these signalling pathways is
frequently found in astrocytomas, and can also be caused by loss of activity of negative regulators
such as NF1 or PTEN. Upward (red) arrows represent upregulated gene activity in tumours and
downward arrows (blue) indicate downregulated/lost gene activity. ERK, extracellular signal-related
kinase; MEK, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase.

possibly because activating mutations render cancer
cells  independent  of exogenous  growth  factors.
Genetic analysis of astrocytomas indicates that RAS-
mediated signalling is involved in the initiation of
astrocytoma development. Elevated expression of
growth factors and their cognate RTK receptors24–26,
including platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and
platelet-derived growth-factor receptor (PDGFR)27–30,
are found in every grade of astrocytoma. Furthermore,
PDGF and PDGFR are often co-expressed in the same
tumour cells, indicating that astrocytoma cells estab-
lish an autocrine stimulatory loop28,30. These observa-
tions  indicate  that  the  PDGF/PDGFR-mediated 
signalling cascade could be involved in the initiation of
astrocytoma development.

Experiments in which Pdgf was expressed in mouse
brain via a retroviral vector have shown that Pdgf sig-
nalling can induce astrocytoma formation31. In this
study, 40% of mice that were infected with the vector
developed  brain  tumours. These  tumours  also
expressed Pdgfr, supporting a model of autocrine 
stimulation. Most tumours generated by this method,
however, were either high-grade gliomas with the
characteristics of GBMs or primitive neuroectodermal
tumours (PNETs), which show consistent expression

R E V I E W S

of nestin — a neural stem-cell marker. Recently, an
avian viral system was established that allows delivery
of Pdgf into specific cell types, both in vitro and 
in vivo. In vitro, overexpression of Pdgf stimulated
proliferation of nestin-expressing progenitor cells and
astrocytes, as determined by expression of the astro-
cyte marker Gfap. The overexpression of Pdgf was
interpreted to reflect de-differentiation of astrocytes
into glial progenitor cells, based on the criteria that
they have similar morphological and molecular char-
acteristics to O2A cells (BOX 1). Pdgf overexpression in
neonatal mouse brains resulted in the development of
oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas32.

So far, astrocytoma mouse models that have been
created by Pdgf overexpression fail to develop low-grade
astrocytomas that reflect the human disease. Although
this difference might be attributed to species differences
in the cellular response to Pdgf, another explanation is
that astrocytic lineage cells that would normally give rise
to tumours might not express Pdgfr during the neonatal
stage33 —  the  stage  at  which  these  studies  are
performed31,32. So, co-expression of Pdgf and its recep-
tor in mouse astrocytes might be required to induce
astrocytoma formation. Alternatively, adult astrocytes
might be the more susceptible target for Pdgf signalling
as astrocytoma occurs mainly in adulthood.

Despite considerable recent progress, the precise
role of PDGF/PDGFR signalling either in astrocyte
development or in astrocytoma formation remains
unclear. Although both in vitro and in vivo data indi-
cate that PDGF/PDGFR signalling is a mitogenic sig-
nal for oligodendrocyte progenitor cells, this has not
been shown for the astrocytic lineage. For example, no
defects have been reported in astrocyte development
of Pdgfa- or Pdgfb-null mice34. Low-grade infiltrating
astrocytomas  generally  have  low  mitotic  activity,
despite their highly invasive nature, indicating that
mitogenic factors are not central to the development
of these tumours. So, if PDGF/PDGFR signalling
functions  in  astrocyte  development, it  might  be
involved in functions other than proliferation. In
Drosophila, a PDGFR homologue has been shown to
regulate cell migration, lending support to this idea35.
Further study on the role of PDGF in astrocyte migra-
tion should provide insight into the initiation of
astrocytoma development.

Although RAS mutations are found in approxi-
mately 30% of human cancers, no such mutations
have been identified in human astrocytomas36. Instead,
in these tumours, RAS can be activated indirectly by
upregulation of growth-factor–RTK pathways (for
example, PDGF/PDGFR), loss of function of the NF1
gene37 or  through  other  RAS-pathway-activating
mechanisms (FIG. 3).

Neurofibromatosis type 1 is a familial cancer syn-
drome in which patients develop multiple benign and
malignant tumours of the CNS and PNS. The NF1
gene encodes the protein neurofibromin, which shares
homology with the RAS GTPase-activating protein
(GAP) family. RAS–GAPs catalyse the conversion of
activated  RAS–GTP  to  inactive  RAS–GDP  (FIG. 3),

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

VOLUME 2 | AUGUST 2002 | 6 1 9

R E V I E W S

Box 1 | PDGF is a mitogen for the oligodendrocyte precursor cells

Although O2A cells can differentiate into both oligodendrocytes and type-2 astrocytes in vitro, there is no clear evidence
that O2A cells can produce astrocytes in vivo. Therefore, O2A cells are generally regarded as oligodendrocyte precursor
cells (OPCs)133,134. In keeping with the role of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) in regulating OPC proliferation 
in vitro, mice lacking PDGFA — one of two PDGF ligands (PDGFA and PDGFB) — have reduced numbers of
oligodendrocytes owing to impaired precursor proliferation34. Furthermore, the overexpression of PDGFA in post-
mitotic neurons leads to overproduction of oligodendrocytes during development135. So, PDGF stimulates the
proliferation of OPCs both in vitro and in vivo.

thereby  negatively  regulating  cellular  RAS  activity.
Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 are predisposed to
the development of astrocytoma, although most neurofi-
bromatosis-type-1-associated astrocytomas are grade I
benign pilocytic astrocytomas5–7. Loss of both NF1 alleles
has been shown in these tumours38,39 (FIG. 2).Activation of
RAS-mediated MAPK and PI3K cascades are found in
both neurofibromatosis type 1 mutant-associated and
sporadic astrocytomas39. Furthermore, in a mouse trans-
genic model, overexpression of oncogenic Ras in astro-
cytes leads to the development of astrocytomas40, provid-
ing  direct  evidence  that  RAS-pathway  activation  is
important for astrocytoma formation. In summary, these
observations  support  the  concept  that  growth-
factor–RTK–RAS signalling cascades are involved in the
initiation of astrocytoma development (FIG. 2).

Progression pathways
Genetic pathways that are specifically disrupted in 
high-grade  but  not  low-grade  astrocytoma  are 
considered to be involved in tumour progression. To

Box 2 | RB regulation

In quiescent cells, RB proteins are hypophosphorylated (P) and sequester E2F
transcription factors. In response to proliferative signals, RB is partially
phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6), and completely
phosphorylated by CDK2. Hyperphosphorylated RB proteins release E2F
transcription factors, which activate the expression of a set of genes that are required
for G1/S transition and the initiation of DNA synthesis. CDK activity is positively
regulated by cyclins. D-type cyclins form a complex and activate CDK4 and CDK6,
whereas E-type cyclins bind and activate CDK2. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
(CKIs) provide negative regulation of this pathway. The INK4 family, including
INK4A (also known as p16), INK4B (also known as p15), INK4C (also known as p18)
and INK4D (also known as p19) specifically inhibit activation of the cyclin D and
CDK4/6 complex. WAF1 (also known as p21), KIP1 (also known as p27) and KIP2
(also known as p57) are more general cyclin/CKIs. Upward arrows (red) represent
upregulated gene activity in tumours and downward arrows (blue) indicate
downregulated/lost gene activity.

G0

E2F

RB

Cyclin D

CDK4/6

INK4A

E2F

P

P

RB

KIP1

G1/S transition

Cyclin E

E2F

Gene 
expression

CDK2

P

P

RB

P

P

maintain tissue homeostasis, normal cells have several
mechanisms to regulate cell-cycle progression and to
prevent uncontrolled proliferation. One of these regula-
tory stages takes place at the G1/S-phase checkpoint (for
a review, see REF. 41). The tumour suppressor retinoblas-
toma (RB) is a key regulator of the G1/S checkpoint
(BOX 2). A hallmark of high-grade astrocytomas is high
mitotic activity. It is, therefore, not surprising that the
RB–CDK–CKI (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor) reg-
ulatory circuit is frequently disrupted in these tumours.
Loss of INK4A (also known as p16; both INK4A and
ARF — also known as p14 in humans and p19 in mice,
and which uses an alternative reading frame — are
encoded by the CDKN2A gene) is detected in 40–57%
of GBMs42–46. CDK4 amplification is found in 12–14%
of GBMs43,46, and loss of RB is identified in 14–33% of
GBMs42,43,46. Consistent with the preceding analysis,
these  genetic  alterations  are  most  often  mutually 
exclusive, supporting the idea that mutation of any
component of the INK4A–CDK4–RB pathway can have
equivalent  effects  (BOX  2). In  total, mutations  in
INK4A/CDK4/RB are detected in more than 80% of
GBMs and in 50% of anaplastic astrocytomas. By con-
trast, such mutations are rare in low-grade astrocy-
tomas. The  remaining  20%  of GBMS  that  lack
detectable INK4A/CDK4/RB mutations might harbour
mutations in other components of this pathway. Indeed,
overexpression  of CDK6 and  cyclin  D1 has  been
detected in a small number of GBMs47,48. In one study,
underexpression of E2F1 and overexpression of cyclin E
have been reported in some high-grade gliomas49.

These retrospective studies of human tumours
indicate that the RB-mediated regulatory circuit of
cell-cycle progression is important for the progres-
sion of astrocytoma development, but not in the ini-
tiation process. Data from studies in mouse models
support this idea. Neither Ink4a-homozygous nor
Ink4a-heterozygous  mice  develop  astrocytomas,
although they are cancer prone50–52. Similarly, neither
astrocytic inactivation of Rb53 or overexpression of
Cdk4 (REF. 54) in mouse brains fails to induce astrocy-
tomas in mice. However, a recent study reported that
inactivation of Rb proteins by expression of a trun-
cated SV40 T antigen leads to the development of
high-grade astrocytomas55, indicating redundancy of
Rb-family proteins (Rb, p107 and p130) in tumour
suppression of mouse astrocytes.

Primary GBM
Although primary and secondary GBMs have similar
histopathological characteristics and clinical outcomes,

620 |  AUGUST 2002 | VOLUME 2

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

the kinetics of tumour development in these two sub-
types are dramatically different1–3. Primary GBMs arise
rapidly (<3 months) without clinical or histological evi-
dence of pre-existing low-grade lesions, which makes it
difficult to distinguish between genetic alterations that
contribute to the initiation of primary GBMs and those
that are associated with the progression of primary
GBMs. However, mutational analysis indicates that the
same genetic pathways are dismantled in both primary
and  secondary  GBMs  —  namely  p53, growth-
factor–RTK–RAS and RB-mediated pathways (FIG. 2).
But what underlies the distinction between the mecha-
nisms that lead to rapid- versus slow-progressing glial
tumours? Certain genetic alterations that have been pre-
dominately identified in primary GBMs provide clues
concerning this distinction.

INK4A/ARF. Mutations  in  the  gene  that  encodes
INK4A — most of which are homozygous deletions
— are common in primary GBMs (~40%) and rare in
secondary GBMs (4%)56. TP53 mutations, by contrast,
are frequently detected in secondary GBMs (>60%),
but are less common in primary GBMs (~10%)57.
Furthermore, in these tumours, mutations in TP53
and the gene that encodes INK4A are mutually exclu-
sive58, although INK4A is involved in the RB-mediated
cell-cycle regulatory pathway. This conundrum is
probably reconciled by the identification of a second
transcript, ARF, from  the  CDKN2A locus59. ARF
stabilizes p53 proteins by antagonizing MDM2 (ampli-
fication and overexpression of MDM2 are detected in
primary GBMs that lack TP53 mutations60), which tar-
gets p53 for ubiquitin-mediated degradation. So, in
secondary GBMs, TP53 is directly mutated, whereas in
primary GBMs, the p53 pathway is altered, resulting
either  from  loss  of ARF  or  from  upregulation  of
MDM2. Homozygous deletion of the CDKN2A locus
ablates both INK4A and ARF function, simultaneously
dismantling both RB and p53 pathways. This might
explain why primary GBMs manifest so rapidly. In
mice, simultaneous disruption of both Nf1 and Trp53
genes results in the development of high-grade astro-
cytomas in certain genetic backgrounds, whereas step-
wise loss of Nf1 and p53 function does not61. These
mouse studies support the concept that simultaneous
loss of two key growth-regulatory pathways in a cell
might present more favourable conditions for the
development of cancer.

EGF/EGFR. Amplification of the gene that encodes epi-
dermal growth-factor receptor (EGFR) is found in
~40% of primary GBMs, but is rare in secondary
GBMs57,62. The specific role of the EGFR signalling
pathway in primary GBMs is consistent with the obser-
vation that EGFR amplification is associated with
mutation in the gene that encodes INK4A and is mutu-
ally exclusive with the TP53 mutation63,64. Moreover,
most tumours with EGFR amplifications (~77%) have
additional genetic alterations65, most of which are
intragenic rearrangements that lead to a truncated and
constitutively active EGFR. Overexpression of this

R E V I E W S

failed 

to 

induce 

truncated  EGFR  confers  a  growth  advantage  and
tumorigenic properties in glioma cell lines66. In vivo,
expression of this Egfr mutant in neonatal mouse
brains 
formation.
Overexpression of this mutant form of Egfr in the
Ink4a–Arf mutant background does, however, lead to
the development of glioma-like lesions54. These data
support  a  model 
in  which  the  cooperation 
of EGFR  activation  and  INK4A–ARF  deficiency 
contributes to tumour formation.

tumour 

PTEN. Loss of the long arm of chromosome 10 is the
most common genetic alteration that is associated
with GBMs67,68. Several genetic loci that are associated
with these tumours have been identified in this region.
Among them, loss of PTEN — phosphatase and tensin
homologue on chromosome 10 (REF. 69), which is also
known as MMAC (mutated in multiple advanced 
cancers)70 or TEP1 (transforming growth-factor-β-
regulated and epithelial-cell-enriched phosphatase 1)71
— is found in more than 30% of primary GBMs, but is
rare in secondary GBMs (4%)72. The PTEN protein
can function as both a protein and lipid phosphatase,
and its activity seems to be essential for tumour sup-
pression as many mutations are found in its phos-
phatase  domain73–75. The  observation  that  some
mutant forms of the PTEN protein still retain protein
phosphatase  activity  indicates  that  the  ability  to
dephosphorylate lipid might be more important for
tumour suppression76.

The identification of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-
triphosphate  (PIP3, a  PI3K  product)  as  a  PTEN 
substrate75 indicates that PTEN could function as a
negative regulator of a well-known growth-control sig-
nalling pathway — the PI3K–AKT pathway77 (FIG. 3).
This is confirmed by the observation that enhanced
AKT activity has been detected in PTEN-deficient
tumours  and  cell  lines  from  both  humans  and
mice78–80. Furthermore, overexpression of constitutive
Akt, as well as oncogenic Ras, in mouse neural stem
cells leads to the development of GBMs80, supporting
the idea that the PI3K–AKT pathway is pivotal in the
aetiology of GBMs.

Neural stem cells: cell of origin of primary GBM?
In vitro, EGF, but not PDGF, can stimulate the prolifera-
tion of neural stem cells that have the ability to undergo
self-renewal and generate all three CNS cell types: neu-
rons, oligodendrocytes and astrocytes81,82. Specific inac-
tivation of Pten in mouse neural stem cells causes
increased proliferation, at least in part, by shortening the
cell cycle of neural stem cells83. The unique roles of EGF
signalling and PTEN in neural stem-cell proliferation
raise the intriguing possibility that primary GBMs
might derive from neural stem cells. Furthermore, adult
neural stem cells have been identified in various species,
including humans and rodents84–87. Intriguingly, adult
neural  stem  cells  express  the  astrocytic  marker  —
GFAP 88,89 — indicating that a close link might exist
between the astrocytic lineage and adult neural stem cells.
This idea is further supported by the observation that

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

VOLUME 2 | AUGUST 2002 | 6 2 1

R E V I E W S

SCHWANN CELL
A glial-cell component of the
peripheral nervous system that is
derived from the neural crest
and composed of myelinating
and non-myelinating cells.

PERINEURAL CELL
A mesenchyme-derived cell that
is recruited by forming
peripheral nerves to undergo
mesenchymal-to-epithelial
transformation. These cells form
the perineurum and secrete
matrix that forms the perineural
sheath.

Glial progenitor cells

Astrocytes

FGF2

INK4A/ARF
loss and
EGF signalling

Neural stem cells

CDKN2A loss
EGFR amplification/mutation
PTEN mutation

Primary GBM

Figure 4 | A model for the development of primary GBM.
Primary glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) can arise from
transformation of adult neural stem cells, which are either
present in some areas of the brain (for example, the
subventricular zones) or de-differentiated from more mature
cells. For example, glial progenitor cells, such as O2A cells,
can be reprogrammed to develop into neural stem cells in
response to exogenous fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2).
Astrocytes can be de-differentiated into neural stem cells in
response to loss of INK4A/ARF and epidermal growth factor
(EGF) signalling. After this, loss of CDKN2A, amplification of
the gene that encodes the EGF receptor (EGFR) or PTEN
mutations can lead to primary GBM.

radial glial cells — traditionally considered to be astro-
cyte precursors — show characteristics of neural stem
cells both in vivo and in vitro90–93. In mice, it has been
shown that neural stem cells are more susceptible to
transformation than are differentiated astrocytes54,80.
The above observations are consistent with the notion
that the rapid growth of primary GBMs might be a
consequence of transformation of neural stem cells.
This is not consistent, however, with the fact that pri-
mary GBMs arise mainly in patients who are older than
55 years of age1,2, as neural stem-cell activity reduces
with age85.

These seemingly contradictory observations are
likely to be reconciled by several recent provocative
studies. One study reported that oligodendrocyte
precursor cells can be reprogrammed to become
neural stem cells in response to certain exogenous
growth factors94. Moreover, a recent study showed
that loss of both Ink4a and Arf, but not of Ink4a, Arf
or p53 alone, results in de-differentiation of neonatal
mouse astrocytes into neural stem cells in response to
Egf signalling. After transplantation into brains,
Ink4a/Arf–/– astrocytes, as well as Ink4a/Arf–/– neural
stem cells, can lead to the development of high-grade
astrocytomas in response to Egf signalling95. Taken
together, these  observations  support  a  model  in
which primary GBMs can arise from neural stem
cells, which either exist in the adult brain or can be
de-differentiated from more differentiated cell types
(such as astrocytes) in response to oncogenic muta-
tions  (for  example, deficiency  of the  gene  that
encodes INK4A/ARF) (FIG. 4).

Tumours in the PNS
More than 80% of MPNSTs are high-grade malignant
tumours, which correspond to WHO grade III–IV4.
Like GBMs in the CNS, MPNSTs are resistant to con-
ventional therapies, and their deep location in the
body and locally invasive growth prevent complete
surgical resection. The 5-year survival rate for patients
with MPNSTs ranges from 34–52%. Most MPNSTs
(>60%) arise from pre-existing benign neurofibro-
mas, particularly from plexiform neurofibromas in
the setting of neurofibromatosis type 1. Less fre-
quently, MPNSTs can arise de novo from peripheral
nerves without histological evidence of low-grade
lesions. In rare conditions, MPNSTs might also arise
from  pre-existing  schwannomas. Human  genetic
studies, particularly from neurofibromatosis type 1
patients, have shed insight into the genetic pathways
that are responsible for the initiation and progression
of this highly aggressive malignant tumour.

Dermal and plexiform neurofibromas
Although neurofibromas can arise sporadically, the
development of multiple neurofibromas is the hall-
mark  of neurofibromatosis  type  1  disease5–7.
Neurofibromas have two characteristic features: they
invariably arise within peripheral nerves, and they are
heterogeneous tumours that contain every cell type
that is present in normal peripheral nerves. These
include SCHWANN CELLS, neuronal processes, PERINEURAL
CELLS, fibroblasts and infiltrating mast cells. Two main
types of neurofibroma occur in the setting of neurofi-
bromatosis type 1. The most common type is the der-
mal neurofibroma, which arises in association with
small, peripheral nerve twigs within the dermis, usu-
ally after the time of puberty. Although potentially dis-
figuring, dermal neurofibromas spontaneously cease
growth and rarely progress to malignancy. The second
type is the plexiform neurofibroma, which is thought
to be embryonic in origin, and which arises in spinal
or cranial nerves in a diffuse infiltrative pattern that
causes expansion of nerve trunks and their branches.
Due to their size and location, these tumours often
physically impede normal neurological function. In
addition, a significant proportion of plexiform neu-
rofibromas (5%) undergo malignant transformation.
The unique susceptibility to malignant transformation
of plexiform neurofibromas indicates that this tumour
type might contain a unique ‘susceptible cell type’.

The clinical behaviours of these two neurofibromas
indicate that plexiform neurofibromas are probably
derived from embryonic Schwann-cell lineage, whereas
dermal neurofibromas can arise from more mature
Schwann-cell lineage. During development, neural-
crest cells migrate into peripheral nerves, and a subset
of cells commit to the Schwann-cell lineage. In rodents,
neural-crest cells first differentiate into Schwann-cell
precursors, which require neuregulin-1 (NRG1) for
survival in vitro and in vivo 96. After birth, immature
Schwann  cells  develop  into  two  types  of mature
Schwann  cells: myelinating  and  non-myelinating.
However, recently, a population of multipotent neural

622 |  AUGUST 2002 | VOLUME 2

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

R E V I E W S

abnormal cardiac development during embryonic
development, and Nf1-heterozygous mice (Nf1+/–) do
not develop classic neurofibromatosis type 1 hallmarks,
such as neurofibromas and hyperpigmented skin105,106.
Lack of neurofibroma formation in Nf1+/– mice indi-
cates that loss of both Nf1 alleles might be essential for
neurofibroma formation. To increase the mutation rate
in mouse cells, chimeric mice harbouring both Nf1–/–
and Nf1+/+ cells were generated. Interestingly, these
chimeric mice developed plexiform neurofibromas that
were  exclusively  derived  from  the  Nf1–/– cells107.
However, no dermal neurofibromas were reported in
these chimeric mice. These studies provide compelling
evidence that loss of both Nf1 alleles is an obligate step
for plexiform neurofibroma formation. Current mouse
models  fail  to  develop  dermal  neurofibromas. In
human patients, these tumours arise after puberty.
Together, these  results  indicate  that  other  factors
(genetic or non-genetic) might be crucial in this type of
tumour formation (FIG. 5).

Schwann-cell origin and neurofibromas
Neurofibromas are heterogeneous tumours in which not
all of the cells necessarily undergo LOH. So, the presence
of these ‘normal cells’ might mask the LOH of NF1-defi-
cient cells within the tumours. One study reported the
presence of both NF1-positive and NF1-negative cells in
plexiform  neurofibromas, lending  support  for  this
idea108. It is assumed that a genetic bottleneck exists that
initiates the formation of these rare heterogeneous multi-
cellular tumours. A significant goal has therefore been to
identify the cell that first undergoes LOH, and thereby
initiates tumour formation. Retrospective analysis of
human tumour samples has indicated a prevalence of
LOH  in  Schwann-cell  populations, leading  to  the
hypothesis that these cells represent the source of LOH
and tumour formation109–111. However, these studies suf-
fer from the fact that analysis has been limited to samples
that do not represent early events in tumour formation.

Mouse models afford an alternative strategy to address
early events in tumour formation. Almost all cell types
that are present in neurofibromas derived from Nf1–/–
mice have some degree of abnormality in culture. For
example, Nf1–/– peripheral neurons show the ability to
survive in the absence of neurotrophins112. Furthermore,
Nf1–/– Schwann cells show a growth advantage and can
readily be transformed113,114. Interestingly, studies in mast
cells provide compelling evidence that loss of one copy of
Nf1 (haploinsufficiency) leads to hyperactivation of Ras
proteins in mast cells, which results in increased prolifera-
tion of Nf1+/– mast cells, as compared with its wild-type
counterparts in response to stem-cell factor115. This
hyperproliferative effect seems to be mediated by both the
PI3K and RAS–MEK–MAPK signalling pathways116.

Taken together, these data indicate that any or all
the lineages of NF1-deficient cells within neurofibro-
mas could contribute to tumour formation in one
way or another. These studies do not identify, how-
ever, the cell type(s) that must undergo LOH at the
NF1 locus  to  generate  neurofibromas. Recently,
Schwann-cell-specific ablation of Nf1 in mice was

PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
A neuroendocrine tumour that
is formed in neural-crest-
derived adrenal chromaffin cells.

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

VOLUME 2 | AUGUST 2002 | 6 2 3

Neural-crest cells

Schwann-cell 
precursors

Immature Schwann
cells

Myelinating
Schwann cells

Non-myelinating
Schwann cells

Mature Schwann- 
cell lineage

Embryonic Schwann-cell lineage

NFI loss

NF1 loss
Non-genetic factors
(e.g. hormone
abnormalities)

Plexiform neurofibroma

Dermal neurofibroma

Figure 5 | Development of Schwann cells and neurofibromas. In rodents, a subset of
migrating neural-crest cells first differentiate into Schwann-cell precursors, which give rise to
immature Schwann cells, marked by expression of the Schwann-cell marker S100. After
birth, immature Schwann cells differentiate into two types of mature Schwann cells:
myelinating and non-myelinating. For simplification, we group neural-crest cells, Schwann-
cell precursors and immature Schwann cells into the ‘embryonic Schwann-cell lineage’.
Plexiform neurofibromas might arise from transformation of embryonic Schwann-cell lineage.
In mature Schwann cells, disruption of NF1 and other, non-genetic factors, such as hormone
abnormalities, can lead to dermal neurofibromas.

stem cells has been identified from the E14–17 rat
peripheral nerve, which can give rise to several cell
types, including neurons, Schwann cells and muscle
cells97. These observations raise the intriguing possibil-
ity that stochastic mutation of NF1 could affect neural-
crest-derivative components of peripheral nerve at 
different developmental stages — in turn, leading to
different biological consequences. Whether plexiform
neurofibromas  are  derived  from  early  stages  of
Schwann-cell differentiation, and dermal neurofibro-
mas are originated from more differentiated Schwann
cells, remains to be determined (FIG. 5).

Initiation pathway and NF1
Loss of both alleles of the tumour suppressor NF1 gene
has been found in several malignant tumours, including
MPNSTs98, myeloid leukaemias99 and PHEOCHROMOCY-
TOMAS100. However, the inactivation of both NF1 alleles in
benign neurofibromas has been questionable until
recent years. So far, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) has
been detected in only a minority of dermal neurofibro-
mas, ranging from 13 to 36%101–103. This might, in part,
be attributed to the fact that the NF1 gene spans 350 kb
of the human genomic sequence, making it difficult to
detect subtle mutations with conventional screening
techniques. Also, as NF1 negatively regulates RAS-medi-
ated signalling (FIG. 3), it is possible that other compo-
nents in the pathway might be genetically altered in
those neurofibromas that lack detected NF1 mutations.
Although  activated  RAS mutations  have  not  been
detected  in  neurofibromas, acquired  expression  of
EGFR has  been  detected  in  neurofibromas  and
MPNSTs, but not in normal Schwann cells104.

Studies from mouse models were initially not par-
ticularly informative of the role of Nf1 in neurofibroma
formation. Nf1-homozygous mice (Nf1–/–) die due to

R E V I E W S

shown to give rise to multiple plexiform neurofibromas,
with similar immunohistological, ultrastructural and
morphological characteristics to human counterparts.
So, direct evidence is now available indicating that loss
of NF1 in Schwann cells is the genetic bottleneck for
neurofibroma formation117. Interestingly, tumour for-
mation in this model seems to depend on the heterozy-
gous state of surrounding cells. Only NF1+/– mast cells
can extensively infiltrate into nerves before tumour for-
mation, indicating that NF1+/– mast cells might be
actively involved in tumour development.

Progression pathway
The molecular mechanisms that are responsible for
malignant progression of neurofibromas are largely
unknown. So far, only two genetic alterations have been
identified as progression pathways. TP53 mutations have
been identified exclusively in MPNSTs but not in benign
neurofibromas, indicating that, unlike in astrocytomas,
the p53-mediated pathway is involved in the progression
of tumour development118,119. Consistent with the role of
p53 in the progression of MPNSTs, Trp53 –/– and Trp53+/–
mice develop neither neurofibromas nor MPNSTs19,20.
However, mice that harbour both Nf1 and Trp53 muta-
tions  develop  MPNSTs107,120. Taken  together, both
human genetic studies and mouse models support the
notion that loss of NF1/Nf1 initiates tumour formation,
whereas  malignant  progression  requires  additional
genetic lesions, such as in TP53/Trp53.

Genetic alterations in the gene that encodes INK4A
are also frequently identified in MPNSTs but not in neu-
rofibromas121,122, indicating that additional loss of genes
in this locus might also contribute to malignant progres-
sion of neurofibromas. ARF stabilizes p53 by antagoniz-
ing MDM2-mediated degradation59. So, loss of ARF
function in the progression of MPNSTs is consistent
with the idea that p53-mediated pathways are important
for the progression of MPNSTs. A high percentage of
homozygous deletions (50–60%) that disrupt both ARF
and INK4A has been identified in MPNSTs121,122. This
indicates that loss of INK4A might also contribute to
tumour progression. In human tumours, loss of INK4A
is exclusively found in MPNSTs, but not in neurofibro-
mas. In addition, genetic alterations of RB and amplifica-
tions in CDK4 have been detected in the MPNSTs that
lack mutations in the gene that encodes INK4A123, indi-
cating that the RB-mediated G1/S-checkpoint pathway
might be crucial in tumour progression. Furthermore,
loss of expression of another component of the RB path-
way — KIP1 — has been identified in most MPNSTs
(91%) compared with only 6% of neurofibromas124.
These studies rely on a small series of tumour samples.
Further analysis of human and mouse tumours will be
required to establish whether the RB-mediated pathway
is pivotal in the progression of MPNSTs.

Future directions
Despite the recent progress in understanding the mol-
ecular and genetic mechanisms that underlie tumori-
genesis in both the CNS and PNS, effective treatment
for these malignancies remains elusive. The rapid

advances in genomic technology, coupled with the
exploitation of relevant mouse models, might allow
the tumour type to be defined and classified based on
specific  gene-expression  profiles. Progress  is  still
needed in several areas. First, in keeping with the
rapid advances in genomic technology, efforts should
be made to continue to incorporate molecular genetic
information into clinical classification and grading
schemes125,126. This new ‘molecular grading’ system,
combined  with  the  traditional  histopathological
approaches, should allow more accurate and repro-
ducible diagnoses. Improved imaging techniques will
probably provide clinicians with opportunities to
make ever-earlier diagnoses of these neoplasms.

Although important genetic pathways that are
involved in the initiation of secondary GBMs have
been identified, it remains unknown whether alter-
ations  of these  pathways  are  sufficient  to  induce
tumour formation. To this end, accurate mouse mod-
els that, through similar genetic alterations, can repro-
duce clinical symptoms in humans will be essential.
Not only might relevant mouse models provide pre-
cise evidence regarding the causal role of particular
genetic pathway(s) for tumorigenesis, but they will
also provide a platform for further characterization of
molecular mechanisms, as well as preclinical models
for therapeutic drug screening.

to  conventional 

We need to understand the correlation of genetic
alterations and tumour phenotype to better under-
stand how these genetic alterations (for example, TP53
and GF–RTK–RAS) cause astrocytoma cells to become
highly invasive and render malignant neurological
tumours  resistant 
therapies.
Downstream effectors of these genetic pathways also
need to be identified, which will provide additional
therapeutic targets. Several molecularly targeted strate-
gies have recently been developed. Virally mediated
gene transfer has been used to specifically kill TP53-
deficient cells127,128. Small compounds that block tyro-
sine kinase activity, such as antagonists of PDGFR and
EGFR, are undergoing clinical trials129. Inhibitors for
components of the RAS–MEK–MAPK pathway are
also at various stages of clinical trials130. In addition,
strategies to target the deficiency of the RB-mediated
pathway have been used131,132.

The highly invasive nature of astrocytoma cells
might reflect a unique feature of astrocytes during
development  —  their  ability  to  undergo  extensive
migration. Compared  with  neuronal  or  oligoden-
droglial development, astrocytic development remains
poorly understood, and is a crucial area for investiga-
tion. As discussed above, genetic mutations in neural
stem cells might give rise to a markedly different out-
come, compared with those occurring in more differen-
tiated cells. So, a more complete understanding of the
biology of stem cells should provide important insights
into the evolution of cancer cells. Taken together, the
integration of the multiple disciplines, including molec-
ular biology, genetics, neuro-oncology and develop-
mental neurobiology, will be a crucial feature of our
quest to cure for these devastating diseases.

624 |  AUGUST 2002 | VOLUME 2

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

1.  Kleihues, P. & Cavenee, W. K. Pathology and Genetics of
Tumors of the Nervous System (IARC Press, Lyon, 2000).
An outstanding and comprehensive textbook on the
pathology and genetics of tumours of the nervous
system.

2.  Maher, E. A. et al. Malignant glioma: genetics and biology of

a grave matter. Genes Dev. 15, 1311–1333 (2001).

3.  Holland, E. C. Gliomagenesis: genetic alterations and

mouse models. Nature Rev. Genet. 2, 120–129 (2001).
References 2 and 3 are recent comprehensive reviews
on the genetics of gliomas.

4.  Woodruff, J. M. Pathology of tumors of the peripheral nerve
sheath in type 1 neurofibromatosis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 89,
23–30 (1999).

5.  Riccardi, V. M. Neurofibromatosis: Phenotype, Natural

History, and Pathogenesis (Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore and London, 1992).

7. 

6.  Cichowski, K. & Jacks, T. NF1 tumor suppressor gene
function: narrowing the GAP. Cell 104, 593–604 (2001).
Zhu, Y. & Parada, L. F. Neurofibromin, a tumor suppressor in
the nervous system. Exp. Cell Res. 264, 19–28 (2001).
Vogelstein, B., Lane, D. & Levine, A. J. Surfing the p53
network. Nature 408, 307–310 (2000).

8. 

factor alpha receptor expression in human malignant
gliomas. Cancer Res. 56, 164–171 (1996).

30.  Nister, M. et al. Expression of messenger RNAs for platelet-
derived growth factor and transforming growth factor-α and
their receptors in human malignant glioma cell lines. Cancer
Res. 48, 3910–3918 (1988).
References 28 and 30 are the first to report that
astrocytoma cells might establish an autocrine loop
of PDGF signalling.

31.  Uhrbom, L., Hesselager, G., Nister, M. & Westermark, B.

Induction of brain tumors in mice using a recombinant
platelet-derived growth factor B-chain retrovirus. Cancer
Res. 58, 5275–5279 (1998).

32.  Dai, C. et al. PDGF autocrine stimulation dedifferentiates
cultured astrocytes and induces oligodendrogliomas and
oligoastrocytomas from neural progenitors and astrocytes in
vivo. Genes Dev. 15, 1913–1925 (2001).
References 31 and 32 describe the effort to model
astrocytomas in mice by overexpression of Pdgf.

33.  Oumesmar, B. N., Vignais, L. & Baron-Van Evercooren, A.

Developmental expression of platelet-derived growth factor-
α receptor in neurons and glial cells of the mouse CNS. J.
Neurosci. 17, 125–139 (1997).

9.  Srivastava, S., Zou, Z. Q., Pirollo, K., Blattner, W. & Chang,

34.  Fruttiger, M. et al. Defective oligodendrocyte development

E. H. Germ-line transmission of a mutated p53 gene in a
cancer-prone family with Li–Fraumeni syndrome. Nature
348, 747–749 (1990).

10.  Malkin, D. et al. Germ line p53 mutations in a familial

syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other
neoplasms. Science 250, 1233–1238 (1990).

and severe hypomyelination in PDGF-A knockout mice.
Development 126, 457–467 (1999).

35.  Duchek, P., Somogyi, K., Jekely, G., Beccari, S. & Rorth, P.
Guidance of cell migration by the Drosophila PDGF/VEGF
receptor. Cell 107, 17–26 (2001).

36.  Bos, J. L. Ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review.

11.  van Meyel, D. J. et al. p53 mutation, expression, and DNA

Cancer Res. 49, 4682–4689 (1989).

ploidy in evolving gliomas: evidence for two pathways of
progression. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 86, 1011–1017 (1994).

12.  Ohgaki, H. et al. A case history of glioma progression. Acta

Neuropathol. 97, 525–532 (1999).

13.  Louis, D. N. et al. Comparative study of p53 gene and

protein alterations in human astrocytic tumors. J.
Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 52, 31–38 (1993).

14.  Rasheed, B. K. et al. Alterations of the TP53 gene in human

gliomas. Cancer Res. 54, 1324–1330 (1994).

15.  Sidransky, D. et al. Clonal expansion of p53 mutant cells is

associated with brain tumour progression. Nature 355,
846–847 (1992).

16.  von Deimling, A. et al. p53 mutations are associated with

17p allelic loss in grade II and grade III astrocytoma. Cancer
Res. 52, 2987–2990 (1992).

17.  Watanabe, K. et al. Incidence and timing of p53 mutations

during astrocytoma progression in patients with multiple
biopsies. Clin. Cancer Res. 3, 523–530 (1997).

18.  Kinzler, K. W. & Vogelstein, B. Lessons from hereditary

colorectal cancer. Cell 87, 159–170 (1996).

19.  Donehower, L. A. et al. Mice deficient for p53 are

developmentally normal but susceptible to spontaneous
tumours. Nature 356, 215–221 (1992).

20.  Jacks, T. et al. Tumor spectrum analysis in p53-mutant

mice. Curr. Biol. 4, 1–7 (1994).

21.  Yahanda, A. M., Bruner, J. M., Donehower, L. A. & Morrison,

R. S. Astrocytes derived from p53-deficient mice provide a
multistep in vitro model for development of malignant
gliomas. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15, 4249–4259 (1995).

22.  Bogler, O., Huang, H. J. & Cavenee, W. K. Loss of wild-type

p53 bestows a growth advantage on primary cortical
astrocytes and facilitates their in vitro transformation. Cancer
Res. 55, 2746–2751 (1995).
References 21 and 22 show that Trp53-deficient
astrocytes have a growth advantage and are
susceptible to transformation.

23.  Hunter, T. Signaling: 2000 and beyond. Cell 100, 113–127

(2000).

24.  Takahashi, J. A. et al. Correlation of basic fibroblast growth
factor expression levels with the degree of malignancy and
vascularity in human gliomas. J. Neurosurg. 76, 792–798
(1992).

25.  Weis, J. et al. CNTF and its receptor subunits in human

gliomas. J. Neurooncol. 44, 243–253 (1999).

26.  Yamaguchi, F., Saya, H., Bruner, J. M. & Morrison, R. S.

Differential expression of two fibroblast growth factor-
receptor genes is associated with malignant progression in
human astrocytomas. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 91,
484–488 (1994).

27.  Guha, A., Dashner, K., Black, P. M., Wagner, J. A. & Stiles,
C. D. Expression of PDGF and PDGF receptors in human
astrocytoma operation specimens supports the existence of
an autocrine loop. Int. J. Cancer 60, 168–173 (1995).

28.  Hermanson, M. et al. Platelet-derived growth factor and its
receptors in human glioma tissue: expression of messenger
RNA and protein suggests the presence of autocrine and
paracrine loops. Cancer Res. 52, 3213–3219 (1992).

29.  Hermanson, M. et al. Association of loss of heterozygosity

on chromosome 17p with high platelet-derived growth

37.  Guha, A., Feldkamp, M. M., Lau, N., Boss, G. & Pawson, A.
Proliferation of human malignant astrocytomas is dependent
on Ras activation. Oncogene 15, 2755–2765 (1997).

38.  Kluwe, L. et al. Loss of NF1 alleles distinguish sporadic from

NF1-associated pilocytic astrocytomas. J. Neuropathol.
Exp. Neurol. 60, 917–920 (2001).

39.  Lau, N. et al. Loss of neurofibromin is associated with
activation of RAS/MAPK and PI3-K/AKT signaling in a
neurofibromatosis 1 astrocytoma. J. Neuropathol. Exp.
Neurol. 59, 759–767 (2000).

40.  Ding, H. et al. Astrocyte-specific expression of activated
p21-Ras results in malignant astrocytoma formation in a
transgenic mouse model of human gliomas. Cancer Res.
61, 3826–3836 (2001).

41.  Malumbres, M. & Barbacid, M. To cycle or not to cycle: a
critical decision in cancer. Nature Rev. Cancer 1, 222–231
(2001).

42.  Ueki, K. et al. CDKN2/p16 or RB alterations occur in the

majority of glioblastomas and are inversely correlated.
Cancer Res. 56, 150–153 (1996).

43.  Burns, K. L., Ueki, K., Jhung, S. L., Koh, J. & Louis, D. N.

Molecular genetic correlates of p16, cdk4, and pRb
immunohistochemistry in glioblastomas. J. Neuropathol.
Exp. Neurol. 57, 122–130 (1998).

44.  Schmidt, E. E., Ichimura, K., Reifenberger, G. & Collins, V. P.

CDKN2 (p16/MTS1) gene deletion or CDK4 amplification
occurs in the majority of glioblastomas. Cancer Res. 54,
6321–6324 (1994).

45.  He, J., Olson, J. J. & James, C. D. Lack of p16INK4 or

46. 

retinoblastoma protein (pRb), or amplification-associated
overexpression of cdk4 is observed in distinct subsets of
malignant glial tumors and cell lines. Cancer Res. 55,
4833–4836 (1995).
Ichimura, K., Schmidt, E. E., Goike, H. M. & Collins, V. P.
Human glioblastomas with no alterations of the CDKN2A
(p16INK4A, MTS1) and CDK4 genes have frequent
mutations of the retinoblastoma gene. Oncogene 13,
1065–1072 (1996).

47.  Costello, J. F. et al. Cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6)

amplification in human gliomas identified using two-
dimensional separation of genomic DNA. Cancer Res. 57,
1250–1254 (1997).

48.  Buschges, R. et al. Amplification and expression of cyclin D
genes (CCND1, CCND2 and CCND3) in human malignant
gliomas. Brain Pathol. 9, 435–442; discussion 432–433
(1999).

49.  Chakravarti, A. et al. Prognostic and pathologic significance
of quantitative protein expression profiling in human gliomas.
Clin. Cancer Res. 7, 2387–2395 (2001).

50.  Krimpenfort, P., Quon, K. C., Mooi, W. J., Loonstra, A. &

Berns, A. Loss of p16Ink4a confers susceptibility to
metastatic melanoma in mice. Nature 413, 83–86 (2001).
51.  Sharpless, N. E. et al. Loss of p16Ink4a with retention of
p19Arf predisposes mice to tumorigenesis. Nature 413,
86–91 (2001).

52.  Serrano, M. et al. Role of the INK4a locus in tumor

suppression and cell mortality. Cell 85, 27–37 (1996).

53.  Marino, S., Vooijs, M., van Der Gulden, H., Jonkers, J. &

Berns, A. Induction of medulloblastomas in p53-null mutant

R E V I E W S

mice by somatic inactivation of Rb in the external granular layer
cells of the cerebellum. Genes Dev. 14, 994–1004 (2000).

54.  Holland, E. C., Hively, W. P., DePinho, R. A. & Varmus, H. E.

A constitutively active epidermal growth factor receptor
cooperates with disruption of G1 cell-cycle arrest pathways
to induce glioma-like lesions in mice. Genes Dev. 12,
3675–3685 (1998).

55.  Xiao, A., Wu, H., Pandolfi, P. P., Louis, D. N. & Van Dyke, T.

Astrocyte inactivation of the pRb pathway predisposes mice
to malignant astrocytoma development that is accelerated
by PTEN mutation. Cancer Cell 1, 157–168 (2002).

56.  Biernat, W., Tohma, Y., Yonekawa, Y., Kleihues, P. & Ohgaki, H.
Alterations of cell cycle regulatory genes in primary (de novo)
and secondary glioblastomas. Acta Neuropathol. 94,
303–309 (1997).

57.  Lang, F. F., Miller, D. C., Koslow, M. & Newcomb, E. W.

Pathways leading to glioblastoma multiforme: a molecular
analysis of genetic alterations in 65 astrocytic tumors. J.
Neurosurg. 81, 427–436 (1994).

58.  Fulci, G. et al. p53 gene mutation and INK4A–ARF deletion

appear to be two mutually exclusive events in human
glioblastoma. Oncogene 19, 3816–3822 (2000).

59.  Sherr, C. J. The INK4A/ARF network in tumour suppression.

Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2, 731–737 (2001).

60.  Biernat, W., Kleihues, P., Yonekawa, Y. & Ohgaki, H.

Amplification and overexpression of MDM2 in primary (de
novo) glioblastomas. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 56,
180–185 (1997).

61.  Reilly, K. M., Loisel, D. A., Bronson, R. T., McLaughlin, M. E.

& Jacks, T. Nf1;Trp53 mutant mice develop glioblastoma
with evidence of strain-specific effects. Nature Genet. 26,
109–113 (2000).

62.  Schlegel, J. et al. Amplification of the epidermal-growth-

factor-receptor gene correlates with different growth
behaviour in human glioblastoma. Int. J. Cancer 56, 72–77
(1994).

63.  Hayashi, Y. et al. Association of EGFR gene amplification

and CDKN2 (p16/MTS1) gene deletion in glioblastoma
multiforme. Brain Pathol. 7, 871–875 (1997).

64.  Simmons, M. L. et al. Analysis of complex relationships

between age, p53, epidermal growth factor receptor, and
survival in glioblastoma patients. Cancer Res. 61,
1122–1128 (2001).

65.  Frederick, L., Wang, X. Y., Eley, G. & James, C. D. Diversity

and frequency of epidermal growth factor receptor
mutations in human glioblastomas. Cancer Res. 60,
1383–1387 (2000).

66.  Nishikawa, R. et al. A mutant epidermal growth factor
receptor common in human glioma confers enhanced
tumorigenicity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 91, 7727–7731
(1994).

67.  Fults, D. & Pedone, C. Deletion mapping of the long arm of

chromosome 10 in glioblastoma multiforme. Genes
Chromosom. Cancer 7, 173–177 (1993).

68.  von Deimling, A. et al. Subsets of glioblastoma multiforme

defined by molecular genetic analysis. Brain Pathol. 3,
19–26 (1993).

69.  Li, J. et al. PTEN, a putative protein tyrosine phosphatase

gene mutated in human brain, breast, and prostate cancer.
Science 275, 1943–1947 (1997).

70.  Steck, P. A. et al. Identification of a candidate tumour

suppressor gene, MMAC1, at chromosome 10q23.3 that is
mutated in multiple advanced cancers. Nature Genet. 15,
356–362 (1997).

71.  Li, D. M. & Sun, H. TEP1, encoded by a candidate tumor
suppressor locus, is a novel protein tyrosine phosphatase
regulated by transforming growth factor-β. Cancer Res. 57,
2124–2129 (1997).
References 69–71 identify the tumour-suppressor
gene PTEN.

72.  Tohma, Y. et al. PTEN (MMAC1) mutations are frequent in

primary glioblastomas (de novo) but not in secondary
glioblastomas. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 57, 684–689
(1998).

73.  Myers, M. P. et al. PTEN, the tumor suppressor from human

chromosome 10q23, is a dual-specificity phosphatase.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 9052–9057 (1997).

74.  Tamura, M. et al. Inhibition of cell migration, spreading, and
focal adhesions by tumor suppressor PTEN. Science 280,
1614–1617 (1998).

75.  Maehama, T. & Dixon, J. E. The tumor suppressor,
PTEN/MMAC1, dephosphorylates the lipid second
messenger, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate. 
J. Biol. Chem. 273, 13375–13378 (1998).

76.  Myers, M. P. et al. The lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN is
critical for its tumor supressor function. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 95, 13513–13518 (1998).

77.  Leevers, S. J., Vanhaesebroeck, B. & Waterfield, M. D.

Signalling through phosphoinositide 3-kinases: the lipids
take centre stage. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11, 219–225 (1999).

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

VOLUME 2 | AUGUST 2002 | 6 2 5

R E V I E W S

78.  Wu, X., Senechal, K., Neshat, M. S., Whang, Y. E. &

Sawyers, C. L. The PTEN/MMAC1 tumor suppressor
phosphatase functions as a negative regulator of the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt pathway. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 95, 15587–15591 (1998).

79.  Stambolic, V. et al. Negative regulation of PKB/Akt-

dependent cell survival by the tumor suppressor PTEN. Cell
95, 29–39 (1998).

80.  Holland, E. C. et al. Combined activation of Ras and Akt in
neural progenitors induces glioblastoma formation in mice.
Nature Genet. 25, 55–57 (2000).
A mouse model that recapitulates cardinal features of
human GBM, including microvascular proliferation
and necrosis. The study also indicates that the
PI3K–AKT pathway has a crucial role in the
development of GBM and that neural stem cells are
more susceptible to transformation.

81.  Reynolds, B. A., Tetzlaff, W. & Weiss, S. A multipotent EGF-

responsive striatal embryonic progenitor cell produces
neurons and astrocytes. J. Neurosci. 12, 4565–4574
(1992).

82.  Reynolds, B. A. & Weiss, S. Generation of neurons and

astrocytes from isolated cells of the adult mammalian central
nervous system. Science 255, 1707–1710 (1992).

83.  Groszer, M. et al. Negative regulation of neural

stem/progenitor cell proliferation by the Pten tumor
suppressor gene in vivo. Science 294, 2186–2189 (2001).

84.  Temple, S. & Alvarez-Buylla, A. Stem cells in the adult

mammalian central nervous system. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
9, 135–141 (1999).

85.  Gage, F. H. Mammalian neural stem cells. Science 287,

1433–1438 (2000).

101. Colman, S. D., Williams, C. A. & Wallace, M. R. Benign
neurofibromas in type 1 neurofibromatosis (NF1) show
somatic deletions of the NF1 gene. Nature Genet. 11,
90–92 (1995).

102. Serra, E. et al. Confirmation of a double-hit model for the

NF1 gene in benign neurofibromas. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61,
512–519 (1997).

103. Rasmussen, S. A. et al. Chromosome 17 loss-of-

heterozygosity studies in benign and malignant tumors in
neurofibromatosis type 1. Genes Chromosom. Cancer 28,
425–431 (2000).

104. DeClue, J. E. et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor

expression in neurofibromatosis type 1-related tumors and
NF1 animal models. J. Clin. Invest. 105, 1233–1241
(2000).

105. Brannan, C. I. et al. Targeted disruption of the

neurofibromatosis type-1 gene leads to developmental
abnormalities in heart and various neural crest-derived
tissues. Genes Dev. 8, 1019–1029 (1994).

106. Jacks, T. et al. Tumour predisposition in mice heterozygous

for a targeted mutation in Nf1. Nature Genet. 7, 353–361
(1994).

120. Vogel, K. S. et al. Mouse tumor model for neurofibromatosis

type 1. Science 286, 2176–2179 (1999).
Along with reference 107, these studies show that p53
cooperates with Nf1 to promote the development of
MPNSTs in mice.

121. Kourea, H. P., Orlow, I., Scheithauer, B. W., Cordon-Cardo, C.

& Woodruff, J. M. Deletions of the INK4A gene occur in
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors but not in
neurofibromas. Am. J. Pathol. 155, 1855–1860 (1999).

122. Nielsen, G. P. et al. Malignant transformation of neurofibromas

in neurofibromatosis 1 is associated with CDKN2A/p16
inactivation. Am. J. Pathol. 155, 1879–1884 (1999).

123. Berner, J. M. et al. Chromosome band 9p21 is frequently

altered in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors: studies
of CDKN2A and other genes of the pRB pathway. Genes
Chromosom. Cancer 26, 151–160 (1999).

124. Kourea, H. P., Cordon-Cardo, C., Dudas, M., Leung, D. &
Woodruff, J. M. Expression of p27(kip) and other cell cycle
regulators in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors and
neurofibromas: the emerging role of p27(kip) in malignant
transformation of neurofibromas. Am. J. Pathol. 155,
1885–1891 (1999).

107. Cichowski, K. et al. Mouse models of tumor development

125. MacDonald, T. J. et al. Expression profiling of

in neurofibromatosis type 1. Science 286, 2172–2176
(1999).
This study provides the first evidence that loss of both
alleles of Nf1 is a rate-limiting step in neurofibroma
formation.

108. Muir, D., Neubauer, D., Lim, I. T., Yachnis, A. T. & Wallace, M. R.

Tumorigenic properties of neurofibromin-deficient
neurofibroma Schwann cells. Am. J. Pathol. 158, 501–513
(2001).

medulloblastoma: PDGFRA and the RAS/MAPK pathway
as therapeutic targets for metastatic disease. Nature Genet.
29, 143–152 (2001).

126. Pomeroy, S. L. et al. Prediction of central nervous system
embryonal tumour outcome based on gene expression.
Nature 415, 436–442 (2002).

127. Bischoff, J. R. et al. An adenovirus mutant that replicates

selectively in p53-deficient human tumor cells. Science 274,
373–376 (1996).

86.  Temple, S. The development of neural stem cells. Nature

109. Serra, E. et al. Schwann cells harbor the somatic NF1

128. McCormick, F. Cancer gene therapy: fringe or cutting edge?

414, 112–117 (2001).

87.  Rakic, P. Adult neurogenesis in mammals: an identity crisis.

J. Neurosci. 22, 614–618 (2002).

mutation in neurofibromas: evidence of two different
Schwann cell subpopulations. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9,
3055–3064 (2000).

Nature Rev. Cancer 1, 130–141 (2001).

129. Traxler, P. et al. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors: from rational

design to clinical trials. Med. Res. Rev. 21, 499–512 (2001).

88.  Doetsch, F., Caille, I., Lim, D. A., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M. &

110. Rutkowski, J. L., Wu, K., Gutmann, D. H., Boyer, P. J. &

130. Gibbs, J. B. Mechanism-based target identification and

Alvarez-Buylla, A. Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural
stem cells in the adult mammalian brain. Cell 97, 703–716
(1999).

Legius, E. Genetic and cellular defects contributing to
benign tumor formation in neurofibromatosis type 1. Hum.
Mol. Genet. 9, 1059–1066 (2000).

89.  Seri, B., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M., McEwen, B. S. & 

111. Sherman, L. S., Atit, R., Rosenbaum, T., Cox, A. D. &

Alvarez-Buylla, A. Astrocytes give rise to new neurons in the
adult mammalian hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 21,
7153–7160 (2001).

90.  Noctor, S. C., Flint, A. C., Weissman, T. A., Dammerman, R. S.

& Kriegstein, A. R. Neurons derived from radial glial cells
establish radial units in neocortex. Nature 409, 714–720
(2001).

91.  Malatesta, P., Hartfuss, E. & Gotz, M. Isolation of radial glial
cells by fluorescent-activated cell sorting reveals a neuronal
lineage. Development 127, 5253–5263 (2000).

92.  Hartfuss, E., Galli, R., Heins, N. & Gotz, M. Characterization

of CNS precursor subtypes and radial glia. Dev. Biol. 229,
15–30 (2001).

93.  Alvarez-Buylla, A., Garcia-Verdugo, J. M. & Tramontin, A. D.

A unified hypothesis on the lineage of neural stem cells.
Nature Rev. Neurosci. 2, 287–293 (2001).

Ratner, N. Single cell Ras-GTP analysis reveals altered ras
activity in a subpopulation of neurofibroma schwann cells
but not fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 30740–30745
(2000).
References 112–114 show that Schwann cells, not
fibroblasts, are NF1-deficient cells within
neurofibromas.

112. Vogel, K. S., Brannan, C. I., Jenkins, N. A., Copeland, N. G.
& Parada, L. F. Loss of neurofibromin results in neurotrophin-
independent survival of embryonic sensory and sympathetic
neurons. Cell 82, 733–742 (1995).

113. Kim, H. A., Rosenbaum, T., Marchionni, M. A., Ratner, N. &

DeClue, J. E. Schwann cells from neurofibromin deficient
mice exhibit activation of p21ras, inhibition of cell
proliferation and morphological changes. Oncogene 11,
325–335 (1995).

94.  Kondo, T. & Raff, M. Oligodendrocyte precursor cells

114. Kim, H. A., Ling, B. & Ratner, N. Nf1-deficient mouse

reprogrammed to become multipotential CNS stem cells.
Science 289, 1754–1757 (2000).

95.  Bachoo, R. M. et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor and

Ink4a/Arf: convergent mechanisms governing terminal
differentiation and transformation along the neural stem cell
to astrocyte axis. Cancer Cell 1, 269–277 (2002).
A provocative study showing that astrocytes can de-
differentiate into neural stem cells in response to
oncogenic mutations. This provides the first evidence
that neural stem cells can result from oncogenic
mutations.

96.  Jessen, K. R. & Mirsky, R. Origin and early development

of Schwann cells. Microsc. Res. Tech. 41, 393–402
(1998).

97.  Morrison, S. J., White, P. M., Zock, C. & Anderson, D. J.

Prospective identification, isolation by flow cytometry, and in
vivo self-renewal of multipotent mammalian neural crest
stem cells. Cell 96, 737–749 (1999).
The study is the first to prospectively identify and
isolate stem cells from the peripheral nervous system.

98.  Legius, E., Marchuk, D. A., Collins, F. S. & Glover, T. W.

Somatic deletion of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene in a
neurofibrosarcoma supports a tumour suppressor gene
hypothesis. Nature Genet. 3, 122–126 (1993).

99.  Side, L. et al. Homozygous inactivation of the NF1 gene in

bone marrow cells from children with neurofibromatosis 
type 1 and malignant myeloid disorders. N. Engl. J. Med.
336, 1713–1720 (1997).

100. Xu, W. et al. Loss of NF1 alleles in phaeochromocytomas

from patients with type I neurofibromatosis. Genes
Chromosom. Cancer 4, 337–342 (1992).

Schwann cells are angiogenic and invasive and can be
induced to hyperproliferate: reversion of some phenotypes
by an inhibitor of farnesyl protein transferase. Mol. Cell. Biol.
17, 862–872 (1997).

115. Ingram, D. A. et al. Genetic and biochemical evidence that

haploinsufficiency of the Nf1 tumor suppressor gene
modulates melanocyte and mast cell fates in vivo. J. Exp.
Med. 191, 181–188 (2000).
References 112–115 describe abnormal properties of
cells that are present in neurofibromas.

116. Ingram, D. A. et al. Hyperactivation of p21(ras) and the

hematopoietic-specific Rho GTPase, Rac2, cooperate to
alter the proliferation of neurofibromin-deficient mast cells in
vivo and in vitro. J. Exp. Med. 194, 57–69 (2001).

117. Zhu, Y., Ghosh, P., Charnay, P., Burns, D. K. & Parada, L. F.
Neurofibromas in NF1: Schwann cell origin and role of tumor
environment. Science 296, 920–922 (2002).
Identifies that disruption of NF1 in Schwann-cell
lineage initiates neurofibroma formation, and that the
heterozygous state of the tumour’s environment is
crucial in its development.

118. Menon, A. G. et al. Chromosome 17p deletions and p53

gene mutations associated with the formation of malignant
neurofibrosarcomas in von Recklinghausen
neurofibromatosis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 87,
5435–5439 (1990).

119. Legius, E. et al. TP53 mutations are frequent in malignant

NF1 tumors. Genes Chromosom. Cancer 10, 250–255
(1994).
References 118 and 119 show that disruption in TP53
is involved in malignant progression of MPNSTs.

drug discovery in cancer research. Science 287,
1969–1973 (2000).

131. Parr, M. J. et al. Tumor-selective transgene expression in

vivo mediated by an E2F-responsive adenoviral vector.
Nature Med. 3, 1145–1149 (1997).

132. Shapiro, G. I. & Harper, J. W. Anticancer drug targets: cell

cycle and checkpoint control. J. Clin. Invest. 104,
1645–1653 (1999).

133. Raff, M. C. Glial cell diversification in the rat optic nerve.

Science 243, 1450–1455 (1989).

134. Fulton, B. P., Burne, J. F. & Raff, M. C. Visualization of O-2A

progenitor cells in developing and adult rat optic nerve by
quisqualate-stimulated cobalt uptake. J. Neurosci. 12,
4816–4833 (1992).

135. Calver, A. R. et al. Oligodendrocyte population dynamics
and the role of PDGF in vivo. Neuron 20, 869–882 (1998).
136. Zhou, Q. & Anderson, D. J. The bHLH transcription factors

OLIG2 and OLIG1 couple neuronal and glial subtype
specification. Cell 109, 61–73 (2002).

137. Lu, Q. R. et al. Common developmental requirement for Olig

function indicates a motor neuron/oligodendrocyte
connection. Cell 109, 75–86 (2002).

Acknowledgements
The authors thank D. Burns, S. Kernie and L. Klesse for critically
reading the manuscript. They also thank the members of the
Parada lab for helpful discussions. L.F.P. is supported by NINDS
(National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke) and
DOD (Department of Defence) grants. Y.Z. is a recipient of a
Young 
Investigator  Award 
(National
Neurofibromatosis Foundation).

the  NNFF 

from 

Online links

DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Cancer.gov: http://www.cancer.gov/cancer_information/
astrocytoma | brain tumours | ependymoma
GenBank: http://www.ncbi.nih.gov/Genbank/
SV40 T antigen
LocusLink: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/
Akt | AKT | CDC42 | CDK2 | Cdk4 | CDK4 | CDK6 | CDKN2A | D-
type cyclins | cyclin D1 | E-type cyclins | E2F1 | Egf | Egfr | EGFR |
FGF2 | Gfap | GFAP | GRB2 | Ink4a | INK4B | INK4C | INK4D |
KIP1 | KIP2 | MAPK | MDM2 | MEK | nestin | Nf1 | NF1 | NRG1 |
p107 | p120GAP | p130 | p53 | Pdgfa | PDGFA | Pdgfb | PDGFB |
Pdgfr | PDGFR | PI3K | Pten | PTEN | RAC | RAF | Ras | RAS | RB |
SHC | SOS | Trp53 | WAF1
OMIM: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/
Li–Fraumeni syndrome | neurofibromatosis type 1
Access to this interactive links box is free online.

626 |  AUGUST 2002 | VOLUME 2

www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

©  2002 Nature Publishing Group

Copyright of Nature Reviews Cancer is the property of Nature Publishing Group and its content may not be
copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written
permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

