©American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics

genetest review

costello syndrome: a Ras/mitogen activated protein kinase 

pathway syndrome (rasopathy) resulting  

from HRAS germline mutations

Karen W. Gripp, MD1 and Angela E. Lin, MD2

Costello syndrome (OMIM# 218040) is a distinctive rare multisys-
tem  disorder  comprising  a  characteristic  coarse  facial  appearance, 
intellectual disabilities, and tumor predisposition. Although the diag-
nosis can be suspected clinically, confirmation requires identification 
of a heterozygous mutation in the proto-oncogene HRAS. In contrast 
to somatic oncogenic mutations in neoplasia, the Costello syndrome 
changes are typically introduced in the paternal germline. The pre-
dicted amino acid substitutions allow for constitutive or prolonged 
activation  of  the  HRAS  protein,  resulting  in  dysregulation  of  the 
Ras/mitogen activated protein kinase pathway. Dysregulation of this 
signaling pathway is the disease mechanism shared among Costello 
syndrome and other rasopathies, including neurofibromatosis type 
1, Noonan syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome, and Legius 
syndrome. The Ras/mitogen activated protein kinase pathway gov-
erns cell proliferation and differentiation, and its dysregulation affects 

cardiac and brain development, accounting for the significant over-
lap in physical and developmental differences and common medical 
problems among rasopathies. Unlike the genetically heterogeneous 
Noonan  syndrome  and  cardio-facio-cutaneous  syndrome,  Costello 
syndrome is caused by HRAS mutations only. Patients, clinicians, and 
researchers may benefit from a multidisciplinary “rasopathy clinic,” 
which serves patients with more common conditions such as Noonan 
syndrome and neurofibromatosis and those affected by rare condi-
tions such as Costello syndrome.

Genet Med 2012:14(3):285–292

Key words: cancer syndrome; Costello syndrome; germline; HRAS; 
hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy;  Noonan  syndrome  spectrum;  Ras/
MAPK; rasopathy

intROdUctiOn

Costello syndrome (OMIM# 218040) is a rare disorder first 
described 40 years ago by a New Zealand pediatrician1,2 based 
on its distinctive phenotype. Characteristic findings include 
coarse facial features, intellectual disability, cardiac problems 
(typically cardiac hypertrophy, less commonly, atrial tachycar-
dia, or pulmonic stenosis), and severe failure-to-thrive with 
short  stature.3  The  predisposition  to  neoplasia  encompasses 
a spectrum from benign wart-like skin lesions termed pap-
illomata to malignant tumors including rhabdomyosarcoma, 
neuroblastoma, and transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder.4 
The identification of activating heterozygous germline muta-
tions in the proto-oncogene HRAS in individuals with Costello 
syndrome5 provided a rationale for the increased malignancy 
risk. Further, additional gene changes affecting other compo-
nents  of  the  Ras/mitogen  activated  protein  kinase  (MAPK) 
pathway were found to result in the clinically related condi-
tions—Noonan syndrome and cardio-facio-cutaneous (CFC) 
syndrome. These conditions are now collectively referred to 
as rasopathies,6 and the improved understanding of the Ras/
MAPK pathway’s primary role in embryologic development 
has shifted the focus from its previously well studied role in 
carcinogenesis. In contrast to the molecular heterogeneity of 
CFC and Noonan syndrome, Costello syndrome results from 
mutations  in  a  single  gene.  Its  gene  product  plays  a  critical 

role within the signaling pathway as it alternates between its 
active, signal transmitting and its inactive conformation. The 
activating point mutations in Costello syndrome shift the bal-
ance toward the active, signal transmitting state, resulting in 
dysregulation  of  the  signaling  pathway.  Costello  syndrome 
can be considered a model disorder for rasopathies, and fur-
ther phenotype/genotype studies are emerging.

discUssiOn

clinical diagnosis
Costello syndrome can be diagnosed clinically with the great-
est  confidence  in  the  older  child.  Formal  diagnostic  criteria 
for Costello syndrome have not been developed, but consen-
sus guidelines developed by experts have been published.7 No 
single  feature  is  unique  for  Costello  syndrome,  although  the 
constellation of several creates the characteristic facial appear-
ance with curly or fine hair, prominent epicanthal folds, long 
eyelashes, full nasal tip, fleshy ear lobes, and a wide mouth with 
full lips. When supplemented by the distinctive hand position 
(severe  ulnar  deviation),  diffuse  hyperpigmentation,  hoarse 
voice and generally, friendly outgoing personality, the memo-
rable phenotype is complete (Table 1) (Figure 1a,b). Clinicians 
should view these guidelines in the context of the natural his-
tory described later, as physical manifestations evolve in an age-
dependent manner.

1Division of Medical Genetics, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware, USA; 2Medical Genetics, MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA. Correspondence: Karen W. Gripp (kgripp@nemours.org)
Submitted 8 June 2011; accepted 11 July 2011; advance online publication 9 September 2011. doi:10.1038/GIM.0b013e31822dd91f

Genetics in medicine  |  Volume 14  |  Number 3  |  March 2012

285

genetest review

GRIPP et al  |  Costello syndrome

  table 1  Physical findings in individuals with Costello syndrome
Organ system affected

specific finding suggestive of costello syndrome

Prenatal and perinatal history

Postnatal growth

Craniofacial appearance and voice

Skin

Musculoskeletal system

•  Polyhydramnios, often severe
•   Increased birth weight as a result of edema (not true macrosomia)
•   Weight loss resulting from resolution of edema and failure to thrive
•  severe postnatal feeding difficulties
•  short stature
•  Growth hormone deficiency
•  Relative macrocephaly
•   Progressive cerebellar overgrowth resulting in Chiari 1 malformation
•   Coarse facial features, full cheeks, full lips, large mouth
•   curly or sparse, fine hair
•   Dolichocilia (extremely long eye lashes)
•   Epicanthal folds
•   Wide nasal bridge, short full nose
•   Deep, hoarse, or whispery voice
•  Loose, soft skin
•  Increased pigmentation
•  deep palmar and plantar creases

•  Papillomata of face, perianal region; typically absent in infancy but may appear in childhood
•  Premature aging, hair loss
•  Spatulate finger pads, abnormal fingernails
•  Diffuse hypotonia and joint laxity
•  Ulnar deviation of wrists and fingers, splayed fingers resulting in characteristic hand posture
•  Congenital hip dysplasia
•  tight Achilles tendons, often developing throughout childhood
•  Positional foot deformity
•  Vertical talus
•  Kyphoscoliosis

•  Pectus carinatum, pectus excavatum, asymmetric rib cage

Cardiovascular system

•  Cardiac hypertrophy

•  Congenital heart defect; usually valvular pulmonic stenosis

•   Arrhythmia, usually supraventricular tachycardia; multifocal atrial tachycardia (chaotic atrial rhythm), or ectopic 

Neurologic

Tumors

atrial tachycardia

•  Aortic dilation
•  Chiari I malformation, may develop over time

•  Hydrocephalus

•  Seizures

•  Tethered cord
•  nystagmus
•  developmental delay or intellectual disability
•  Sociable, outgoing personality
•   Increased occurrence of malignant solid tumors; rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, and transitional cell 

carcinoma of the bladder

   Bulleted findings in bold are present in almost all affected individuals; and bulleted findings in italics are not present in all affected individuals but are distinctive for Costello 
syndrome.

286

Volume 14  |  Number 3  |  March 2012  |  Genetics in medicine

Costello syndrome  |  GRIPP et al 

a

b

Figure 1   typical facial features of costello syndrome. (a) An 8-year-
old white boy and (b) an almost 11-year-old Hispanic girl. The features are 
remarkably consistent regardless of sex or ethnic background. Note the high 
broad forehead, low-set ears with thickened lobules, prominent epicanthal 
folds, full cheeks, wide mouth, full lips, and radiant smiles which are typical 
for the pleasant personality of Costello syndrome. The appearance of the girl 
can be compared with an earlier photograph taken 1 year ago (Figure 3D in 
ref. 8). There are some changes including thinning of the frizzy hair, wrinkling 
of the skin, and wearing of corrective lenses. We thank the mothers of these 
patients for contributing their personal photographs. Permission to publish 
these photographs was given by the mothers.

molecular genetic testing
A  suspected  clinical  diagnosis  of  Costello  syndrome  is  con-
firmed through the identification of a specific germline muta-
tion in the proto-oncogene HRAS, which is the only gene asso-
ciated with Costello syndrome according to a review by expert 
clinicians. 5,9 Sequence analysis of HRAS exon 2 (the first cod-
ing exon) detects missense mutations in 80–90% of individuals 
tested.5,10–12 If no mutation is identified in exon 2, all other cod-
ing exons and flanking intronic regions should be sequenced, as 
rare mutations have been seen in other exons.

Failure to identify an HRAS mutation in an individual with 
a phenotype thought to be typical for Costello syndrome can 
result from either (1) the rare occurrence of low level of somatic 
mosaicism for the HRAS disease-causing mutation in the tested 
tissue11–14 or (2) the more common presence of a mutation in 
another gene, consistent with a diagnosis of CFC syndrome15,16 
or another disorder of the Ras/MAPK pathway.17 In the early 
series, the 10–15% of individuals suspected of having Costello 
syndrome who lacked an HRAS mutation were later found to 
have CFC syndrome.15,16

molecular genetic pathogenesis
HRAS is a well-known proto-oncogene, and aberrant activation 
is often found in sporadic somatic tumors; it is thus not surpris-
ing to see the increased cancer incidence in individuals with a 
germline HRAS mutation. The work performed by Kerr et al.18 
showing loss of heterozygosity for 11p15.5 in rhabdomyosar-
coma from individuals with Costello syndrome suggests that 
loss of the wild-type allele is the second hit in tumor develop-
ment. This theory is supported by the loss of the wild-type allele 
in  a  rhabdomyosarcoma  demonstrated  by  Estep  et  al.10  and 

genetest review

   table 2  Frequency of selected HRAS pathologic allelic 
variants

dnA nucleotide change

Protein amino 
acid change

Frequency in percent 
(number of patients)

c.34G>A

c.34G>T

c.35G>C

c.35_36delGCinsTT

c. 35_36delGCinsAA

c.37G>T

c.38G>A

c.64C>A

p.Gly12Ser

p.Gly12Cys

p.Gly12Ala

p.Gly12Val

p.Gly12Glu

p.Gly13Cys

p.Gly13Asp

p.Gln22Lys

c.110_111+1dupAGG

p.Glu37dup

c.108_110dupAGA

p.Glu37dup

c.173C>T

c.187G>A

c.350A>G

c.436G>A

c.437C>T

   Adapted from ref. 20.

p.Thr58Ile

p.Glu63Lys

p.Lys117Arg

p.Ala146Thr

p.Ala146Val

81.3 (113)

2 (3)

7.2 (10)

1.4 (2)

<1 (1)

1.4 (2)

1.4 (2)

<1 (1)

<1 (1)

<1 (1)

<1 (1)

<1 (1)

<1 (1)

<1 (1)

<1 (1)

the monoallelic expression in a tumor, but not in fibroblasts, 
reported by Aoki et al.5

HRAS consists of six exons. Five exons2–6 code for a protein 
of 189 amino acids with a molecular weight of 21 kd (p21). 
Alternative  splicing,  excluding  residues  152–165,  gives  rise 
to a protein of 170 amino acids. Somatic mutation hotspots 
are bases encoding the glycines in Positions 12 and 13 and 
the  glutamine  in  Position  61.  Missense  mutations  at  these 
positions lead to increased activity of the gene product. As 
the  germline  mutations  in  Costello  syndrome  affect  simi-
lar codons, it can be inferred that they have a similar effect  
on  the  gene  product.  Functional  studies  performed  on 
patient-derived  fibroblasts  confirmed  aberrant  downstream 
signaling.19

Germline mutations leading to nucleotide substitutions and 
the consequent amino acid substitutions of the glycine resi-
due at Positions 12 or 13 are typical in Costello syndrome.20 A 
review of 81 unrelated individuals5,11,12 shows the nucleotide 
substitution  c.34G>A,  resulting  in  p.Gly12Ser  amino  acid 
change, to be the most common (65/81 or 80%). The c.35G>C 
nucleotide  resulting  in  p.Gly12Ala  was  seen  in  seven  indi-
viduals (9%). Estep et al.10 reported the same two mutations 
and aggregate clinical data on 33 individuals. In this study11 
and others conducted by colleagues, we have avoided dupli-
cated  reporting  of  this  rare  syndrome.21  Recently,  12  indi-
viduals with p.Gly13Cys change were identified,8 making this 
the most common amino acid change affecting the glycine in 
Position 13. Other mutations (Table 2) were seen in one or 
two patients each.5,10 –12,22–25

Genetics in medicine  |  Volume 14  |  Number 3  |  March 2012

287

genetest review

GRIPP et al  |  Costello syndrome

natural history
Females and males are equally affected. The phenotype evolves 
over time, and although Costello syndrome can theoretically be 
recognized in the fetus, it is usually diagnosed in the young child. 
Older individuals often display features suggestive of premature 
aging. Prenatally, increased nuchal thickness, polyhydramnios 
(>90%), characteristic ulnar deviation of the wrists, and short 
humeri, and femurs can be seen on ultrasonography.26,27 Because 
most features of the fetal phenotype are not unique (such as ven-
triculomegaly and macrocephaly), and as Costello syndrome is 
rare, the diagnosis is often not considered prenatally. Cardiac 
hypertrophy has not been reported, but fetal atrial tachycardia 
has been detected in at least five fetuses subsequently diagnosed 
with Costello syndrome, and it increases the index of suspicion 
for this diagnosis.26 Increased birth weight and head circumfer-
ence (often >50th percentile) for gestational age can lead to the 
misclassification of Costello syndrome as “macrosomia.” Hypo-
glycemia is common in neonates. Failure to thrive and severe 
feeding difficulties are usually severe and almost universal.

Characteristic  physical  findings  include  a  relatively  high 
forehead,  low  nasal  bridge,  epicanthal  folds,  prominent  lips 
and a wide mouth, ulnar deviation of wrists and fingers, loose- 
appearing skin with deep palmar and plantar creases, and cryp-
torchidism. In infancy, severe feeding difficulties may lead to a 
marasmic appearance. Pyloric stenosis occurs more commonly 
than  in  the  general  population.24  Most  infants  display  hypo-
tonia,  irritability,  developmental  delay,  and  nystagmus  with 
delayed visual maturation improving with age. Hypotonia may 
be severe and suggest myopathy.22 Relative macrocephaly is typ-
ical and likely reflects brain overgrowth.28 Progressive postnatal 
cerebellar enlargement results in cerebellar tonsillar herniation, 
which can progress to a Chiari malformation as seen in 32% of 
individuals in one series, with 25% developing syringomyelia.28 
Neurosurgical  interventions  included  posterior  fossa  decom-
pression (32%), shunt placement or ventriculostomy (25%), and 
tethered cord release (7%), reflecting the significant morbidity 
associated with brain overgrowth.28 Nystagmus is common and 
may improve over time, although its underlying cause has not 
been determined. Although nystagmus does not require medi-
cal treatment, it is important to recognize it as a common find-
ing in Costello syndrome, rather than an unrelated symptom.
In childhood, individuals are able to take oral feeds begin-
ning between age 2 and 4 years. The first acceptable tastes are 
often strong (e.g., ketchup). The onset of speech often coincides 
with  the  willingness  to  feed  orally.  Short  stature  is  universal, 
delayed bone age is common,29 and testing may show partial or 
complete growth hormone (GH) deficiency.11

Cardiovascular abnormalities are typically present in infancy 
or early childhood, but may be recognized at any age. Based 
on  a  recent  analysis  of  61  study  and  85  previously  reported 
patients with HRAS mutation analysis, 87% of individuals with 
Costello syndrome have some type of a cardiovascular abnor-
mality, increased from a prior report based on clinically diag-
nosed patients (60%).30 A congenital heart defect was present 
in 44%, usually nonprogressive valvar pulmonic stenosis, rarely 

atrial septal defect. Cardiac hypertrophy was noted in 61%; the 
term hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) was used because 
there was typical subaortic septal hypertrophy associated with 
pathologic myocardial disarray (in 70% of specimens studied). 
In addition to the rare lethal severe form, HCM was chronic or 
progressive in 37%, stabilized in 27%, decreased (resolved) in 
15%; and outcome was unavailable in 22%. Atrial tachycardia 
occurred in 48%, characteristically as multifocal atrial tachycar-
dia (also known as chaotic atrial rhythm). These nonreentrant 
atrial  tachycardias  are  generally  self-limited  but  may  persist 
or worsen in approximately one fourth. Mild-moderate aortic 
dilation occurs in approximately 5% and was unassociated with 
bicuspid aortic valve.

Although the cardiovascular natural history of Costello syn-
drome continues to be delineated, this recent data can be used 
to  create  several  “cardiac  phenotypes.”  A  few  neonates  pres-
ent with very severe HCM can be lethal if untreated. In other 
infants,  progressively  severe  HCM  and/or  severe  multifocal 
atrial tachycardia can lead to death in the first 2 years of life. 
However,  most  children  with  Costello  syndrome  associated 
with HCM have mild to moderate involvement. Of great inter-
est are the few with moderate to severe involvement who appear 
to have remodeling, which gives the impression of “normaliz-
ing.” Multifocal atrial tachycardia and ectopic atrial tachycar-
dia may be concerning but are usually self-limited with treat-
ment. Pulmonic valve stenosis is usually mild to moderate and 
infrequently requires surgery or interventional catheterization. 
Older individuals with moderate HCM and new onset arrhyth-
mia (atrial and ventricular) represent the greatest challenge and 
do not constitute a predictable outcome “phenotype” until more 
information is obtained.

The  possibility  of  a  congenital  myopathy  in  Costello  syn-
drome  was  hypothesized  based  on  the  observation  of  four 
patients with severe hypotonia, three of whom had less com-
mon HRAS mutations.22 On muscle biopsy, there were excess 
muscle  spindles,  leading  to  the  description  “congenital  myo-
pathy with excess of muscle spindles.” The analysis of skeletal 
muscle pathology was extended by Tidyman et al.31 who stud-
ied  additional  pathology  reports  and  muscle  biopsies.  They 
found abnormal muscle fiber size and variability, type 2 fiber 
predominance,  but  without  severe  structural  histopathology 
and no excess of muscle spindles. Because Costello syndrome 
mutations inhibited myoblast differentiation, they agreed that 
there was evidence of a true myopathy related to an inherent 
dysregulation of skeletal myogenesis.31

Papillomata,  absent  in  infancy,  appear  in  young  children. 
Acanthosis  nigricans,  thick  calluses  and  toenails,  and  strong 
body  odor  are  common.  Developmental  delay  or  intellectual 
disability is present in all individuals.32–35 Electroencephalogram 
abnormalities are seen in approximately one third of individu-
als; between 20% and 50% have seizures.36,37 Seven of 10 indi-
viduals  ages  3–29  years  undergoing  polysomnography  in  the 
sleep laboratory had obstructive events.38 Dental abnormalities, 
including enamel defects, occur frequently. Excessive secretions 
are often noted.29 Individuals with Costello syndrome have very 

288

Volume 14  |  Number 3  |  March 2012  |  Genetics in medicine

Costello syndrome  |  GRIPP et al 

loose  joints,  particularly  the  fingers.  Ulnar  deviation  of  the 
wrists and fingers is common. Achilles tendons become very 
tight throughout childhood and often require surgical release.

Adolescents often show delayed or disordered puberty and 
may appear older than their chronologic age because of wors-
ening kyphoscoliosis, sparse hair, and prematurely aged skin. In 
17 adults ranging from age 16 to 40 years, all eight individuals 
who had a bone density measurement had abnormal results that 
suggested osteoporosis or osteopenia; three had bone pain, ver-
tebral fractures, and height loss.39,40 Adult-onset gastroesopha-
geal reflux was present in four individuals in the series of White 
et al.39; additional cases are known (personal observation). The 
reported adult height range is 135–150 cm.41

tumor predisposition
Benign and malignant solid tumors occur with far greater fre-
quency in individuals with Costello syndrome than in the general 
population. The overall tumor incidence is approximately 15% 
over the lifetime of individuals with an identified HRAS muta-
tion.11 Rhabdomyosarcoma occurs most frequently, followed by 
neuroblastoma and transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder, and 
other solid tumors.4 Rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma are 
tumors of early childhood, presenting in Costello syndrome at 
ages comparable with the general population. In contrast, transi-
tional cell carcinoma of the bladder occurs in older adults (70%, 
age >65 years) in the general population, whereas it occurs in 
adolescents with Costello syndrome. The ages at presentation in 
the three reported cases were 10, 11, and 16 years.

Prevalence and mortality
A  formal  epidemiologic  study  of  Costello  syndrome,  with 
lifespan  analysis,  survival  and  cumulative  mortality  has  not 
been performed. Lin et al.42 studied 146 mutation-confirmed 
patients, with at least another 85 clinically defined cases from 
the  literature.  The  total  is  at  least  220,  and  with  additional 
unreported  patients  around  the  world,  it  is  likely  the  figure 
approaches 300. The Costello Syndrome Family Network esti-
mates that the birth prevalence in the United Kingdom is at least 
1/500,000.7 As part of the recent cardiovascular study,42 deaths 
were reported in 10% and in the study and 20% of literature 
patients, providing preliminary descriptive data. Cardiorespi-
ratory causes included HCM in all 11 (48%) accompanied by 
neoplasia, coronary artery fibromuscular dysplasia, and mul-
tifocal tachycardia in four. Neoplasia was noted at the cause of 
death in five (22%), pulmonary cause in two (9%), and multio-
rgan failure in five (four with HCM) (22%).

Genotype-phenotype correlations
Because  few  affected  individuals  with  mutations  other  than 
p.Gly12Ser have been identified, limited genotype-phenotype 
correlations have been established. However, Kerr et al.12 sug-
gested  that  the  risk  for  malignant  tumors  may  be  higher  in 
individuals  with  the  p.Gly12Ala  mutation  (4/7  or  57%)  than 
in those with the p.Gly12Ser variant (4/65 or 7%). Lo et al.43 
suggested  that  a  more  severe  neonatal  phenotype  may  be  

genetest review

associated with certain rare mutations, including p.Gly12Asp 
and p.Gly12Cys. In contrast, the possibility of a milder or atten-
uated phenotype was noted in individuals with p.Thr58Ile and 
p.Ala146Val.24  Distinctive  phenotypic  findings  are  associated 
with the p.Gly13Cys change and include dolichocilia (extremely 
long  eye  lashes,  often  requiring  trimming)  and  loose  anagen 
hair.8  Papillomata  or  multifocal  atrial  tachycardia  have  not 
yet been seen in individuals with p.Gly13Cys, and fewer have 
short stature. Compared with individuals with the most com-
mon p.Gly12Ser, these differences are statistically significant. In 
addition, no individual with p.Gly13Cys has developed a malig-
nant  tumor.8  The  two  individuals  reported  with  p.Glu37dup 
share phenotypic findings including very sparse hair and facial 
features  that  appear  less  coarse  than  in  most  other  Costello 
syndrome  individuals,  but  a  detailed  clinical  description  was 
not provided.25 Of 146 patients with HRAS mutations whose 
cardiovascular status was reviewed, there was no apparent cor-
relation between the specific mutation and the variables stud-
ied (HCM, multifocal tachycardia, and aortic dilation; Table 5 
in Lin et al.42). In some cases, small numbers prevented formal 
statistical analysis.

One  individual  with  somatic  mosaicism  (20–30%  of  DNA 
derived  from  buccal  cells  exhibited  the  HRAS  mutation 
p.Gly12Ser,  which  was  not  detected  in  DNA  derived  from 
blood cells) had an atypical phenotype attributed to her mosa-
icism. Findings typical for Costello syndrome included intellec-
tual disability, short stature, sparse hair, coarse facial features, 
nasal papillomata, and tight Achilles tendons. Atypical findings 
included microcephaly, streaky areas of skin hypo- and hyper-
pigmentation, and normal menarche with subsequent regular 
menses.44 Somatic mosaicism was seen in a father who showed 
a patchy distribution of skin findings suggestive of Costello syn-
drome and who transmitted the p.Gly12Ser change to his son 
with typical Costello syndrome.13 Mosaicism for the p.Gly12Ser 
mutation was noted in an individual with a typical presenta-
tion including apparent cutis laxa.14 As may be expected in an 
autosomal dominant trait, somatic mosaicism can thus be asso-
ciated with a range of findings including patchy or segmental 
distribution, typical phenotypic presentation, and transmission 
to offspring and recurrence in siblings.44

treatment of manifestations
Medical care for individuals with Costello syndrome aims to 
improve overall health and development through early identifi-
cation of anticipated medical problems and prompt treatment. 
Its ultimate goal is to improve quality of life for affected indi-
viduals and their families.45

Neonatal  hypoglycemia  has  frequently  been  reported,  and 
a high level of suspicion should be maintained. Rarely, hypo-
glycemia  occurs  in  older  individuals  and  may  present  with 
seizures. Under these circumstances, GH deficiency needs to 
be excluded as the underlying cause.46 Hypoglycemic episodes 
unresponsive to GH therapy responded well to cortisone replace-
ment in another individual.47 Thus, cortisol deficiency may also 
be considered. Because of the severe feeding difficulties, most 

Genetics in medicine  |  Volume 14  |  Number 3  |  March 2012

289

genetest review

infants require nasogastric or gastrostomy feeding. Because of 
gastroesophageal reflux and irritability, Nissen fundoplication 
is often performed. Pyloric stenosis is treated surgically. Severe 
irritability associated with feeding and an inability to sleep has 
anecdotally improved by use of benzodiazepines, resulting in 
decreased  irritability  and  weight  gain.  Anecdotally,  affected 
children have very high caloric needs. Even after nutrition is 
improved  through  supplemental  feeding,  growth  retardation 
persists. GH deficiency can often be documented on stimula-
tion testing and warrants replacement therapy. Although linear 
growth may benefit from GH replacement, the main objective 
of replacement therapy is to prevent secondary complications, 
such as hypoglycemia and low muscle mass. Orthopedic issues 
can include congenital hip dysplasia, scoliosis, and kyphosco-
liosis.  Joint  contractures,  often  affecting  elbows,  wrists,  and 
fingers are treated through physical and occupational therapy 
or by early bracing. Surgical tendon lengthening, usually of the 
Achilles tendon, is often required in late childhood. Low bone 
density  is  common  in  young  adults  with  Costello  syndrome; 
and  bone  density  assessment  is  recommended  as  a  baseline, 
with  follow-up  depending  on  the  initial  result.  Osteoporosis 
may be ameliorated by physical activity and increased vitamin 
D and calcium intake, or require treatment with pamidronate.
The high risk for postnatal development of a Chiari I malfor-
mation and its sequelae warrant a brain imaging study, prefer-
ably a magnetic resonance imaging, at the time of diagnosis and 
a repeat scan 1–2 years later or whenever the patient becomes 
symptomatic.28 In older individuals, headaches, changes in gait, 
and  other  neurologic  symptoms  may  prompt  imaging  of  the 
central nervous system and spinal cord. A symptomatic Chiari 
I  malformation  will  require  surgical  intervention,  typically  a 
posterior  fossa  decompression.  Tethered  cord  is  common  in 
individuals with Costello syndrome and may present with loss 
of bowel and bladder function or gait disturbance, it is treated 
surgically.  Developmental  disability  should  be  addressed  by 
early-intervention programs and individualized learning strate-
gies. Speech delay and expressive language limitations will ben-
efit from appropriate therapy and an appropriate educational 
plan. As for every individual with developmental delay, an eye 
and hearing evaluation is indicated, and medical problems are 
treated as necessary. Alternate means of communication should 
be  considered  if  expressive  language  is  significantly  limited. 
Anxiety  occurs  more  frequently  than  in  the  general  popula-
tion, and it may benefit from supportive therapies, appropriate 
educational expectations, and use of standard medications. The 
identification  of  individual  cognitive  and  adaptive  strengths, 
and the development of an educational plan building on these 
strengths, may improve independent living skills and will result 
in improved quality of life.

We continue to recommend that all individuals with Cos-
tello syndrome, especially those with an identified cardiovas-
cular  abnormality,  should  be  followed  up  by  a  cardiologist 
who is aware of the spectrum of cardiac disease and its natural 
history.30,42 Rather than propose a unique set of guidelines, we 
advise providers and families to receive individualized care by  

GRIPP et al  |  Costello syndrome

a  pediatric  cardiologist,  transitioning  to  an  adult  specialist  
following the “best practices” for the particular defect. Gen-
eral  guidelines  (Table  4  in  Lin  et  al.42)  can  be  pragmatically 
dichotomized based on the presence or absence of HCM, with 
close evaluation in the first 2 years of life depending on the 
severity of hypertrophy, subsequent annual examinations, and 
appropriate risk stratification. We emphasized in that article 
and remind providers that it is beyond the scope of a genet-
ics article to review the complex decision making for treating 
HCM  or  atrial  tachycardia.  The  benefit  of  recent  research42 
is that it adds modest natural history data, although ongoing 
studies of older individuals will be necessary to monitor for 
late-onset HCM progression or arrhythmia.42 The treatment of 
tachycardia in Costello syndrome has not been formally stud-
ied, and anecdotal reports may not be broadly applied. Malig-
nant nonreentrant tachycardia may require electrophysiologic 
catheterization, aggressive antiarrhythmic drugs, and ablation. 
Pharmacologic and surgical treatment (myectomy) has been 
used to treat severe cardiac hypertrophy. Individuals with Cos-
tello  syndrome  and  severe  cardiac  problems  may  choose  to 
wear a Medic Alert bracelet.

The  benign  papillomata  usually  appear  in  the  perinasal 
region  and  less  commonly  in  the  perianal  region,  torso,  and 
extremities.  Although  they  are  mostly  of  cosmetic  concern, 
papillomata may give rise to irritation or inflammation in hard-
to-clean  body  regions  and  may  be  removed,  as  appropriate. 
Recurrent facial papillomata have been successfully managed 
with  regular  dry  ice  removal.  Malignant  tumors,  most  com-
monly  embryonal  rhabdomyosarcoma,  occur  with  increased 
frequency in Costello syndrome, and this led to the proposal 
of a screening protocol. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound and 
urine  testing  for  catecholamine  metabolites  and  hematuria 
were suggested.48 However, a subsequent report49 on elevated 
catecholamine  metabolites  in  individuals  with  Costello  syn-
drome without an identifiable tumor concluded that screening 
for abnormal catecholamine metabolites is not helpful. Serial 
abdominal and pelvic ultrasound screening for rhabdomyosar-
coma and neuroblastoma was proposed every 3–6 months until 
age 8–10 years. Urinalysis for hematuria was suggested annu-
ally  beginning  at  age  10  years  to  screen  for  bladder  cancer.48 
Neither of these screening approaches has yet been proven to 
be beneficial; however, studies are ongoing. The most important 
factor for early tumor detection remains parental and physician 
awareness of the increased cancer risk. Treatment of malignant 
tumors follows standard protocols.

the rasopathies clinic: a pragmatic care model
Costello syndrome affects multiple organ systems and requires 
medical care expertise from numerous specialty areas, includ-
ing cardiology, gastroenterology, neurology and neurosurgery, 
orthopedics, urology, developmental medicine and therapeutic 
services, and often oncology. With approximately 300 reported 
patients, Costello syndrome remains rare, and most specialists 
will  see  very  few  affected  individuals  throughout  their  career 
and will thus have little personal experience with this condition.  

290

Volume 14  |  Number 3  |  March 2012  |  Genetics in medicine

Costello syndrome  |  GRIPP et al 

However,  the  medical  issues  seen  in  Costello  syndrome  may 
resemble  those  seen  in  other  rasopathies,  for  example,  the 
HCM in Noonan syndrome and CFC syndrome, the skin find-
ings shared with CFC syndrome, or the low bone density and 
increased tumor risk in NF1. In fact, the phenotype of Costello, 
Noonan,  and  CFC  syndromes  shows  such  significant  overlap 
during infancy that a clear distinction cannot always be made on 
clinical criteria alone, but rather molecular testing is necessary. 
This overlap in the physical manifestations is easily understood 
based  on  the  close  relationship  of  these  conditions  through 
their shared mechanism of Ras/MAPK pathway dysregulation. 
In light of the many similar medical issues for individuals with 
any  rasopathy,  a  clinic  model  combining  patients  with  these 
conditions  is  beneficial  as  it  allows  the  specialists  to  become 
more familiar with these conditions.50 Two of the rasopathies, 
NF1 and Noonan syndrome, are relatively common, and most 
healthcare  institutions  are  familiar  with  their  phenotype  and 
medical issues. Specialists, such as cardiologist caring for Noo-
nan syndrome individuals, can become familiar with the phe-
notypic presentation and may be more comfortable caring for 
a patient with Costello syndrome. To a large degree, this occurs 
informally, but the designation of a formal clinic will focus atten-
tion, resources, and patient care. Additional benefits of a com-
bined rasopathy clinic include the formation of a local rasopathy 
advocacy  group,  which  could  complement  the  national  (Cos-
tello Syndrome Family Network) and international (Costellok-
ids.org) family support organizations. Furthermore, such clinics 
may  provide  an  organizational  structure  for  future  treatment 
trials.51 Discussion about research has already occurred at three 
International Meetings under the name “Genetic Syndromes of 
the Ras/MAPK Pathway.”

DisCLosurE
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

rEFErEnCEs
1.  Costello JM. A new syndrome. NZ Med J 1971;74:397.
2.  Costello JM. A new syndrome: mental subnormality and nasal papillomata. 

Aust Paediatr J 1977;13:114–118.

3.  Gripp KW, Lin AE. Costello syndrome. In: GeneReviews at GeneTests: 
Medical Genetics Information Resource [database online]. University of 
Washington: Seattle, 1997–2009. http://www.genetests.org/. Accessed 1 
May 2011.

4.  Gripp KW. Tumor predisposition in Costello syndrome. Am J Med Genet C 

Semin Med Genet 2005;137C:72–77.

5.  Aoki Y, Niihori T, Kawame H, et al. Germline mutations in HRAS proto-

oncogene cause Costello syndrome. Nat Genet 2005;37:1038–1040.

6.  Rasopathy Network, 2011. http://ras-pathway-syndromes. com/. Accessed 

26 April 2011.

7.  Costello Kids Support Group. http://www.costellokids.com/. Accessed 5 

June 2011.

8.  Gripp KW, Hopkins E, Sol-Church K, et al. Phenotypic  analysis  of 
individuals with Costello syndrome due to HRAS p.G13C. Am J Med Genet  
A 2011;155A:706–716.

9.  Kerr B, Allanson J, Delrue MA, et al. The diagnosis of Costello syndrome: 
nomenclature  in  Ras/MAPK  pathway  disorders.  Am  J  Med  Genet  
A 2008;146A:1218–1220.

10.  Estep AL, Tidyman WE, Teitell MA, Cotter PD, Rauen KA. HRAS mutations 
in Costello syndrome: detection of constitutional activating mutations in 
codon 12 and 13 and loss of wild-type allele in malignancy. Am J Med 
Genet A 2006;140:8–16.

genetest review

11.  Gripp KW, Lin AE, Stabley DL, et al. HRAS mutation analysis in Costello 
syndrome: genotype and phenotype correlation. Am J Med Genet A 
2006;140:1–7.

12.  Kerr B, Delrue MA, Sigaudy S, et al. Genotype-phenotype correlation 
in Costello syndrome: HRAS mutation analysis in 43 cases. J Med Genet 
2006;43:401–405.

13.  Sol-Church K, Stabley DL, Demmer LA, et al. Male-to-male transmission 
of Costello syndrome: G12S HRAS germline mutation inherited from  
a father with somatic mosaicism. Am J Med Genet A 2009;149A: 
315–321.

14.  Girisha KM, Lewis LE, Phadke SR, Kutsche K. Costello syndrome with 
severe cutis laxa and mosaic HRAS G12S mutation. Am J Med Genet A 
2010;152A:2861–2864.

15.  Rauen KA. Distinguishing Costello versus cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome: 
BRAF mutations in patients with a Costello phenotype. Am J Med Genet A 
2006;140:1681–1683.

16.  Gripp KW, Lin AE, Nicholson L, et al. Further delineation of the phenotype 
resulting from BRAF or MEK1 germline mutations helps differentiate cardio-
facio-cutaneous syndrome from Costello syndrome. Am J Med Genet A 
2007;143A:1472–1480.

17.  Quezada E, Gripp KW. Costello syndrome and related disorders. Curr Opin 

Pediatr 2007;19:636–644.

18.  Kerr B, Mucchielli ML, Sigaudy S, et al. Is the locus for Costello syndrome on 

11p? J Med Genet 2003;40:469–471.

19.  Rosenberger G, Meien S, Kutsche K. Oncogenic HRAS mutations cause 
prolonged PI3K signaling in response to epidermal growth factor in 
fibroblasts of patients with Costello syndrome. Hum Mutat 2009;30: 
352–362.

20.  Sol-Church K, Gripp KW. The molecular basis of Costello syndrome. In: 
Zenker M (ed). Noonan Syndrome and Related Disorders: A Matter of 
Deregulated Ras Signaling (monographs in human genetics). S. Karger: 
Switzerland, 2009:94–103.

21.  Lin AE, Rauen KA, Gripp KW, Carey JC. Clarification of previously reported 

Costello syndrome patients. Am J Med Genet A 2008;146:940–943.

22.  van der Burgt I, Kupsky W, Stassou S, et al. Myopathy caused by HRAS 
germline mutations: implications for disturbed myogenic differentiation 
in the presence of constitutive HRas activation. J Med Genet 2007;44: 
459–462.

23.  Zampino G, Pantaleoni F, Carta C, et al. Diversity, parental germline origin, 
and phenotypic spectrum of de novo HRAS missense changes in Costello 
syndrome. Hum Mutat 2007;28:265–272.

24.  Gripp KW, Innes AM, Axelrad ME, et al. Costello syndrome associated with 
novel germline HRAS mutations: an attenuated phenotype? Am J Med 
Genet A 2008;146A:683–690.

25.  Gremer L, De Luca A, Merbitz-Zahradnik T, et al. Duplication of Glu37 in the 
switch I region of HRAS impairs effector/GAP binding and underlies Costello 
syndrome by promoting enhanced growth factor-dependent MAPK and 
AKT activation. Hum Mol Genet 2010;19:790–802.

26.  Lin AE, O’Brien B, Demmer LA, et al. Prenatal features of Costello 
syndrome: ultrasonographic findings and atrial tachycardia. Prenat Diagn 
2009;29:682–690.

27.  Smith LP, Podraza J, Proud VK. Polyhydramnios, fetal overgrowth, and 
macrocephaly: prenatal ultrasound findings of Costello syndrome. Am J 
Med Genet A 2009;149A:779–784.

28.  Gripp  KW,  Hopkins  E,  Doyle  D,  Dobyns  WB.  High  incidence  of 
progressive postnatal cerebellar enlargement in Costello syndrome: 
brain overgrowth associated with HRAS mutations as the likely cause 
of structural brain and spinal cord abnormalities. Am J Med Genet A 
2010;152A:1161–1168.

29.  Johnson JP, Golabi M, Norton ME, et al. Costello syndrome: phenotype, 
natural history, differential diagnosis, and possible cause. J Pediatr 
1998;133:441–448.

30.  Lin AE, Grossfeld PD, Hamilton RM, et al. Further delineation of cardiac 
abnormalities in Costello syndrome. Am J Med Genet 2002;111:115–129.
31.  Tidyman WE, Lee HS, Rauen KA. Skeletal muscle pathology in Costello 
and cardio-facio-cutaneous syndromes: developmental consequences of 
germline Ras/MAPK activation on myogenesis. Am J Med Genet C Semin 
Med Genet 2011;157:104–114.

32.  Axelrad ME, Glidden R, Nicholson L, Gripp KW. Adaptive skills, cognitive, 
and behavioral characteristics of Costello syndrome. Am J Med Genet A 
2004;128A:396–400.

Genetics in medicine  |  Volume 14  |  Number 3  |  March 2012

291

genetest review

GRIPP et al  |  Costello syndrome

33.  Axelrad ME, Nicholson L, Stabley DL, Sol-Church K, Gripp KW. Longitudinal 
assessment of cognitive characteristics in Costello syndrome. Am J Med 
Genet A 2007;143A:3185–3193.

34.  Axelrad ME, Schwartz DD, Fehlis JE, et al. Longitudinal course of cognitive, 
adaptive, and behavioral characteristics in Costello syndrome. Am J Med 
Genet A 2009;149A:2666–2672.

35.  Axelrad ME, Schwartz DD, Katzenstein JM, Hopkins E, Gripp KW. 
Neurocognitive, adaptive, and behavioral functioning of individuals 
with Costello syndrome: a review. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 
2011;157:115–122.

36.  Delrue MA, Chateil JF, Arveiler B, Lacombe D. Costello syndrome and 

neurological abnormalities. Am J Med Genet A 2003;123A:301–305.

37.  Kawame H, Matsui M, Kurosawa K, et al. Further delineation of the 
behavioral and neurologic features in Costello syndrome. Am J Med Genet 
A 2003;118A:8–14.

38.  Della Marca G, Vasta I, Scarano E, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea in Costello 

syndrome. Am J Med Genet A 2006;140:257–262.

39.  White SM, Graham JM Jr, Kerr B, et al. The adult phenotype in Costello 

syndrome. Am J Med Genet A 2005;136:128–135.

40.  Stevenson DA, Yang FC. The musculoskeletal phenotype of the RASopathies. 

Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 2011;157:90–103.

41.  Hennekam RC. Costello syndrome: an overview. Am J Med Genet C Semin 

Med Genet 2003;117C:42–48.

42.  Lin AE, Alexander ME, Colan SD, et al. Clinical, pathological, and molecular 
analyses of cardiovascular abnormalities in Costello syndrome: a Ras/
MAPK pathway syndrome. Am J Med Genet A 2011;155A:486–507.

43.  Lo IF, Brewer C, Shannon N, et al. Severe neonatal manifestations of Costello 

syndrome. J Med Genet 2008;45:167–171.

44.  Gripp KW, Stabley DL, Nicholson L, Hoffman JD, Sol-Church K. Somatic 
mosaicism for an HRAS mutation causes Costello syndrome. Am J Med 
Genet A 2006;140:2163–2169.

45.  Hopkins E, Lin AE, Krepkovich KE, et al. Living with Costello syndrome: 
quality of life issues in older individuals. Am J Med Genet A 2010;152A: 
84–90.

46.  Gripp KW, Scott CI Jr, Nicholson L, Figueroa TE. Second case of bladder 
carcinoma in a patient with Costello syndrome. Am J Med Genet 
2000;90:256–259.

47.  Gregersen N, Viljoen D. Costello syndrome with growth hormone deficiency 
and hypoglycemia: a new report and review of the endocrine associations. 
Am J Med Genet A 2004;129A:171–175.

48.  Gripp KW, Scott CI Jr, Nicholson L, et al. Five additional Costello syndrome 
patients with rhabdomyosarcoma: proposal for a tumor screening protocol. 
Am J Med Genet 2002;108:80–87.

49.  Gripp KW, Kawame H, Viskochil DH, Nicholson L. Elevated catecholamine 
metabolites in patients with Costello syndrome. Am J Med Genet  
A 2004;128A:48–51.

50.  Rauen KA, Schoyer L, McCormick F, et al. Proceedings from the 2009 genetic 
syndromes of the Ras/MAPK pathway: From bedside to bench and back.  
Am J Med Genet A 2010;152A:4–24.

51.  Rauen KA, Banerjee A, Bishop WR, et al. Costello and cardio-faciocutaneous 
syndromes: moving toward clinical trials in RASopathies. Am J Med Genet 
Part C Semin Med Genet 2011;157:136–146.

292

Volume 14  |  Number 3  |  March 2012  |  Genetics in medicine

