J Genet Counsel (2007) 16:387–407
DOI 10.1007/s10897-007-9101-8

PROFESSIONAL ISSUES

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 in Genetic Counseling
Practice: Recommendations of the National Society
of Genetic Counselors

Heather B. Radtke & Courtney D. Sebold &
Caroline Allison & Joy Larsen Haidle &
Gretchen Schneider

Received: 22 March 2007 / Accepted: 27 March 2007 / Published online: 17 July 2007
# National Society of Genetic Counselors, Inc. 2007

Abstract The objective of this document
is to provide
recommendations for the genetic counseling of patients and
families undergoing evaluation for neurofibromatosis type
1 (NF1) or who have received a diagnosis of NF1. These
recommendations are the opinions of a multi-center
working group of genetic counselors with expertise in the
care of individuals with NF1. These recommendations are
based on the committee’s clinical experiences, a review of
pertinent English language medical articles, and reports of
expert committees. These recommendations are not

Both Heather B. Radtke and Courtney D. Sebold contributed equally
to this document.
H. B. Radtke (*)
Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin, Genetics Center,
MS 716, 9000 W. Wisconsin Avenue,
Milwaukee, WI 53201, USA
e-mail: hradtke@chw.org

C. D. Sebold
Division of Genetics and Metabolic Disorders,
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio,
San Antonio, TX, USA

C. Allison
Division of Genetics, Children’s Hospital Boston,
Boston, MA, USA

J. L. Haidle
Humphrey Cancer Center, North Memorial Medical Center,
Robbinsdale, MN, USA

G. Schneider
Harvard Medical School-Partners HealthCare Center
for Genetics and Genomics,
Boston, MA, USA

intended to dictate an exclusive course of management,
nor does the use of such recommendations guarantee a
particular outcome. These recommendations do not displace
a health care provider’s professional judgment based on the
clinical circumstances of an individual patient.

Keywords Neurofibromatosis type 1 . NF1 .
Genetic counseling . Practice guidelines .
National Society of Genetic Counselors .
von Recklinghausen disease

Our geneticist convinced us that in reality nothing had
changed with our daughter when we walked through
the door. We just had more information. She convinced
us that although life was uncertain, we need to make
sure that our child was given the opportunity to reach
her full potential, no matter what
that might be.
if we were out having fun prior to the
Medically,
then that shouldn’t change. We should
diagnosis,
continue to enjoy life and not
the information
let
affect
information can be
the child. In that sense,
harmful and NF will have already caused harm. I will
say that we were still devastated, but her words helped
us get
through the process more quickly than if
someone had just sat there and told us the facts and
answered our questions. She set us out with goals in
our life and a framework with which to use that
information in our child’s best interest.

-Parent of a child with NF1, commenting on his

experience with the genetic counseling process.

388

Purpose

The purpose of these guidelines is to serve as a compre-
hensive resource for health care professionals providing
genetic counseling to patients and families undergoing
evaluation for neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) or who have
received a diagnosis of NF1. In this document, we review
the diagnosis, natural history, and genetics of NF1. We
suggest
items to be included in the genetic
counseling session. Specific medical management recom-
mendations will not be discussed in this document.

relevant

Disclaimer

These recommendations were approved in March 2007 by
the National Society of Genetic Counselors (NSGC)—the
leading voice, advocate and authority for the genetic coun-
seling profession. This document is not intended to replace
the judgment of an individual genetic counselor with respect
to particular patients or special clinical situations and cannot
be considered inclusive of all practices or exclusive of other
practices reasonably directed at obtaining the same results. In
addition, the practice of genetic counseling is subject to
regulation by federal, state and local governments. In a sub-
ject jurisdiction, any such regulations will take precedence
over this statement. NSGC expressly disclaims any warran-
ties or guarantees, express or implied, and shall not be liable
for damages of any kind, in connection with the information
set forth in this document or for reliance on its contents.

Genetic counseling is a dynamic profession, which
undergoes rapid change with the discovery of new genetic
information and the development of new genetic tests and
treatment options. Thus, NSGC will periodically review
and, where appropriate, revise this statement as necessary
for consistency with current practice information.

Objectives

The goals of these recommendations are to:

1. Review the history, epidemiology, and genetics of NF1.
2. Summarize the current understanding of the natural

history of NF1.

3. Provide a framework for

the genetic counseling

sessions of individuals and families with NF1.

4. Present a list of resources for patients and families with NF1.

Materials and Methods

The NF1 Working Group was composed of genetic
counselors with experience in various NF1 Clinics through-

Radtke et al.

out the United States. MEDLINE, PubMed and Internet
databases were searched (using the key words neurofibro-
matosis type 1, NF1, neurofibromin) to locate relevant
English language medical papers published between 1966
and 2007. The literature was reviewed and evaluated
according to the following categories outlined by the US
Preventive Services Task Force (1995):

I. Evidence obtained from at least one properly designed

randomized controlled trial.

II-1. Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled

trials without randomization.

II-2. Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or
case-control analytic studies, preferably from more
than one center or research group.

II-3. Evidence obtained from multiple time series, with or

without the intervention.

III. The opinions of

respected authorities, based on
clinical experience, descriptive studies, or reports of
expert committees.

The rating of supporting literature for this recommenda-
tion is Class III. Particular attention was paid to genetic
counseling issues. Following the completion of the initial
draft of the guidelines, the NF1 Working Group elicited
opinions and feedback from noted medical experts in the
field, as well as representatives of NF1 support and
advocacy organizations (See “Patient Resources”). These
recommendations were approved by the NSGC Board of
Directors in March, 2007.

Overview of Neurofibromatosis Type 1

Historical Background

Over the centuries, NF1 has been known by many names,
including peripheral neurofibromatosis, von Recklinghau-
sen disease, and, erroneously, the “Elephant Man Disease.”
The history of NF1 is briefly summarized in Table I.

Historically,

there has been confusion regarding the
relationship between neurofibromatosis types 1 and 2. It
was initially thought that these two conditions represented
different manifestations of the same underlying entity. In
1930, Garner and Frazier first suggested that individuals
with only central nervous system tumors should be
differentiated from those with other manifestations of the
condition. Genetic linkage to two distinct loci confirmed
that these two conditions were not only clinically but also
etiologically distinct (Rouleau et al. 1987).

Another historical confusion is the belief

the
“Elephant Man” had neurofibromatosis. Joseph Merrick
had a debilitating disfigurement originally presumed to be
NF. His life was originally documented by Treves in 1923.

that

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Genetic Counseling Practice Guidelines

389389

Table I Significant Milestones in the History of NF1

1768

1882

1970s–
1980s
1978

1979
1986

1987

1990
2000

First published English-language description of
neurofibromatosis
Von Recklinghausen published paper on clinical entity,
suggesting that tumors originated in the nervous system
NF1 and NF2 are recognized as distinct clinical entities

National NF Foundation (NNFF) is founded (currently
known as the Children’s Tumor Foundation)
NNFF establishes first comprehensive NF clinic
Tibbles and Cohen suggest that the Elephant Man had
Proteus syndrome instead of NF1
NF1 locus mapped to chromosome 17
Diagnostic criteria for NF1 developed at NIH Consensus
Conference
NF1 gene cloned
Molecular testing for NF1 identifies mutation in more than

95% of individuals meeting diagnostic criteria

(Huson 1998; Korf and Rubenstein 2005; Messiaen et al. 2000;
Riccardi 1999a)

Later, a play and a movie introduced this story to the
public. Current knowledge suggests that Joseph Merrick
had Proteus syndrome rather than NF (Tibbles and Cohen
1986). However, the repercussions of the initial presump-
tion persist, and many families continue to be misinformed
that NF1 is the “Elephant Man Disease.”

Epidemiology

NF1 is one of the most common genetic conditions with an
estimated prevalence of 1 in 3,500 people (Huson et al. 1989;
Poyhonen et al. 2000; Rasmussen and Friedman 2000). A
distinct feature of the NF1 gene is the very high spontaneous
−4 per gamete per generation), which is
mutation rate (1×10
about 100-fold higher than the typical mutation rate for a
single locus. This high mutation rate cannot be accounted for
strictly by the size of the gene (Upadhyaya and Cooper
1998). NF1 affects all races, ethnicities, and genders.

sus Development Conference 1988). These criteria are
listed in Table II and are also available online: (http://
consensus.nih.gov/1987/1987Neurofibramatosis064html.
htm) (NIH Consens Statement Online 1987).

The appearance of many of the diagnostic manifestations
of NF1 is age-dependent. This may make the diagnosis in a
young child without a family history of the condition
challenging. As a result, children may need to be followed
for several years before the clinical diagnosis of NF1 can be
confirmed. Approximately 90% of individuals with NF1
will have two or more diagnostic criteria by 6 years of age,
97% by age 8 and all do so by 20 years of age (DeBella
et al. 2000; Korf 1992). The most common NF1 referral
indication is multiple café-au-lait spots; however, not all
children with cafe-au-lait spots will be diagnosed with NF1.

Molecular Testing

Genetic testing is clinically available and identifies approx-
imately 95% of mutations in individuals that fulfill
the
clinical diagnostic criteria (Messiaen et al. 2000). Testing
may be beneficial to individuals meeting only one of the
diagnostic criteria or when the diagnosis is unclear. A
positive DNA test result cannot predict the presence, age of
onset, or severity of NF1 symptoms (See “Molecular Basis
of Disease”). Likewise, a negative result, in the absence of
a known familial mutation, cannot exclude the diagnosis.

Natural History

Phenotypic Variability

NF1 exhibits an extreme degree of inter- and intra-familial
variability. Modifier genes may play a role in this variability
(Szudek et al. 2002). One study estimated that two-thirds of
individuals with NF1 are relatively mildly affected, not

Table II Criteria for the Clinical Diagnosis of NF1 (At least two are
required)

Diagnosis

Criterion

Notes

Although the diagnosis of NF1 has historically been
established by clinical evaluation, continued advances in
the study of NF1 may lead to modification of diagnostic
strategies. In recent years, advances in molecular testing
offer another diagnostic approach.

Clinical Evaluation

Traditionally, NF1 has been a clinical diagnosis, based on a
set of diagnostic criteria established in 1987 (NIH Consen-

Six or more
café-au-lait macules
Freckling
Neurofibromas

Skeletal dysplasia
Lisch nodules
Optic glioma
First degree relative
with NF1

>5 mm before puberty
>15 mm after puberty
Axillary, inguinal
Two or more neurofibromas or
one plexiform neurofibroma
Sphenoid or tibial lesion
Two or more iris hamartomas
Detected by imaging (usually MRI)
Sibling or parent with NF1

(NIH Consensus Development Conference 1988)

390

Radtke et al.

requiring major surgery or having life-threatening problems
(Carey et al. 1979). However, at the time this study was
completed, many of the serious complications that are now
known to be associated with NF1 had not yet been
recognized. Therefore, this may represent an underestimate
of the rate of serious complications of NF1.

and often occur in clusters (Friedman and Riccardi 1999).
They are most commonly found in the axillary and inguinal
regions, but they can also occur in other areas of skin-to-
skin contact, such as the underside of the breast in female
patients, between skin folds in obese patients, and on the
back of the neck.

Clinical Features

Lisch Nodules

Table III lists the frequency and age of onset of common
symptoms of NF1.

Café-au-lait Spots

Café-au-lait spots (CALS) are pigmentary lesions propor-
than one’s skin color with uniform
tionately darker
pigmentation and smooth borders. The presence of multiple
CALS is one of the most well-recognized features of NF1.
Ninety-nine percent of individuals with NF1 meet
the
CALS diagnostic criteria by 1 year of age (DeBella et al.
2000). In the newborn,
typical CALS are oval-shaped
lesions between 1 and 4 cm in diameter (Alper and Holmes
1983). As the child ages, the number and size of CALS
may increase. In adults, CALS tend to fade and may be
more difficult to identify.

Freckling

Another characteristic but
innocuous finding of NF1 is
freckling, which is present in over 90% of patients by
7 years of age (DeBella et al. 2000). The freckles are
similar in color to café-au-lait spots but are much smaller

Lisch nodules are a common feature of NF1. Lisch nodules
are pigmented hamartomas of the iris that do not affect
vision. They are typically not present at birth, but they
develop during childhood. More than 95% of individuals
with NF1 have Lisch nodules by the age of 20 (Flueler et
al. 1986; Huson et al. 1987; Lubs et al. 1991). Slit lamp
examination by an ophthalmologist is necessary to deter-
mine the presence or absence of Lisch nodules as well as
the distinction between these and iris nevi, which are not
associated with NF1 (Friedman and Riccardi 1999).

Optic Pathway Gliomas

Optic pathway gliomas (OPG), or pilocytic astrocytomas of
the optic nerve, are the most common central nervous
system tumors seen in NF1 and typically present in early
childhood (less than 6 years of age) (Listernick et al. 1999;
Singhal et al. 2002). It has been estimated that up to 70% of
all OPGs are related to NF1 (Listernick et al. 1999). OPGs
may be either unilateral or bilateral and may involve the
optic nerve, the chiasm, or both. Approximately 15% of
NF1 patients will develop an OPG, half of whom have no
clinical symptoms (Korf 2000; Listernick et al. 1994;

Table III Age of Onset and Frequency of Common NF1 Symptoms

Symptoms

Café-au-lait spots

Freckling (axillary, inguinal)
Lisch nodules
Cutaneous neurofibromas

Typical age at presentation

Early presentation (occasionally visible at birth; usually
present by 2 years of age)
Between 3 and 5 years
Late childhood/adolescence
Variable; may see increase in size and number during
adolescence and pregnancy

Diffuse plexiform neurofibromas
Tibial dysplasia and/or sphenoid dysplasia

Congenital; manifest early in life
Typically visible clinically by 1 year

Learning disabilities
ADHD
Optic nerve glioma
Malignant peripheral nerve

sheath tumor (MPNST)

May not be identified until school age
Childhood
Childhood; may be asymptomatic
Average age at diagnosis is 28 years

(DeBella et al. 2000; Evans et al. 2002; Korf et al. 2005; Levy et al. 2005; Listernick et al. 1999)

Frequency

99%

>90%
95%
0–9 years 14%
10–19 years 44%
20–29 years 85%
>30 years 95%
25%
1–4% tibial
3–7% sphenoid
20–50%; MR uncommon (4.8–11%)
20–40%
15%
4–13%

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Genetic Counseling Practice Guidelines

391391

Singhal et al. 2002). Most NF1-related OPGs do not
progress or metastasize. If progression does occur, present-
ing symptoms often include proptosis, precocious puberty
or increased growth velocity. Other symptoms include loss
of visual acuity, abnormal color vision, optic atrophy, and
afferent pupillary defect. Some optic nerve tumors may
spontaneously regress (Korf 2000).

Skeletal Findings

Scoliosis is the most common skeletal finding in NF1 with
an estimated frequency ranging from 10 to approximately
25% (Akbarnia et al. 1992; Crawford and Schorry 1999;
Friedman and Birch 1997; Riccardi 1999b; Vitale et al.
2002). The scoliosis can be either dystrophic or non-
dystrophic (Alwan et al. 2005). The dystrophic type of
scoliosis is associated with bony abnormalities evident on
radiographic films and tends to be more severe with rapid
progression. This form of scoliosis typically presents
between 6 and 10 years of age, and, if not present by
10 years, is unlikely to develop (Riccardi 1999b). The non-
dystrophic form of scoliosis has no apparent bony abnor-
malities and has findings similar to idiopathic scoliosis in
individuals without NF1; it presents during adolescence and
tends to be less severe. Kyphoscoliosis may also develop
(Alwan et al. 2005). Occasionally, these spinal abnormalities
may be caused by an underlying neurofibroma.

Sphenoid dysplasia is present in 3–7% of NF1 patients and
typically presents as a unilateral defect (Riccardi 1999b;
Alwan et al. 2005). Over 50% of cases of sphenoid dysplasia
are associated with NF1. The lesions are usually asymptom-
atic and are diagnosed by skull radiographs or CT scans
(Alwan et al. 2005). In rare instances, progression of a lesion
may lead to medical complications such as enophthalmos and
herniation of the brain into the orbit (Riccardi 1999b).

Lesions of the long bones are another feature of NF1
with a prevalence of 1–4% (Crawford and Schorry 1999;
Friedman and Birch 1997; Vitale et al. 2002). The tibia is
most frequently involved, although other long bones may
also be affected (Ali and Hooper 1982; Alldred 1963; Floyd
and Percy-Lancaster 1987; Gregg et al. 1982; Keret et al.
2000; Riccardi 1999b). Congenital pseudarthrosis, or “false
joint” abnormality, occurs in 1–2% of NF1 patients
(Friedman and Birch 1997; Riccardi 1999b). These lesions
are often detected during infancy or early childhood and
present as bowing or fracturing of the affected bone (Alwan
et al. 2005). Other potential abnormalities of the long bones
include changes associated with a plexiform neurofibroma
or localized lytic defects (Riccardi 1999b).

NF1 patients also have an increased risk for osteoporosis
and osteopenia. (Kuorilehto et al. 2005). Other skeletal
anomalies found in NF1 patients may include pectus
deformities, genu varum, and genu valgum (Riccardi 1999b).

Neurofibromas

Neurofibromas (NFs) are benign tumors that can occur
anywhere in the body. They most commonly develop along
peripheral nerves or less frequently in the deep nerves.
Neurofibromas are typically multicellular in origin, com-
posed of Schwann cells, axons, fibroblasts, mast cells,
endothelial cells and perineurial cells (Peltonen et al. 1988).
Pruritis, or itching, is a somewhat common feature of NF1
and when localized, often precedes the development of
cutaneous neurofibromas.

NFs can be classified into different types (Friedman and

Riccardi 1999; Korf and Rubenstein 2005):

1. Discrete Neurofibromas

Discrete NFs are benign tumors that arise from a single site
on a peripheral nerve. They are rarely present at birth, often
appearing just before the time of puberty (Dugoff and
Sujansky 1996; Korf and Rubenstein 2005). The number
of dermal neurofibromas tends to increase with age and
varies widely between individuals. They may increase in
size and number during pregnancy. Discrete NFs are
encapsulated; they may grow in size and press on other
tissues, but will not invade them.

Discrete Cutaneous Neurofibromas. Discrete cutaneous
NFs usually protrude above the skin and are soft and
fleshy. They may be flesh-colored, pink or purple.
They may be sessile or pedunculated. They often
initially appear on the chest, abdomen and back.
Typically, these NFs are not painful, but may cause
pruritis and often have a significant cosmetic burden.
Discrete Subcutaneous Neurofibromas. Discrete subcu-
taneous NFs develop along nerves contained in deeper
body tissue under the epidermis. They are usually firm
and rubbery to palpation and can be distinguished from
cutaneous neurofibromas because the skin can be moved
over the nodule. These tumors may present clinically as
beadlike nodules along the length of the nerve and they
range in size from pea-sized to several centimeters. They
may be painful or tender. Tumors in deeper nerves can
compress a nerve root, causing radicular pain, weakness
or loss of sensation.

2. Plexiform Neurofibromas

Plexiform NFs (PNFs) grow along the length of a peripheral
nerve sheath. They are non-encapsulated and therefore may
grow into healthy tissue and interfere with normal develop-
ment of tissue or bone. These tumors tend to be supported by a
network of blood vessels and therefore are usually difficult to
surgically remove. Most PNFs are benign, but there is a risk

392

Radtke et al.

for transformation to malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors (MPNST) (See ‘Tumors and Malignancy’).

Diffuse Plexiform Neurofibromas. Diffuse PNFs are
usually congenital, but may not be recognized until they
increase in size or are found incidentally. They may
spread out from the area of origin and develop numerous
extensions that infiltrate extensively into adjacent normal
tissues, making complete surgical removal difficult. They
may also engulf nerves. The tumors can occur superfi-
cially, in deep tissues, or a combination thereof. With
superficial involvement, skin may be thickened, redun-
dant, and/or hyperpigmented. There may also be thick,
coarse hair or localized hypertrophy over the affected
area. Diffuse PNFs are described as having a “bag of
worms” feel on palpation and most often develop in the
head, neck and abdomen. They typically grow most
rapidly during childhood, although they sometimes
increase during adolescence and pregnancy.
Nodular Plexiform Neurofibromas. Nodular PNFs are
less common than diffuse PNFs and are discrete lesions
that arise in peripheral nerve trunks. The most frequent
site of involvement is along the spinal nerves. They
cannot usually be detected by palpation. They vary in
size and are sometimes painful. These types of NFs
frequently cause neurological symptoms.

Seizures

Although not common, there are some studies that suggest
an increased frequency of seizures (range 3.5–7.3%) in NF1
(Friedman and Riccardi 1999; North 1993). The seizures
that are suggested to be associated with NF1 do not differ
from those seen in the general population. When not
associated with an intracranial
these
seizures are generally well-controlled with routine anti-
epileptic drugs (Gutmann 1999).

lesion or stenosis,

Headaches

Individuals with NF1 have an increased frequency of
headaches. These range from a mild “tension” headache to
a true migraine (Riccardi 1981). Although common, a new
onset of headaches or ones that are atypical for the patient
and/or accompanied by neurologic deficits, may warrant
investigations for other causes including brain tumors,
pheochromocytomas or cerebrovascular etiologies (Friedman
and Riccardi 1999; Riccardi 1981).

UBOs

Cranial MRI scans in NF1 patients often show focal areas of
high signal intensity on T2 or FLAIR weighted images. They

are typically referred to as Unidentified Bright Objects
(UBOs) or “NF spots.” They exert no mass effect and are
not observed on CT scan. They often resolve with time and are
rarely seen in NF1 patients over the age of 20 (Aoki et al.
1989). Some researchers have suggested a connection
between the presence of UBOs and lower IQ,
language
skills, visuospatial functioning and academic achievement
(Denckla et al. 1996), although this has not been found in
other studies (Friedman and Riccardi 1999).

Growth

Individuals with NF1 tend to be below average in height and
true short stature (<10th percentile) occurs in more than 40%
of adults with NF1 (Carmi et al. 1999). One study found
growth hormone deficiency in 3 of 122 children, although
this does not appear to be the cause of short stature in most
patients with NF1 (Cnossen et al. 1997).

Macrocephaly, either relative or absolute, is present in 29–
45% of individuals with NF1 and usually develops during
childhood (Clementi et al. 1999; Friedman and Riccardi 1999;
Riccardi 1999b; Szudek et al. 2000). Rarely, underlying
hydrocephalus is identified (Friedman and Riccardi 1999).

Onset of Puberty

Most individuals with NF1 undergo normal pubertal devel-
opment (Friedman and Riccardi 1999). However, in approx-
imately 1–4% of patients, puberty may be premature or
delayed (Friedman and Birch 1997). Precocious puberty
typically results from an optic chiasm glioma or other tumor
proximal to the region of the hypothalamus (Friedman and
Riccardi 1999; Habiby et al. 1995).

Pregnancy and NF

Although NF1 appears to have no intrinsic effect on fertility,
negative pregnancy outcome has been reported (Friedman and
Riccardi 1999). Early reports suggest a significant increase in
complications including intrauterine growth retardation,
preterm labor, and stillbirth (Belton et al. 1984; Edwards et
al. 1983; Weissman et al. 1993). However, these findings are
controversial, and more recent studies suggest
that most
pregnancy outcomes for healthy women with NF1 are
normal, although there appears to be an increased need for
cesarean-sections (Dugoff and Sujansky 1996). Pregnancy is
frequently associated with an exacerbation of existing
maternal symptoms as well as the new presentation or rapid
increase in tumors and hypertension (Ansari and Nagamani
1976; Dugoff and Sujansky 1996; Swapp and Main 1973). A
subsequent decrease in the size of the exacerbated neuro-
fibromas in the postpartum period is sometimes seen (Dugoff
and Sujansky 1996).

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Genetic Counseling Practice Guidelines

393393

Cardiovascular Findings

neurofibromas and is often relieved by anti-histamines
(Korf and Rubenstein 2005; Riccardi 1981).

Hypertension is a common finding in individuals with NF1.
The incidence of hypertension increases with age and can lead
to heart attack, stroke, kidney failure, and other medical
problems. In most cases,
the hypertension is essential.
However, less common causes of hypertension include renal
artery abnormalities, pheochromocytomas, and, in rarer instan-
ces, aortic coarctations or brain tumors (Friedman 1999a).

Congenital heart defects have been reported in patients
with NF1 with an estimated frequency between 0.4 and
6.4% (Carey et al. 1979; Crowe et al. 1956; Lin et al. 2000;
Schorry et al. 1989). The most common cardiac abnormal-
ity is valvar pulmonic stenosis (Friedman and Birch 1997;
Lin et al. 2000). This abnormality has been described in
individuals with the Watson and the NF1-Noonan pheno-
types as well as individuals with a large gene deletion (See
“Variants of NF1”); however, the incidence of pulmonic
stenosis is also increased in patients with NF1 without these
variant phenotypes. Coarctation of the aorta and other heart
defects have also been reported (Friedman and Birch 1997;
Lin et al. 2000). Several reports have identified NF1
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Current evi-
dence is insufficient
to determine whether these reflect
manifestations of NF1 or are simply coincidental.

involvement

Vasculopathies are a well-recognized cardiovascular
complication of NF1 (Friedman 1999a). They may be
peripheral or cerebrovascular. The specific types of lesions
include stenoses, dilations, aneurysms, and fistulas (Friedman
et al. 2002). Arterial
is most common,
although venous involvement has also been reported
(Lehrnbecher et al. 1994). These lesions frequently occur
in the renal arteries, but may also occur in the cerebral or
visceral arteries (Criado et al. 2002; Serleth et al. 1998;
Westenend et al. 1994). The exact frequency of vasculop-
athy in patients with NF1 is unknown and many patients
with vasculopathy remain asymptomatic throughout their
lives (Friedman et al. 2002). Symptomatic vascular lesions
are most commonly detected in childhood or early
adulthood and may be identified during a pregnancy
(Friedman et al. 2002; Pilmore et al. 1997). A study by
Rosser et al. (2005) identified a cerebrovascular abnormal-
ity in 2.5% of patients with NF1. These abnormalities may
present with neurological symptoms secondary to cerebral
ischemia (Friedman et al. 2002).

Pruritis

Pruritis, or chronic itching, is a relatively common feature
of NF1. It may be generalized or restricted to a certain area
of the body. When localized, the itching may precede the
development of cutaneous neurofibromas. The itching is
thought to be related to the large amount of mast cells in

Tumors and Malignancy

The malignancy rates in individuals with NF1 are higher
than the general population risk,
though precise risk
estimates vary. Literature reports suggest that the risk for
malignancy in individuals with NF1 is 5–15% higher than
the general population risk (Walker et al. 2006). On average,
the onset of malignancy in NF1 patients appears to be
earlier than the general population (Kim et al. 2002; Walker
et al. 2006). A prospective study by Walker et al. suggests
that the increased malignancy rate comes primarily from a
higher incidence of central nervous system and connective
tissue malignancies (Walker et al. 2006).

Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors

Approximately 4–13% of patients with NF1 will develop a
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST), also called
malignant schwannoma or neurofibrosarcoma (Evans et al.
2002; Korf 2000; Levy et al. 2005). The most common
locations of these tumors in NF1 patients are the abdominal
paraspinal region, the extremities, and the head and neck
regions (Levy et al. 2005). Approximately 20–50% of
patients with MPNSTs also have NF1 (Evans et al. 2002;
Korf 2000; Levy et al. 2005). Compared to individuals
without NF1, individuals with NF1 tend to be diagnosed with
an MPNST at a younger age and have a poorer prognosis.
Most of the time, MPNSTs in NF1 are associated with an
underlying plexiform neurofibroma (Evans et al. 2002; Levy
et al. 2005; Korf 2000). While plexiform neurofibromas may
be very large tumors, the malignant component of the tumor
may be very small and can easily be missed by a single
biopsy. Symptoms commonly reported by patients with an
MPNST include pain, enlarging tumor mass, and neurologic
symptoms (Korf 2000).

Pheochromocytomas

Pheochromocytomas are catecholamine-secreting tumors
that occur most often in the adrenal gland They occur in
approximately 0.1–5.7% of NF1 patients. In the majority of
cases, the NF1-related pheochromocytoma will be a single,
unilateral tumor (84%). Roughly 10% of patients will have a
bilateral pheochromocytoma and a small percentage (6%)
will have an extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma (Walther et
al. 1999). Pheochromocytomas often lead to increased
production of adrenaline which may cause hypertension
and a variety of other associated symptoms such as
headaches, cardiac palpitations, diaphoresis and tremors.
They may become metastatic. (Walther et al. 1999).

394

Gastrointestinal Tumors

There is a wide spectrum and diverse nature of tumors that
occur along the gastrointestinal (GI) tract in NF1 patients.
Neurofibromas are the most common tumor of the gastroin-
testinal tract in patients with NF1, however most of these are
benign and asymptomatic. When symptomatic, abdominal
pain, constipation and bleeding are the most common
presenting symptoms. The incidence of gastrointestinal
carcinoids is higher in NF1 patients than in the general
population; however,
the malignancy rate is comparable
between the two groups (Levy et al. 2005). Gastrointestinal
stromal tumors (GIST) are associated with NF1. Contrary to
non-NF1 patients, NF1-related GIST occur primarily in the
small intestine and typically present as either multiple tumors
or are associated with other GI neoplasms (Levy et al. 2004).

Leukemia and Lymphoma

There have been several reports suggesting an increased risk
for acute lymphoblastic leukemia, non-Hodgkin lymphoma
and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) in NF1
(Stiller et al. 1994; Zvulunov et al. 1995). As many as 14%
of individuals with JMML have NF1 (Niemeyer et al. 1997).
However, the risk of an individual with NF1 developing
JMML is low. (Gutmann and Gurney 1999). An association
between leukemia and the cutaneous finding of juvenile
xanthogranulomas (JXG) has been suggested, but
this
association has not been well-established (Cambiaghi et al.
2004; Morier et al. 1990).

Gliomas

Optic gliomas are seldom malignant and are discussed earlier
in this document. Other than optic gliomas, individuals with
NF1 are at risk for other types of gliomas,
including
cerebellar astrocytomas, ependymomas, third ventricle as-
trocytomas, cerebral astrocytomas, brain stem gliomas, and
spinal cord tumors. The risk of malignant transformation
in these tumors in NF1 patients was found to be higher
than in those without NF1 (Ilgren et al. 1985).

Embryonal Tumors

Rhabdomyosarcomas are seen with disproportionately high
frequency in individuals with NF1. An association of NF1
with neuroblastoma and Wilms tumor has been suggested
but has not been confirmed (Korf 2000; Levy et al. 2005).

Breast Cancer

Questions have been raised regarding a potentially in-
creased risk for breast cancer in individuals with NF1 due

Radtke et al.

to the possible role of neurofibromin in some breast cancers
(Guran and Safali 2005). This concern has been further
supported by a prospective study suggesting an increased
risk for early onset-breast cancer among women with NF1
(Walker et al. 2006). Additional data and larger studies are
necessary to determine whether the breast cancer risk in
individuals with NF1 is truly increased.

Miscellaneous Tumors

A variety of other
in NF1 including
leiomyosarcomas, ganglioneuromas and adenocarcinomas
(Levy et al. 2005).

tumors occur

Cognitive Phenotype

The vast majority of individuals with NF1 have intelligence
within the normal range. However, there is a documented
leftward shift in the IQ curve, as well as an increased incidence
of both mental retardation (MR) and learning disabilities as
compared to the general population (Barton and North 2004;
Eliason 1986; Ferner et al. 1996; Mazzocco et al. 1995).

The incidence of MR in the NF1 population is estimated
to be between 4.8 and 11% (Dilts et al. 1996; Ferner et al.
1996; Hyman et al. 2005; North et al. 1995; Wadsby et al.
1989). Large NF1 gene deletions are a frequent finding in
patients with MR, and patients with such deletions tend to
exhibit a more severe phenotype overall (Ainsworth et al.
1997) (See “Variants of NF1”). Accordingly, MR is not
typically expected in individuals without the deletion. The
occurrence of MR in a patient with NF1 without a full gene
deletion may warrant further evaluations to rule out other
more common causes of MR, such as chromosomal
duplications/deletions, and fragile X syndrome.

Learning disabilities are a much more common occur-
rence in NF1. Historically, most studies have estimated the
incidence of learning disabilities to be between 40 and
60%, although the criteria for defining a “learning
disability” have varied (Hyman et al. 2005; Kayl and
Moore 1995; North 1999; Ozonoff 1999; Samuelsson and
Axelsson 1981; Stine and Adams 1989; Wadsby et al.
1989). The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders IV (DSM IV) defines a specific learning
disability as “the achievement on standardized tests that is
more than two standard deviations below that expected for
the individual’s level of intelligence” (American Psychiatric
Association 2000). Using this definition, a study by Hyman
et al. (2005) examined a cohort of 81 children with NF1, in
which 81% of individuals showed some sort of cognitive
impairment, but only 25% of individuals met the DSM IV
diagnostic criteria for learning disabilities when controlling
for IQ. Thus, some individuals with NF1 do not qualify for
a formal diagnosis of a learning disability but will still

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Genetic Counseling Practice Guidelines

395395

require intervention for other neuropsychological deficits.
These deficits can include but are not limited to visuospatial
skills, executive function, expressive and receptive lan-
guage, social skills and motor coordination (Barton and
North 2004; Chapman et al. 1996; Dilts et al. 1996; Ferner
et al. 1996; Hyman et al. 2005; Johnson et al. 1999;
Mazzocco et al. 1995; North et al. 1994, 1995, 2002;
Varnhagen et al. 1988; Zoller et al. 1997).

Several studies have suggested a frequency of attention
deficit disorder (ADD) with or without hyperactivity in
approximately 30–40% of the NF1 population (Bawden et al.
1996; Cutting et al. 2000; DeWinter et al. 1999; Hyman et al.
2005; Kayl and Moore 1995).

In summary, the cognitive phenotype of NF1 is complex,
variable, and unpredictable, and can include a wide range
of learning disabilities, other neuropsychological deficits,
and less often, mental retardation. Formal neuropsycholog-
ical evaluation can help elucidate the specific challenges of
an individual with NF1 to allow for appropriate interven-
tion. Intervention is based on the presenting cognitive
features, and these are managed in the same way as they
would be in the non-NF1 population.

Life Expectancy

Individuals with NF1 are predicted to have a lifespan of
approximately 15 years less than that seen in the general
population (Rasmussen et al. 2001; Zoller et al. 1995).
Khosrotehrani et al. (2005) reviewed data on 703 NF1
patients. The major cause of death in this population was
malignancy. The second major cause was tumor-related
neurological complications, and less frequent were vascular
complications and accidents, suicide or causes of death that
were indeterminate. Other reports demonstrate that cardio-
vascular disease is a frequent cause of premature death in
individuals with NF1, and that myocardial infarction and
cerebrovascular accidents occur at a younger than expected
age among NF1 patients (Friedman et al. 2002; Zoller et al.
1995). Complications from surgery also may lead to a
decreased life span (Korf and Rubenstein 2005).

Molecular Basis of Disease

The elucidation of the molecular basis of NF1 began in 1990
when the gene, NF1, was identified and the protein product,
neurofibromin, were characterized (Cawthon et al. 1990b;
Wallace et al. 1990). The NF1 gene, located at 17q11.2 is
approximately 350 kb in size and contains 60 exons. Within
the NF1 gene are three additional genes contained within an
intron, which are transcribed in the opposite direction
(Cawthon et al. 1991, 1990a; Mikol et al. 1990). The
protein, neurofibromin, contains 2,818 amino acids.

The various functions of neurofibromin are still being
investigated. It appears to serve a tumor suppressor function
within the Ras signaling pathway (Zhu and Parada 2001).
Typically, neurofibromin inactivates Ras by stimulating its
conversion from Ras-GTP to Ras-GDP, thus controlling cell
proliferation. However, when neurofibromin is abnormal or
absent, Ras remains active and promotes cell proliferation
and tumor growth. This is thought to be the mechanism
responsible for the formation of tumors associated with
NF1. It is also thought that abnormalities in this pathway
contribute to the occurrence of learning disabilities (Korf
and Rubenstein 2005).

To date, hundreds of mutations in the NF1 gene have been
identified, many of which are unique to an individual or
family (Messiaen et al. 2003). Mutations identified include
deletions,
insertions, splice site mutations, amino acid
substitutions, full gene deletions and chromosomal rear-
rangements. In the majority of cases, the mutation results in a
truncated protein. A majority of molecular studies have not
identified a strong genotype–phenotype correlation.
(Rasmussen et al. 1998; Upadhyaya et al. 1998). However,
in 2007, Upadhyaya et al. identified 21 patients with an
atypical presentation and a 3-bp in-frame deletion in exon
17. All patients lacked cutaneous neurofibromas or clinically
obvious plexiform neurofibromas. Other exceptions that
demonstrate a possible genotype–phenotype correlation
include some of the NF1 variants,
including Spinal NF,
NF-Noonan syndrome and individuals with deletions of the
entire NF1 gene. (See “Variants of NF1”).

There appears to be a parent-of-origin effect on the types
of de novo mutations that arise in the NF1 gene, with gene
deletions being more frequent on the maternally derived
chromosome and other types of mutations occurring preferen-
tially on the paternally derived chromosome (Ainsworth et al.
1997; Stephens et al. 1992; Upadhyaya et al. 1998).

It should be noted that although NF1 is common, no
convincing evidence of homozygous NF1 mutations have been
reported, suggesting that at least one functional NF1 allele is
essential in early fetal development (Friedman 1999b). This is
further supported by the fact that homozygosity for NF1
mutations in mice leads to abnormal heart development and
mid-gestation embryonic lethality (Jacks et al. 1994).

Differential Diagnosis

Individual signs and symptoms of NF1 can be seen in the
absence of other clinical findings. Isolated tumors, includ-
ing optic gliomas and neurofibromas, are well documented,
although Lisch nodules are rarely seen outside of the NF1
spectrum. The presence of one or two CALS is fairly
common in the general population; however, having
multiple (three or more) CALS is noted in less than 1%

396

Radtke et al.

of children without other features of a genetic condition
(Tekin et al. 2001). The diagnosis of NF1 is subsequently
confirmed in a majority of these patients (Fois et al. 1993;
Korf 1992). Some individuals with red hair, fair skin, and,
often, Irish ancestry are referred to clinics to rule out NF1
due to multiple CALS. These CALS are paler and more
irregular than typical NF1 CALS. It is unclear whether this
is an extremely mild variant of NF1 or a normal pigmentary
variation (Schneider and Korf 1996).

Several conditions have features that overlap with NF1.

See Table IV.

Variants of NF1

Segmental Neurofibromatosis

Clinical findings of NF1 that are confined to one or more
well-circumscribed regions of the body have been described
in many individuals. This entity is known as “segmental
NF.” Typically, these manifestations do not encompass the
entire clinical spectrum of NF1 and may include only
dermatologic findings and/or neurofibromas. Ophthalmo-
logic findings are seldom observed (Ruggieri et al. 2004).
Usually, a mild clinical course is anticipated for those
patients who present with only pigmentary features.
However, studies looking at long-term outcomes of these
patients are very limited. Therefore counseling patients
about clinical prognosis based on the assumed presence of a
mutation in a mosaic state must be undertaken with caution.
It is believed that segmental NF1 is caused by a post-zygotic
mutation in the NF1 gene. Tinschert et al. (2000) reported the
first molecular evidence of this phenomenon. The timing of
the post-zygotic event is believed to determine the extent of
involvement. Mutations arising early in embryologic develop-
ment may result in a more widespread mosaicism that may
appear as classic NF1 (Colman et al. 1996). A milder
phenotype presenting as patchy distribution, smaller segment
involvement, or isolated findings, may be the result of
mutations arising later in embryologic development.

Providing an accurate risk assessment for the offspring
of an individual with segmental NF1 presents a great
challenge. There have been reports of individuals with
segmental NF1 having children with classic NF1 (Oguzkan
et al. 2004; Poyhonen et al. 2000). Since individuals with
segmental NF1 are presumed to have some proportion of
cells that harbor an NF1 gene mutation, they should be
counseled that the risk to their offspring for classic NF1
is likely to be
could be as high as 50%,
considerably lower. Lymphocyte molecular
testing in
segmental NF may not be informative as the sample may
not
include the affected region or cells. However, for
individuals who have had informative molecular confirma-

though it

tion in the affected cells, prenatal genetic testing for that
mutation could be pursued in future pregnancies.

Spinal Neurofibromatosis

A subset of patients with NF1 has a variant in which their
tumors are primarily localized to the spinal nerve roots. These
individuals exhibit variable skin manifestations. This variant is
referred to as spinal neurofibromatosis (SNF). The hallmark of
this condition is multiple bilateral symmetrical enlargement of
the nerve root on the spine (Korf et al. 2005; Kluwe et al.
2003). Cord compression is a frequent complication in SNF
(Korf et al. 2005). In contrast, spinal cord tumors associated
with clinical symptoms are uncommon in classic NF1,
affecting less than 7% of patients (Kluwe et al. 2003; Von
Deimling et al. 1995). Lisch nodules may or may not be
present. The diagnosis of spinal neurofibromatosis by physical
examination alone can be difficult, as individuals can be
affected and not meet diagnostic criteria for the classic form of
NF1. Most patients with SNF will have a variable number of
CALS, but even in adults, the dermal neurofibromas may not
be present (Korf et al. 2005). Spinal neurofibromatosis is also
inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and appears to be
associated with mild mutations, such as missense, nonsense,
or splicing mutations in the NF1 gene (Kluwe et al. 2003).

NF-Noonan Syndrome

Noonan syndrome is characterized by short stature, charac-
teristic facial features, a webbed neck and congenital heart
disease (most commonly pulmonic stenosis). In 1985,
Allanson et al. first reported the concurrence of NF1 and
Noonan syndrome (NFNS). In subsequent years, controversy
has remained as to whether NFNS represents a variable
manifestation of either NF1 or Noonan syndrome; a chance
occurrence of two common genetic disorders; or a distinctive
clinical entity (Carey et al. 1995). De Luca et al. (2005)
identified NF1 mutations in 16/17 patients with the NFNS
phenoytype. They found an increased prevalence of in-frame
mutations involving exons 24 and 25 of the NF1 gene. No
mutations in PTPN11, the gene most commonly associated
with Noonan syndrome, were observed, suggesting that most
cases of NFNS are due to mutations within the NF1 gene.

Watson Syndrome

Watson syndrome is characterized by pulmonic stenosis,
multiple café-au-lait spots, and decreased IQ in addition to
other various manifestation of NF1 (Allanson et al. 1991;
Leao and da Silva 1995; Watson 1967). Linkage analysis,
as well as identification of a gene deletion in one patient,
support the hypothesis that this is an allelic variant of NF1
(Allanson et al. 1991; Upadhyaya et al. 1992).

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Genetic Counseling Practice Guidelines

397397

Table IV Differential Diagnoses for NF1

Condition and gene (if known)

Overlapping features

Distinguishing features

Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2)

CALS
Dermal and spinal
cord tumors
Autosomal dominant

Pathology of tumors is more often schwannoma, meningioma
Vestibular schwannomas (acoustic neuromas)
leading to deafness in mid-adulthood
Juvenile posterior subcapsular cataract
CALS do not meet NF1 diagnostic criteria

LEOPARD Syndrome (Lentigines,

Electocardiographic abnormalities, Ocular
Abnormalities, Pulmonic Stenosis,
Abnormal Genitalia, Retardation of Growth
and Deafness) (PTPN11)

CALS and
hyperpigmented lesions
Pulmonic stenosis
Autosomal dominant

Deafness
Multiple lentigines

McCune–Albright Syndrome (GNAS1)

CALS
Premature puberty

Bannayan–Riley–Ruvalcaba Syndrome (PTEN) CALS

Multiple tumors
Macrocephaly
Learning problems
Autosomal dominant

Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
Endocrine abnormalities such as sexual precocity,
hyperthyroidism, hyperparathyroidism
CALS are atypical—fewer in number, larger in size
and have irregular margins
Sporadic (only compatible with life when in the mosaic state)

Subcutaneous tumors are usually lipomas or hemangiomas
Polyposis of colon
Pigmentary changes of penis in males

Multiple Lipomas

Proteus Syndrome (PTEN)

Tuberous Sclerosis (TSC1; TSC2)

Subcutaneous tumors
Autosomal dominant

Tumors are lipomas
No other features of NF1

CALS
Hemihypertrophy,
Subcutaneous tumors
Overgrowth of limbs
Learning disabilities

Epidermal nevi
Tumors are lipomas, lymphangiomas, and hemangiomas
Bony abnormalities including: prominences of skull,
macrodactyly and hyperostosis
Soft tissue hypertrophy may appear as gyriform
especially over plantar surfaces of feet
Sporadic

CALS
Seizures
Learning problems
Behavior problems/ADHD
Autosomal dominant

Additional dermatologic findings including: ash leaf spots,
shagreen patches
Pits in dental enamel
Cardiac rhabdomyoma
Angiomyolipomas of kidneys
Glioma/angioma lesions in cortex and white matter
(“tubers”)

Familial Multiple CALS

CALS
Autosomal dominant

No other features of NF1

Schwannomatosis (INI1)

Multiple tumors

Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia, Type IIB
(RET)

CALS
Tumors including
pheochromocytoma
Autosomal dominant

Schwannomas of cranial, spinal or peripheral nerves
No other features of NF1
Mostly sporadic, though some reports of autosomal
dominant inheritance

Tumors usually involve the endocrine system
Marfanoid habitus

398

Table IV (continued)

Condition and gene (if known)

Overlapping features

Distinguishing features

Klippel–Trenauney–Weber (VG5Q)

Overgrowth

Port wine stains
Hemangiomas
Usually unilateral involvement
Sporadic

Radtke et al.

Homozygous mismatch repair gene
mutations (PMS2, MLH1)

CALS
Tumors
Hematologic malignancies

Family history consistent with Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal
Cancer
Early onset HNPCC-related cancers
Autosomal recessive, consanguinity common

(Bandipalliam 2005; Jones 2005; Raevaara et al. 2004; Trimbath et al. 2001)

NF1 Gene Microdeletion

Medical and Developmental History

Approximately 4–5% of NF1 patients have deletions of the
entire NF1 gene. (Kluwe et al. 2004). The phenotype in
these patients tends to be more severe, with an earlier onset
of neurofibomas and the presence of mental deficiency,
variable dysmorphic features and other congenital anom-
alies. (Kayes et al. 1994; Wu et al. 1995; Rasmussen et al.
1998). In addition, some of these individuals appear to have
connective tissue abnormalities such as mitral valve
prolapse and joint laxity. (Mensink et al. 2006). A study
by De Raedt et al. suggested that the risk of MPNSTs is
higher in this group of patients than in individuals with
other types of mutations (De Raedt et al. 2003).

Ongoing Research

Research in NF1 is concentrated on the underlying causes
of the various symptoms of the condition as well as
potential therapies and treatments. Current studies are listed
on the Children’s Tumor Foundation webpage (http://www.
ctf.org), the Neurofibromatosis, Inc. webpage (http://www.
nfinc.org), and at http://www.clinicaltrials.gov. Active areas
of investigation include genotype–phenotype correlations;
the role of modifier genes; etiology of extensive phenotypic
variability; neurodevelopmental issues; and treatments for
neurofibromas and other tumors.

Genetic Counseling

Contracting

As with other genetic counseling indications, ascertaining the
family’s understanding of the reason for the visit as well as
their primary questions and concerns, and mutually develop-
ing a plan to address these concerns, are key components of
establishing rapport in the NF counseling process (Weil 2000).

See Figure 1 at the end of the text for a sample clinic intake
form.

Family History

To identify additional family members who may be affected
with NF, obtain at least a three generation, targeted pedigree
from the consultand or proband using standardized pedigree
symbols (Bennett et al. 1995). When possible, verify positive
or questionable family history with medical records. Sugges-
tions for a targeted family history are listed in Table V.

Psychosocial Assessment and Counseling

Similar to genetic counseling for other conditions, obtain-
ing a thorough psychosocial history and assessment
is
critical to the NF counseling process. General suggestions
for a targeted psychosocial history are listed in Table VI.

In addition to topics that are covered during a typical
genetic counseling session, individuals with NF1 may have
some unique psychosocial concerns may need to be addressed.

a. Realize that many individuals have received information
about NF1 from other sources (internet, physicians, etc.),
and that this information may be inaccurate, outdated, or

only representative of the most severe cases of NF1.

b. Recognize that

the list of potential complications
associated with NF1 is extensive. Appreciate that the
information may be overwhelming for some individu-
als. The genetic counselor should use his or her clinical
judgment
in gauging the appropriate amount of
information discussed during a session and may wish
to continue discussions at subsequent appointments.

c. Assess perception of the risk for malignancy. The term
“tumors” can be especially frightening and it should
be stressed that most NF tumors are benign. Malig-

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Genetic Counseling Practice Guidelines

399399

nancy risks should be discussed in the context of the
general population’s cancer risk, which is approxi-
mately 41% (http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2003/
results_merged/topic_lifetime_risk.pdf).

d. Address concerns and fears regarding the variable and
unpredictable natural history of NF1. Explain that the
majority of individuals lead productive lives, meaning
that they are able to attend school, be employed and
live independently. Providing the family with a list of
concerning symptoms (See “Education”) can be
helpful in giving the family a sense of control when
they are experiencing anxiety about the unpredictable
nature of NF1.

e. Assess perception of the impact of NF1 on the individ-
ual’s daily life, with a focus on cosmetic and medical
concerns. Wolkenstein et al. (2001) found that quality of
life in adults with NF1 was negatively correlated with
the visibility of the manifestations of NF1.

f. Discuss family’s concerns regarding labeling and self-
fulfilling prophecies. Many parents are concerned that the
diagnosis of a genetic condition will lower a child’s self-
expectations or the expectations of others for the child.

g. Assess the family’s knowledge and perception of the
Elephant Man. Despite the current belief that “The
Elephant Man” did not have NF1, older literature and
resources often refer to NF1 as the disease of “The
Elephant Man.” Families of patients with NF1 may
still be affected by the association of NF1 with the
difficult life of Joseph Merrick (Ablon 1995).

h. Elicit the individual’s experiences at school, work and
other social situations. In addition to the learning
disabilities, many NF1 patients have difficulty with
social skills. This may also be impacted by the co-
occurrence of ADHD.

i. Be aware of issues regarding counseling an individual
with a learning disability. In familial cases of NF1, a
parent may also have a learning disability. This may
affect an individual’s understanding and perception of
the disorder, their ability to recognize or cope with the

Table V Suggestions for Targeted Family History

Birthmarks or other targeted skin findings
Benign growth or tumors
Malignant tumor or cancer
Significant hearing problem such as hearing loss or ringing of the ears
Significant vision problem such as tumor, poor vision or blindness
Bone or joint problems (fractures, dislocations, curved spine)
Developmental delay, learning disability, ADHD or MR
Seizures, epilepsy or other nervous system problems
Macrocephaly

These targeted questions may also aid in differential diagnosis.

potential medical issues, and their comprehension of
the genetic implications for future offspring. In these
families, it is particularly important to determine the
level of understanding and adjust
the counseling
session to reflect the family’s comprehension level. It
is also important to keep in mind that individuals with
learning disabilities may prefer alternate methods of
receiving information and may benefit from reinforce-
ment at follow-up visits (Finucane 1998).

j. As indicated, assist

the family in navigating the
complexities of special education and/or other inter-
ventional services. Many individuals with NF1 require
additional services in school, and obtaining these
services may prove challenging and frustrating.

Risk Assessment

it

In order to complete an accurate risk assessment,
is
crucial to determine whether the disease and/or mutation
was inherited or de novo. This can often be accomplished
through physical and ophthalmologic examination of the
proband’s parents. Alternatively, if a DNA mutation has
been identified in the patient, molecular genetic testing can
be performed.

If the Mutation is De Novo

Risk for siblings of proband is low (thought to be less than
1%), but
remains increased due to the possibility of
germline mosaicism (see “Special Considerations”).

If the Mutation is Familial

Apply principles of autosomal dominant
inheritance to
pedigree. All offspring of an affected parent have a 50% risk

Table VI Suggestions for Targeted Psychosocial History/Assessment

Level of education
Possible barriers to communication, including cultural/language
diversity or the presence of learning disabilities
Current level of knowledge regarding diagnosis of NF1
Family’s understanding and perception of medical information
Previous experiences with NF1, if any
Family’s perception of the etiology of NF1
Emotional reaction to the diagnosis of NF1
Family structure and functioning
Family and community support systems
Coping skills
Meaning of a genetic diagnosis for the family, including implications
for family planning and parenting

400

Radtke et al.

to inherit the mutation. As indicated, identify nearest genetics/
NF clinic for affected relatives not living in the area.

Alternate Risk Reduction Options

Education

Clinical Features and Natural History

Review the main features of the condition,
its natural
history, and the typical timeline for the development of
features. See “Natural History.”

In families where a parent
is affected and the risk to
offspring is 50%, various options can reduce the risk in a
future pregnancy. The use of assisted reproductive technol-
ogy with a donor gamete from an unaffected individual in
place of the gamete from the affected parent can greatly
reduce the risk to future children. Alternatively, pre-
implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) may be available
for couples in which the causative NF1 mutation has been
identified or if linkage phase has been established.

Inheritance Pattern and Recurrence Risk

Signs and Symptoms that Warrant Immediate
Referral and Evaluation

NF1 is an autosomal dominant condition. Approximately
50% of NF1 cases are inherited from a parent. The
remaining 50% of cases of NF1 are due to a de novo
mutation in the proband. This is felt to be due, in part, to
the large size of the NF1 gene, which makes it more
susceptible to mutation. Penetrance is essentially 100%, but
expressivity is variable, even amongst family members.

If neither parent of the proband has NF1, the chance of
recurrence is low. However, because of the possibility of
germline mosaicism, the recurrence risk is likely somewhat
than the general population risk (see “Special
higher
Considerations”).

Please see “Variants of NF1” for recurrence risks for

segmental NF.

Prenatal Testing and Reproductive Options

Prenatal molecular genetic testing is available for families
in which the mutation has been identified in the proband.
Alternatively, if there are multiple affected family members,
and linkage has been established within the family, linkage
analysis is an option. In these situations, prenatal diagnosis
is possible via chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or
amniocentesis. In the vast majority of cases, ultrasound is
not useful in the prenatal diagnosis of NF1. There are some
reports of prenatal identification of NF1-related abnormal-
ities (Drouin et al. 1997; Hoyme et al. 1987; McEwing et al.
2006). These abnormalities included cardiac and craniofacial
anomalies as well as tumors. However,
the abnormalities
included in these reports were atypical for NF1, and in only
one instance was the diagnosis of NF1 considered before birth
(McEwing et al. 2006).

Given the variability and unpredictable nature of the
condition, genetic counseling is critical
for a couple
considering prenatal testing for NF1. Genetic counseling
informs a couple about the signs, course, and genetics of
NF1. It also facilitates the discussion of personal, moral,
and ethical issues they need to explore in order to make an
autonomous decision that meets their needs.

Parents and patients often find it helpful to be informed of
what types of symptoms warrant an immediate referral and
evaluation.

See Table VII

for signs and symptoms warranting

emergent evaluation.

Follow-up

Management

Management recommendations for patients with NF1 vary
between centers and must be tailored to the individual. It is not
the intention of this manuscript to address specific manage-
ment recommendations. It should be noted, however, that
management of these patients typically requires a multidisci-
plinary team. Disciplines that may be involved in the care of a
patient with NF1 are listed in Table VIII.

Documentation

Providers are encouraged to thoroughly document all
patient
interactions. This may be done via a patient
summary letter and/or a physician note. In many centers,
these two forms of documentation are combined. Please see
Table IX for a list of suggested items to be included.

Special Considerations

Germline Mosaicism

Germline mosaicism is a recognized phenomenon occurring
in a number of dominant genetic disorders and has been
observed in NF1 (Lazaro et al. 1995; Zlotogora 1998).
Therefore, caution must be used when discussing recur-
rence risks with the parents of a child with an apparently de

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Genetic Counseling Practice Guidelines

401401

Table VII Signs/Symptoms Warranting Immediate Referral

Table IX Suggested Items to Include in Documentation of NF Visit

Pain of unknown etiology
Weakness, numbness, tingling in the extremities
Change in balance or coordination
Change in vision
Change in intensity or frequency of headaches
Neurofibromas that change rapidly in size and/or color, or cause pain
Abnormal neurologic exam
Sudden onset of hypertension
Regression of cognitive skills or loss of developmental milestones
Significant deviation from individual’s established pattern of growth

Patient summary letter to include: Physician note to include:
Medical and family history
Diagnostic criteria
Physical examination
Natural history
Impression
Genetics Inheritance
Recommendations/follow-up plan
Recurrence risks
Reproductive options
Resource information
Impression
Contact information for further
Recommendations/follow-up
questions
plan
Resource information
Contact information for further
questions

novo case of NF1, even if parental lymphocyte analysis is
negative following mutation identification in the proband.
Nevertheless, it is estimated that the risk for recurrence due
to germline mosaicism is less than 1%.

Consent for DNA Testing

Informed consent for molecular analysis should be obtained
from the patient or legal guardian prior to the acquisition of
a sample for DNA testing. A consent form from the clinical
testing laboratory should be reviewed with the family.
Typically, this form describes the limitations and benefits of
testing, how results will be reported, and any other potential
uses of the specimen.

Table VIII Potential Referrals

Neurology
Neurosurgery
Surgery
Oncology
Endocrinology
Dermatology
Orthopedics
Ophthalmology
Otolaryngology
Gastroenterology
Urology/Nephrology
Cardiology
Obstetrics/Gynecology
Physical therapy
Occupational therapy
Speech therapy
Birth-to-three/Early intervention program
Social work
Psychiatry
Psychology
Support groups

Table X Patient Resources

Children’s Tumor Foundation (formerly NNFF): http://www.ctf.org;
800-323-7938
Neurofibromatosis, Inc: http://www.nfinc.org; 800-942-6825
Understanding NF1: http://www.understandingNF1.org
British Columbia Neurofibromatosis Program: http://www.bcnf.bc.ca;
800-385-BCNF (2263)
National Society of Genetic Counselors: http://www.nsgc.org
American College of Medical Genetics: http://www.acmg.net
American Society of Human Genetics: http://genetics.faseb.org/
genetics/ashg/ashgmenu.htm
Gene Tests: http://www.genetests.org

Patient Resources

It is important to aid the family in identifying additional
sources of support, such as advocacy and support groups,
and other families. A list of patient resources is listed in
Table X.

Acknowledgments The authors are grateful to the many reviewers
that contributed their time and expertise to this manuscript. Genetic
counselor reviewers included Stefanie Dugan, Lynn Holt, Kory Keller,
and Barb Pettersen. Drs. Bruce Korf and Jan Friedman also provided
invaluable feedback, as did Mr. Robert Miyamoto, a representative of
the Children’s Tumor Foundation. The authors would also like to
thank the Genetics Services committee for their guidance throughout
the process. Lacy Miles and Dr. Kenneth Grizzle also provided
valuable input on the cognitive section. Above all, the authors are
appreciative of the families that are directly impacted by neurofibro-
matosis. We hope that they will benefit from this manuscript.

402

Radtke et al.

Figure 1 Sample Intake Form
for an NF1 Clinic Visit

Neurofibromatosis Visit Form: 

  DOB: 

  DOV: 
  Age at Diagnosis (if applicable): 

Name:  
Age: 
Medical Record #:  
Referring Physician: 
Primary Care Physician:
Reason for Referral: 
Chief complaint:  

Medical History: 

Work-up to date (neuroimaging, radiographs, EEG, audiogram, DNA testing, etc.):
Developmental History:
Pregnancy history:
Labor and delivery history: 
Developmental milestones:
Surgeries: 
Therapies: 

Current review of systems: 

General Health: 

Illnesses 
Itching 
Medications 

Café-au-lait spots/Hyperpigmented lesions: 
Neurofibromas/Dermal tumors: 

Location 
Increased growth 
Pain 
Itching 
Other 

Neurologic: 

Headaches 
Pain 
Tingling/Numbness 
Seizures 
Dizziness 
Balance problems 

Joint/Muscle: 

Strength 
Symmetry 
Coordination 
Handwriting

Cognitive function: 

Education/grade level 
School grades  
Therapies 
Employment 
Behavior 
Attetion/Distractibility issues 

Eating/Elimination: 

Problems chewing/gagging 
Bowel/bladder control 
Constipation 
Diarrhea 

Vision:

Blurriness/Double vision 
Sudden changes 
Most recent Ophthalmologic results 
Lisch nodules present or absent 

Orthopedic: 

Scoliosis 
Pseudarthrosis 

Physical Exam: 

Height, weight, head circumference 
BP 
Dermatologic exam 
Skeletal exam (long bones, scoliosis) 
Neurologic exam 

Social History: 

Knowledge of condition: 
Natural history  
Genetics 

Psychosocial assessment: 

Assessment/Impression: 

Recommendations/Plan: 

Referrals:  (see TableVIII) 

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Genetic Counseling Practice Guidelines

403403

References

Ablon, J. (1995). ‘The elephant man’ as ‘self’ and ‘other’: The
psychosocial costs of a misdiagnosis. Social Science & Medicine,
40(11), 1481–1489.

Ainsworth, P. J., Chakraborty, P. K., & Weksberg, R. (1997). Example
of somatic mosaicism in a series of de novo neurofibromatosis
type 1 cases due to a maternally derived deletion. Human
Mutation, 9(5), 452–457.

Akbarnia, B. A., Gabriel, K. R., Beckman, E., & Chalk, D. (1992).
Prevalence of scoliosis in neurofibromatosis. Spine, 17, S244–
S248.

Ali, M. S., & Hooper, G. (1982). Congenital pseudarthrosis of the ulna
due to neurofibromatosis. Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, 64,
600–602.

Allanson, J. E., Hall, J. G., & Van Allen, M. I. (1985). Noonan
phenotype associated with neurofibromatosis. American Journal
of Medical Genetics, 21, 457–462.

Allanson, J. E., Upadhyaya, M., Watson, G. H., Partington, M.,
MacKenzie, A., Lahey, D., et al. (1991). Watson syndrome: Is it
a subtype of type 1 neurofibromatosis? Journal of Medical
Genetics, 28, 752–756.

Alldred, A. J. (1963). Congenital pseudarthrosis of the clavicle.

Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, 45-B, 312–319.

Alper, J. C., & Holmes, L. B. (1983). The incidence and significance
of birthmarks in a cohort of 4, 641 newborns. Pediatric
Dermatology, 1(1), 58–68.

Alwan, S., Tredwell, S. J., & Friedman, J. M. (2005). Is osseous
dysplasia a primary feature of neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1)?
Clinical Genetics, 67, 378–390.

American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (4th ed.) (Text Revision). Arlington:
American Psychiatric Association.

Ansari, A. H., & Nagamani, M. (1976). Pregnancy and neurofibromatosis
(von Recklinghausen’s disease). Obstetrics & Gynecology, 47
(suppl), 25S–29S.

Aoki, S., Barkovich, A. J., Nishimura, K., Kjos, B. O., Machido, T.,
Cogen, P., et al. (1989). Neurofibromatosis Types 1 & 2: Cranial
MR findings. Radiology, 172, 527–534.

Bandipalliam, P. (2005). Syndrome of early onset colon cancers,
hematologic malignancies & features of neurofibromatosis in
HNPCC families with homozygous mismatch repair gene
mutations. Familial Cancer, 4(4), 323–333.

Barton, B., & North, K. (2004). Social skills of children with
neurofibromatosis type 1. Developmental Medicine & Child
Neurology, 46, 553–563.

Bawden, H., Dooley, J., Buckley, D., Camfield, P., Gordon K., Riding M.,
et al. (1996). MRI and nonverbal cognitive deficits in children with
neurofibromatosis 1. Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology, 18(6), 784–792.

Belton, S. R., Ferguson, J. E., & Catanzarite, V. A.

(1984).
Neurofibromatosis and pregnancy: Report of a case compli-
cated by intrauterine growth retardation and oligohydramnios.
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 149(4), 468–
469.

Bennett, R. L., Steinhaus, K. A., Uhrich, S. B., O’Sullivan, C. K.,
Resta, R. G., Lochner-Doyle, D., et al. (1995). Recommendations
for standardized human pedigree nomenclature. Journal of
Genetic Counseling, 4(4), 267–279.

Cambiaghi, S., Restano, L., & Caputo, R. (2004). Juvenile zanthog-
ranuloma associated with neurofibromatosis 1: 14 patients without
evidence of hematologic malignancies. Pediatric Dermatology,
21(2), 97–101.

Carey, J. F., Hall, B. D., Allanson, J. E., & Witt, D. (1995). Is there a
the

“Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome”? Proceedings of
Greenwood Genetic Center, 14, 82–83.

Carey, J. C., Laub, J. M., & Hall, B. D. (1979). Penetrance and
variability in neurofibromatosis: A genetic study of 60 families.
Birth Defects Series, 15, 271–281.

Carmi, D., Shohat, M., Metzker, A., & Dickerman, Z. (1999). Growth,
puberty, and endocrine functions in patients with sporadic or
familial neurofibromatosis type 1: A longitudinal study. Pediatrics,
103(6 Pt 1), 1257–1262.

Cawthon, R. M., Andersen, L. B., Buchberg, A. M., Xu, G. F.,
O’Connell, P., Viskochil, D., et al. (1991). cDNA sequence and
genomic structure of EVI2B, a gene lying within an intron of the
neurofibromatosis type 1 gene. Genomics, 9, 446–460.

Cawthon, R. M., O’Connell, P., Buchberg, A. M., Viskochil, D.,
Weiss, R. B., Culver, M., et al. (1990a). Identification and
characterization of transcripts from the neurofibromatosis 1
region: The sequence and genomic structure of EVI2 and
mapping of other transcripts. Genomics, 7, 555–565.

Cawthon, R., Weiss, R., Xu, G., Viskochil, D., Culver, M., Stevens, J.,
et al. (1990b). A major segment of the neurofibromatosis type 1
gene: cDNA sequence, genomic structure, and point mutations.
Cell, 62, 193–201.

Chapman, C. A., Waber, D. P., Bassett, N., Urion, D. K., & Korf, B. R.
(1996). Neurobehavioral profiles of children with neurofibroma-
tosis 1 referred for learning disabilities are sex-specific. American
Journal of Medical Genetics, 67, 127–132.

Clementi, M., Milani, S., Mammi, I., Boni, S., Monciotti, C., &
Tonconi, R. (1999). Neurofibromatosis type 1 growth charts.
American Journal of Medical Genetics, 87(4), 317–323.

Cnossen, M. H., Sam, E. N., Cooiman, L. C., Simonsz, H. J., Stroink,
H. H., Oranje, A. P., et al. (1997). Endocrinologic disorders and
optic pathway gliomas in children with neurofibromatosis type 1.
Pediatrics, 100, 667–670.

Colman, S. D., Rasmussen, S. A., Ho, V. T., Abernathy, C. R., &
Wallace, M. R. (1996). Somatic mosaicism in a patient with
neurofibromatosis type 1. American Journal of Human Genetics,
58(3), 484–490.

Crawford, A. H., & Schorry, E. K. (1999). Neurofibromatosis in
children: The role of the orthopedist. Journal of the American
Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 7, 217–230.

Criado, E., Izquierdo, L., Lujan, S., Puras, E., & del Mar Espino, M.
(2002). Abdominal aortic coarctation, renovascular, hypertension,
and neurofibromatosis. Annals of Vascular Surgery, 16(3), 363–367.
Crowe, F. W., Schull, W. J., & Neel, J. V. (1956). A clinical,
pathological, and genetic study of multiple neurofibromatosis
(pp. 1–181). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.

Cutting, L. E., Koth, C. W., & Denckla, M. B. (2000). How children
with neurofibromatosis type 1 differ from “typical” learning
disabled clinic attenders: Nonverbal learning disabilities revis-
ited. Developmental Neuropsychology, 17(1), 29–47.

DeBella, K., Szudek, J., & Friedman, J. M. (2000). Use of National
Institutes of Health criteria for diagnosis of neurofibromatosis 1
in children. Pediatrics, 105(3), 608–614.

De Luca, A., Bottillo, I., Sarkozy, A., Carta, C., Neri, C., Bellacchio, E., et
al. (2005). NF1 gene mutations represent the major molecular
event underlying Neurofibromatosis-Noonan syndrome. American
Journal of Human Genetics, 77(6), 1092–1101.

Denckla, M. D., Hofman, K., Massocco, M., Melhem, E., Reiss, A. L.,
Bryan, R. N., et al. (1996). Relationship between T2-weighted
hyperintensities (unidentified bright objects) and lower IQs in
children with neurofibromatosis-1. American Journal of Medical
Genetics, 67, 98–102.

De Raedt, T., Brems, H., Wolkenstein, P., Vidaud, D., Pilotti, S.,
Perrone, F., et al. (2003). Elevated risk for MPNST in NF1
microdeletion patients. American Journal of Human Genetics, 72
(5), 1288–1292.

DeWinter, A. E., Moore, B. D., Slopis, J. M., Ater, J. L., & Copeland,
D. R. (1999). Brain tumors in children with neurofibromatosis:

404

Radtke et al.

Additional neuropsychological morbidity? Neuro-oncology, 1(4),
275–281.

Dilts, C. V., Carey, J. C., Kircher, J. C., Hoffman, R. O., Creel, D.,
Ward, K., et al. (1996). Children and adolescents with neurofi-
bromatosis 1: A behavioral phenotype. Journal of Developmental
and Behavioral Pediatrics, 17(4), 229–239.

Drouin, V., Marret, S., Petitcolas, J., Eurin, D., Vannier, J. P., Fessard,
C., et al. (1997). Prenatal ultrasound abnormalities in a patient
with generalized neurofibromatosis type 1. Neuropediatrics,
28(2), 120–121.

Dugoff, L., & Sujansky, E. (1996). Neurofibromatosis type I and

pregnancy. American Journal of Medical Genetics, 66, 7–10.

Edwards, J. N., Fooks, M., & Davey, D. A. (1983). Neurofibromatosis
and severe hypertension in pregnancy. British Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 90(6), 528–531.

Eliason, M. J. (1986). Neurofibromatosis: Implications for learning
and behaviour. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral
Pediatrics, 7, 175–179.

Evans, D., Baser, M. E., McGaughran, J., Sharif, S., Howard, E., & Moran,
A. (2002) Malignant peripheral nerve sheaths, tumors, and neurofi-
bromatosis type 1. Journal of Medical Genetics, 39, 311–314.

Ferner, R. E., Hughes, R. A., & Wenman, J. (1996). Intellectual
impairment in neurofibromatosis 1. Journal of the Neurological
Sciences, 138, 125–133.

Finucane, B.

(1998). Working with women who have mental
retardation: A genetic counselor’s guide. Elwyn, Pennsylvania:
Elwyn, Inc.

Floyd, A., & Percy-Lancaster, R. (1987). The elephant woman.
Neurofibromatosis associated with pseudarthrosis of the humerus.
Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, British Volume, 69, 121–123.
Flueler, U., Boltshauser, E., & Kilchhofer, A. (1986). Iris hamartomata
as a diagnostic criterion in neurofibromatosis. Neuropediatrics,
17(4), 183–185.

Fois, A., Calistri, L., Balestri, P., Vivarelli, R., Bartalini, G.,
Mancini, L., et al. (1993). Relationship between café-au-lait
spots as the only symptom and peripheral neurofibromatosis
(NF1): A follow-up study. European Journal of Pediatrics, 152,
500–504.

Friedman, J. M. (1999a). Vascular and endocrine abnormalities. In
J. M. Friedman, D. H. Gutmann, M. MacCollin, & V. M.
Riccardi (Eds.), Neurofibromatosis: Phenotype, natural history,
and pathogenesis (3rd ed.) (pp. 274–296). Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press.

Friedman, J. M. (1999b). Epidemiology of neurofibromatosis type 1.

American Journal of Medical Genetics, 89(1), 1–6.

Friedman, J. M., & Birch, P. H. (1997). Type 1 neurofibromatosis: A
descriptive analysis of the disorder in 1,728 patients. American
Journal of Medical Genetics, 70, 138–143.

Friedman, J. M., & Riccardi, V. M. (1999). Clinical and epidemiolog-
ical features. In J. M. Friedman, D. H. Gutmann, M. MacCollin, &
V. M. Riccardi (Eds.), Neurofibromatosis: Phenotype, natural
history, and pathogenesis (3rd ed.) (pp. 29–86). Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins University Press.

Friedman, J. M., Arbiser, J., Epstein, J. A., Gutmann, D. H., Huot, S. J.,
Lin, A. E., et al. (2002). Cardiovascular disease in neurofibro-
matosis 1: Report of the NF1 cardiovascular task force. Genetics
in Medicine, 4(3), 105–111.

Gregg, P. J., Price, B. A., Ellis, H. A., & Stevens, J. (1982).
Pseudarthrosis of the radius associated with neurofibromatosis.
Clinical Orthopaedics, 171, 175–179.

Guran, S., & Safali, M. (2005). A case of neurofibromatosis and breast
cancer: Loss of heterozygosity of NF1 in breast cancer. Cancer
Genetics and Cytogenetics, 156(1), 86–88.

Gutmann, D. (1999). Abnormalities of the nervous system. In J. M.
Friedman, D. H. Gutmann, M. MacCollin, & V. M. Riccardi
(Eds.), Neurofibromatosis: Phenotype, natural history, and

pathogenesis (3rd ed.)
Hopkins University Press.

(pp. 29–86). Baltimore: The Johns

Gutmann, D., & Gurney, J. (1999). Other malignancies. In J. M.
Friedman, D. H. Gutmann, M. MacCollin, & V. M. Riccardi
(Eds.), Neurofibromatosis: Phenotype, natural history, and
pathogenesis (3rd ed.) (pp. 231–249). Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press.

Habiby, R., Silverman, B., Listernick, R., & Charrow, J. (1995).
Precocious puberty in children with neurofibromatosis type 1.
Journal of Pediatrics, 126(3), 346–347.

Hoyme, H. E., Musgrave, S. D., Browne, A. F., & Clemmons, J. J. (1987).
Congenital oral tumor associated with neurofibromatosis detected by
prenatal ultrasound. Clinical Pediatrics, 26(7), 372–374.

Huson, S. M. (1998). Neurofibromatosis type 1: Historical perspec-
tives and introductory overview. In M. Upadhyaya & D. N.
Cooper (Eds.), Neurofibromatosis Type I: From genotype to
phenotype (pp. 1–20). Oxford: BIOS Scientific.

Huson, S., Jones, D., & Beck, L. (1987). Ophthalmic manifestations of
neurofibromatosis. British Journal of Ophthalmology, 71, 235–238.
Huson, S. M., Compston, D. A., Clark, P., & Harper, P. S. (1989). A
genetic study of von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis in south
east Wales. I. Prevalence, fitness, mutation rate, and effect of
parental transmission on severity. Journal of Medical Genetics,
26, 704–711.

Hyman, S. L., Shores, A., & North, K. N. (2005).The nature and
frequency of cognitive deficits in children with neurofibromatosis
type 1. Neurology, 65(7), 1037–1044.

Ilgren, E. B., Kinnier-Wilson, L. M., & Stiller, C. A. (1985). Gliomas
in neurofibromatosis: A series of 89 cases with evidence for
enhanced malignancy in associated cerebellar astrocytoma.
Pathology Annual, 20(part1), 331–358.

Jacks, T., Shih, T. S., Schmitt, E. M., Bronson, R. T., Bernards, A., &
Weinberg, R. A. (1994). Tumour predisposition in mice hetero-
zygous for a targeting mutation in NF1. Nature Genetics, 7(3),
353–361.

Johnson, N. S., Saal, H. M., Lovell, A. M., & Schorry, E. K. (1999).
Social and emotional problems in children with neurofibromato-
sis type 1: Evidence and proposed interventions. Journal of
Pediatrics, 134(6), 767–772.

Jones, K. (2005). Smith’s recognizable patterns of human malforma-

tion. New York: Saunders.

Kayes, L. M., Burke, W., Riccardi, V. M., Bennett, R., Ehrlich, P.,
Rubenstein, A., et al. (1994). Deletions spanning the neurofibro-
matosis 1 gene: Identification and phenotype of five patients.
American Journal of Human Genetics, 54(3), 424–436.

Kayl, A. E., & Moore, B. D. (1995). Behavioral phenotype of
neurofibromatosis, type 1. Mental Retardation and Developmen-
tal Disabilities Research Reviews, 6(2), 117–124.

Keret, D., Bollini, G., Dungl, P., Fixsen, J., Grill, F., & Hefti, F.
(2000). The fibula in congenital pseudarthrosis of the tibia: The
EPOS multicenter study. Journal of Pediatric Orthopedics Part
B, 9, 3–10.

Khosrotehrani, K., Bastuji-Garin, S., Riccardi, V. M., Birch, P.,
Friedman, J. M., & Wolkenstein, P. (2005). Factors associated
with mortality in neurofibromatosis, type 1. American Journal of
Medical Genetics, 132(1), 49–53.

Kim, S. E., Heo, E. P., Yoon, T. J., & Kim, T. H. (2002). Segmentally
distributed neurofibromatosis associated with adenocarcinoma of
the colon. Journal of Dermatology, 29, 350–353.

Kluwe, L., Siebert, R., Gesk, S., Friedrich, R. E., Tinschert, S.,
Kehrer-Sawatzki, H., et al. (2004). Screening 500 unselected
neurofibromatosis 1 patients for deletions of the NF1 gene.
Human Mutation, 23(2), 111–116.

Kluwe, L., Tatagiba, M., Funsterer, C., & Mautner, V. F. (2003). NF1
mutations and clinical spectrum in patients with spinal neuro-
fibromas. Journal of Medical Genetics, 40, 638–671.

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Genetic Counseling Practice Guidelines

405405

Korf, B. R. (1992). Diagnostic outcome in children with multiple café-

au-lait spots. Pediatrics, 90(6), 924–927.

Korf, B. R.

(2000). Malignancy in neurofibromatosis type 1.

Oncologist, 5(6), 477–485.

Korf, B. R., Henson, J. W., & Stemmer-Rachamimov, R. (2005). Case
13-2005: A 48-year-old man with weakness of the limbs and
multiple tumors of the spinal nerves. New England Journal of
Medicine, 352(17), 1800–1808.

Korf, B. R., & Rubenstein, A. E. (2005). Neurofibromatosis: A
handbook for patients, families, and health care professionals
(2nd ed.). New York: NY Thieme Medical Publishers.

Kuorilehto, T., Poyhonen, M., Bloigu, R., Heikkinen, J., Vaananen,
K., & Peltonen, J. (2005). Decreased bone mineral density and
content in neurofibromatosis type 1: Lowest local values are
located in the load-carrying parts of the body. Osteoporosis
International, 16, 928–936.

Lazaro, C., Gaona, A., Lynch, M., Kryuer, H., Ravella, A., & Estivill, X.
(1995). Molecular characterization of the breakpoints of a 12-kb
deletion in the NF1 gene in a family showing germ-line mosaicism.
American Journal of Human Genetics, 57, 1044–1049.

Leao, M., & da Silva, M. L. (1995). Evidence of central nervous
system involvement in Watson syndrome. Pediatric Neurology,
12, 252–254.

Lehrnbecher, T., Gassel, A. M., Rauh, V., Kirchner, T., & Huppertz,
H. I. (1994). Neurofibromatosis presenting as a severe systemic
vasculopathy. European Journal of Pediatrics, 153, 107–109.

Levy, A. D., Patel, N., Abbott, R., Dow, N., Miettinen, M., & Sobin,
L. H. (2004). Gastrointestinal stromal tumors in patients with
neurofibromatosis: Imaging features with clinicopathologic cor-
relation. American Journal of Roentgenology, 183, 1629–1636.
Levy, A. D., Patel, N., Dow, N., Abbott, R. M., Miettinen, M., &
Sobin, L. H. (2005). From the archives of the AFIP: Abdominal
neoplasms in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1: Radiologic–
pathologic correlation. Radiographics, 25(2), 455–480.

Lin, A. E., Birch, P. H., Korf, B. R., Tenconi, R., Niimura, M.,
Poyhonen, M., et al. (2000). Cardiovascular malformations and
other cardiovascular abnormalities in neurofibromatosis 1.
American Journal of Medical Genetics, 95, 108–117.

Listernick, R., Charrow, J., Greenwald, M., & Mets, M. (1994).
Natural history of optic pathway tumors in children with
neurofibromatosis type 1: A longitudinal study. Journal of
Pediatrics, 125, 63–66.

Listernick, R., Charrow, J., & Gutmann, D. H. (1999). Intracranial
gliomas in neurofibromatosis type 1. American Journal of
Medical Genetics, 89(1), 38–44.

Lubs, M. L., Bauer, M. S., Formas, M. E., & Djokic, B. (1991). Lisch
nodules in neurofibromatosis type 1. New England Journal of
Medicine, 324(18), 1264–1266.

Mazzocco, M. M., Turner, J. E., Denckla, M. B., Hofman, K. J.,
Scanlon, D. C., & Vellutino, F. R. (1995). Language and reading
deficits associated with neurofibromatosis type 1: Evidence for a
not-so-nonverbal learning disability. Developmental Neuropsy-
chology, 11, 503–522.

McEwing, R. L., Joelle, R., Mohlo, M., Bernard, J. P., Hilton, Y., & Ville,
Y. (2006). Prenatal diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1: Sono-
graphic and MRI findings. Prenatal Diagnosis, 26, 1110–1114.

Mensink, K. A., Ketterling, R. P., Flynn, H. C., Knudson, R. A.,
Lindor, N. M., Heese, B. A., et al. (2006). Connective tissue
dysplasia in five new patients with NF1 microdeletions: Further
expansion of phenotype and review of the literature. Journal of
Medical Genetics, 43(2), e8.

Messiaen, L. M., Callens, T., Mortier, G., Beysen, D., Vandenbroucke, I.,
Van Roy, N., et al. (2000). Exhaustive mutation analysis of the NF1
gene allows identification of 95% of mutations and reveals a high
frequency of unusual splicing defects. Human Mutation, 15(6),
541–555.

Messiaen, L., Riccardi, V., Peltonen, J., Maertens, O., Callens, T.,
Karvonen, S. L., et al. (2003). Independent NF1 mutations in two
large families with spinal neurofibromatosis. Journal of Medical
Genetics, 40(2), 122–126.

Mikol, D., Gulcher, J., & Stefannson, K. (1990). The oligodendrocyte
myelin glycoprotein belongs to a distinct family of proteins and
contains the HNK-1 carbohydrate. J Cellular Biology, 110, 471–
480.

Morier, P., Merot, Y., Paccaud, D., Beck, D., & Frenk, E. (1990). Juvenile
chronic granulocytic leukemia,
juvenile xanthogranulomas, and
neurofibromatosis. Case report and review of the literature. Journal
of the American Academy of Dermatology, 22, 962–965.

Niemeyer, C. M., Aricó, M., Basso, G., Biondi, A., Cantú Rajnoldi,
A., Creutzig, U., et al.
(1997). Chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia in childhood: A retrospective analysis of 110 cases.
Blood, 89, 3534–3543.

NIH Consens Statement Online (1987). Neurofibromatosis, 6(12), 1–19.
NIH Consensus Development Conference (1988). Neurofibromatosis:

Conference statement. Archives of Neurology, 45, 752–756.

North, K. (1993). Neurofibromatosis type 1: Review of the first 200
patients in an Australian clinic. Journal of Child Neurology, 8,
395–402.

North, K. (1999). Cognitive Function and Academic Performance. In
J. M. Friedman, D. H. Gutmann, M. MacCollin, & V. M.
Riccardi (Eds.), Neurofibromatosis: Phenotype, natural history,
and pathogenesis (3rd ed.) (pp. 162–189). Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press.

North, K., Hyman, S., & Barton, B. (2002). Cognitive deficits in
neurofibromatosis 1. Journal of Child Neurology, 17(8), 605–612.
North, K., Joy, P., Yuille, D., Cocks, N., & Hutchins, P. (1995).
Cognitive function and academic performance in children with
neurofibromatosis type 1. Developmental Medicine & Child
Neurology, 37, 427–436.

North, K., Joy, P., Yuille, D., Cocks, N., Hutchins, P., McHugh, K., et al.
(1994). Learning difficulties in neurofibromatosis type 1: The
significance of MRI abnormalities. Neurology, 44, 878–883.

Oguzkan, S., Cinbis, M., Ayter, S., Anlar, B., & Aysun, S. (2004)
Familial segmental neurofibromatosis. Journal of Child Neurol-
ogy, 19(5), 392–394.

Ozonoff, S. (1999). Cognitive impairment in neurofibromatosis type

1. American Journal of Medical Genetics, 89, 45–52.

Peltonen, J., Jaakkola, S., Lebwohl, M., Renvall, S., Risteli, L.,
Virtanen, I., et al. (1988). Cellular differentiation and expression
of matrix genes in type 1 neurofibromatosis. Laboratory
Investigation, 59, 760–771.

Pilmore, H. L., Na Nagara, M. P., & Walker, R. J. (1997). Neurofibroma-
tosis and renovascular hypertension presenting in early pregnancy.
Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation, 12, 187–189.

Poyhonen, M., Kytola, S., & Leisti, J. (2000). Epidemiology of
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) in northern Finland. Journal of
Medical Genetics, J Med Genet, 37, 632–636.

Raevaara, T. E., Gerdes, A. M., Lonnqvist, K. E., Tybjaerg-Hansen, A.,
Abdel-Rahman, W. A., Kariola, R., et al. (2004). HNPCC mutation
MLH1 P648S makes the functional protein unstable, and homozy-
gosity predisposes to mild neurofibromatosis type 1. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer, 40(3), 261–265.

Rasmussen, S. A., Coman, S. D., Ho, V. T., Abernathy, C. R., Arn, P. H.,
Weiss, L., et al. (1998). Constitutional and mosaic large NF1 gene
deletions in neurofibromatosis type 1. Journal of Medical Genetics,
35(6), 468–471.

Rasmussen, S. A., & Friedman, J. M.

(2000). NF1 gene and
neurofibromatosis 1. American Journal of Epidemiology, 151,
33–40.

Rasmussen, S. A., Yang, Q., & Friedman, J. M. (2001). Mortality in
neurofibromatosis 1: An analysis using U.S. death certificates.
American Journal of Human Genetics, 68(5), 1110–1118.

406

Radtke et al.

Riccardi, V. M. (1981). Neurofibromatosis: An overview and new
directions in clinical investigations. Advances in Neurology, 29,
1–9.

Riccardi, V. M. (1999a). Historical Background and Information. In J. M.
Friedman, D. H. Gutmann, M. MacCollin, & V. M. Riccardi (Eds.),
Neurofibromatosis: Phenotype, natural history, and pathogenesis
(3rd ed.) (pp. 1–25). Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University
Press.

Riccardi, V. M. (1999b). Skeletal system. In J. M. Friedman, D. H.
Gutmann, M. MacCollin, & V. M. Riccardi (Eds.), Neurofibro-
matosis: Phenotype, natural history, and pathogenesis (3rd ed.)
(pp. 250–273). Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rosser, T. L., Vezina, G., & Packer, R. J. (2005). Cerebrovascular
abnormalities in a population of children with neurofibromatosis
type 1. Neurology, 64(3), 553–555.

Rouleau, G. A., Wertelecki, W., Haines, J. L., Hobbs, W. J., Trofatter,
J. A., Seizinger, B. R., et al. (1987). Genetic linkage of bilateral
acoustic neurofibromatosis to a DNA marker on chromosome 22.
Nature, 329(6136), 246–248.

Ruggieri, M., Pavone, P., Polizzi, A., Di Pietro, M., Scuderi, A.,
Gabriele, A., et al. (2004). Ophthalmological manifestations in
segmental neurofibromatosis type 1. British Journal of Ophthal-
mology, 88(11), 1429–1433.

Samuelsson, B., & Axelsson, R. (1981). Neurofibromatosis: A clinical
and genetic study of 96 cases in Gothenburg, Sweden. Acta
Dermato-Venereologica, 95, 67–71.

Schneider, G., & Korf, B. R. (1996). Multiple café-au-lait spots that
may not be diagnostic of neurofibromatosis. In J. Stevens (Ed.),
Abstracts of papers and posters presented at the fifteenth annual
education conference of
the National Society of Genetic
Counselors. Journal of Genetic Counseling, 5(4), 181–237.

Schorry, E. K., Stowens, D. W., Crawford, A. H., Stowens, P. A.,
Schwartz, W. R., & Dignan, P. S. (1989). Summary of patient
data from a multidisciplinary neurofibromatosis clinic. Neurofi-
bromatosis, 2, 129–134.

Serleth, H. J., Cogbill, T. H., & Gundersen, S. B. (1998). Ruptured
pancreaticoduodenal artery aneurysms and pheochromocytoma in a
pregnant patient with neurofibromatosis. Surgery, 124, 100–102.

Singhal, S., Birch, J. M., Kerr, B., Lashford, L., & Evans, D. G.
(2002) Neurofibromatosis type 1 and sporadic optic gliomas.
Archives of Disease in Childhood, 87, 65–70.

Stephens, K., Kayes, L., Riccardi, V. M., Rising, M., Sybert, V. P., &
Pagon, R. A. (1992). Preferential mutation of the neurofibroma-
tosis type 1 gene in paternally derived chromosomes. Human
Genetics, 88(3), 279–282.

Stiller, C. A., Chessells, J. M., & Fitchett, M. (1994). Neurofibroma-
tosis and childhood leukaemia/lymphoma: A population-based
UKCCSG study. British Journal of Cancer, 74(3), 494.

Stine, S. B., & Adams, W. V.

(1989). Learning problems in
neurofibromatosis patients. Clinical Orthopaedics, 245, 43–48.
Swapp, G. H., & Main, R. A. (1973). Neurofibromatosis in pregnancy.

British Journal of Dermatology, 88(5), 431–435.

Szudek, J., Birch, P., & Friedman, J. M. (2000). Growth charts for
young children with neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1). American
Journal of Medical Genetics, 92, 224–228.

Szudek, J., Joe, H., & Friedman, J. M.

(2002). Analysis of
intrafamilial phenotypic variation in neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1).
Genetic Epidemiology, 23(2), 150–164.

Tekin, M., Bodurtha, J. N., & Riccardi, V. M. (2001). Café-au-lait spots:
The pediatricians perspectives. Pediatrics in Review, 22(3), 82–90.
Tibbles, J. A., & Cohen, M. M. (1986). The Proteus syndrome: The
elephant man diagnosed. British Medical Journal, 283, 683–685.
Tinschert, S., Naumann, I., Stegmann, E., Buske, A., Kaufmann, D.,
& Thiel, G. (2000). Segmental neurofibromatosis is caused by
somatic mutation of the neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) gene.
European Journal of Human Genetics, 8(6), 455–459.

Treves, F.

(1923). The elephant man and other reminiscences.

London: Cassell.

Trimbath, J. D., Petersen, G. M., Erdman, S. H., Ferry, M., Luce, M. C., &
Giardiello, F. M. (2001). Café-au-lait spots and early onset colorectal
neoplasia: A variant of HNPCC? Familial Cancer, 1, 101–105.

Upadhyaya, M., & Cooper, D. N. (1998). The mutational spectrum in
neurofibromatosis type 1 and its underlying mechanisms. In M.
Upadhyaya & D. N. Cooper (Eds.), Neurofibromatosis type 1: From
genotype to phenotype (pp. 65–82). Oxford: BIOS Scientific.

Upadhyaya, M., Huson, S. M., Davies, M., Thomas, N., Chuzhanova, N.,
Giovannini, S., et al. (2007). An absence of cutaneous Neuro-
fibromas associated with a 3-bp inframe deletion in Exon 17 of the
NF1 gene (c.2870–2972 del AAT): Evidence of a clinically
significant NF1 genotype–phenotype correlation. American Journal
of Human Genetics, 80(1), 140–151.

Upadhyaya, M., Ruggieri, M., Maynard, J., Osborn, M., Hartog, C.,
Mudd, S., et al. (1998). Gross deletions of the neurofibromatosis
type 1 gene are predominantly of maternal origin and commonly
associated with a learning disability, dysmorphic features and
developmental delay. Human Genetics, 102(5), 591–597.

Upadhyaya, M., Shen, M., Cherryson, A., Farnham, J., Maynard, J.,
Huson, S. M., et al. (1992). Analysis of mutations at
the
neurofibromatosis (NF1) locus. Human Molecular Genetics, 1,
735–740.

US Preventative Services Task Force. Chairman Harold Sox, Jr. (1995)
Guide to Clinical Preventive Services, 2nd ed. Appendix A. US
Government Printing Office, Stock no. 017001005258.

Varnhagen, C. K., Lewin, S., Das, J. P., Bowen, P., Ma, K., &
Klimek, M. (1988). Neurofibromatosis and psychological pro-
cesses. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 9,
257–265.

Vitale, M. G., Guha, A., & Skaggs, D. L. (2002). Orthopedic
manifestations of neurofibromatosis in children. An update.
Clinical Orthopaedics, 401, 107–118.

Von Deimling, A., Krone, W., & Menon, A. G. (1995). Neurofibro-
features and molecular

matosis type 1: Pathology, clinical
genetics. Brain Pathology, 5(2), 153–162.

Wadsby, M., Lindenhammer, H., & Eeg-Olofsson, O.

(1989).
Neurofibromatosis in childhood: Neuropsychological aspects.
Neurofibromatosis, 2, 251–260.

Walker, L., Thompson, D., Easton, D., Ponder, B., Ponder, M.,
Frayling, I., et al. (2006). A prospective study of neurofibroma-
tosis type I cancer incidence in the UK. British Journal of
Cancer, 95, 233-238.

Wallace, M. R., Marchuk, D. A., Andsersen, L. B., Letcher, R., Odeh,
H. M., Saulino, A. M., et al. (1990). Type 1 neurofibromatosis
gene: Identification of a large transcript disrupted in three NF1
patients. Science, 249(4965), 181–186.

Walther, M. M., Herring, J., Enquist, E., Keiser, H. R., & Linehan, W. M.
(1999). von Recklinghausen’s disease and pheochromocytomas.
Journal of Urology, 162(5), 1582–1586.

Watson, G. C. (1967). Pulmonic stenosis, café-au-lait spots, and dull

intelligence. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 42, 303–307.

Weil, J. W. (2000). The structure of psychosocial genetic counseling.
In J. W. Weil (Ed.), Psychosocial genetic counseling (pp. 93–
115). New York: Oxford University Press.

Weissman, A., Jakobi, P., Zaidise,

(1993).
Neurofibromatosis and pregnancy: An update. Journal of
Reproductive Medicine, 38, 890–896.

I., & Drugan, A.

Westenend, P. H., Smedts, F., de Jong, M. C., Lommers, E. J., &
Assmann, K. J. (1994). A 4-year old boy with neurofibromatosis
and severe renovascular hypertension due to renal arterial
dysplasia. American Journal of Surgical Pathology, 18, 512–
516.

Wolkenstein, P., Zeller, J., Revuz, J., Ecosse, E., & Leplege, A. (2001).
Quality-of-life impairment in neurofibromatosis type 1: A cross-

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Genetic Counseling Practice Guidelines

407407

sectional study of 128 cases. Archives of Dermatology, 137(11),
1421–1425.

Wu, B., Austin, M. A., Schneider, G. H., Boles, R. G., & Korf, B. R.
(1995). Deletion of the entire NF1 gene detected by FISH: Four
deletion patients associated with severe manifestations. American
Journal of Medical Genetics, 59(4), 528–535.

Zhu, Y., & Parada, L. F. (2001). Neurofibomin, a tumor suppressor in

the nervous system. Experimental Cell Research, 264, 19–28.

Zlotogora, J. (1998). Germ line mosaicism. Human Genetics, 102,

381–386.

Zoller, M., Rembeck, B., Akesson, H. O., & Angervall, L. (1995). Life
expectancy, mortality and prognostic factors in neurofibromatosis
type 1: A twelve-year follow-up of an epidemiological study in
Goteborg, Sweden. Acta Dermato-Venereologica, 75, 136–140.

Zoller, M. E., Rembeck, B., & Backman, L. (1997). Neuropsycho-
logical deficits in adults with neurofibromatosis type 1. Acta
Neurologica Scandinavica, 95(4), 225–232.

Zvulunov, A., Barak, Y. M., & Metzker, A. (1995). Juvenile xantho-
granuloma, neurofibromatosis, and juvenile chronic myelogenous
leukemia. Archives of Dermatology, 131(8), 904–908.

