Oncogene (2015), 1–12
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 0950-9232/15
www.nature.com/onc

REVIEW
Role of Merlin/NF2 inactivation in tumor biology

AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

Merlin (Moesin-ezrin-radixin-like protein, also known as schwannomin) is a tumor suppressor protein encoded by the
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 gene NF2. Loss of function mutations or deletions in NF2 cause neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2), a multiple
tumor forming disease of the nervous system. NF2 is characterized by the development of bilateral vestibular schwannomas.
Patients with NF2 can also develop schwannomas on other cranial and peripheral nerves, as well as meningiomas and
ependymomas. The only potential treatment is surgery/radiosurgery, which often results in loss of function of the involved nerve.
There is an urgent need for chemotherapies that slow or eliminate tumors and prevent their formation in NF2 patients. Interestingly
NF2 mutations and merlin inactivation also occur in spontaneous schwannomas and meningiomas, as well as other types of cancer
including mesothelioma, glioma multiforme, breast, colorectal, skin, clear cell renal cell carcinoma, hepatic and prostate cancer.
Except for malignant mesotheliomas, the role of NF2 mutation or inactivation has not received much attention in cancer, and NF2
might be relevant for prognosis and future chemotherapeutic approaches. This review discusses the inﬂuence of merlin loss of
function in NF2-related tumors and common human cancers. We also discuss the NF2 gene status and merlin signaling pathways
affected in the different tumor types and the molecular mechanisms that lead to tumorigenesis, progression and pharmacological
resistance.

Oncogene advance online publication, 20 April 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.125

INTRODUCTION
Merlin is the protein encoded by the tumor suppressor gene, NF2,
located on chromosome 22q12. Deletion or
loss-of-function
mutation of NF2 causes neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2), a nervous
system tumor-forming disease.1–3 The incidence of NF2 is 1 in
25 000 and it is dominantly inherited, although in 50–60% of cases
it is caused by de novo mutations with high frequency of somatic
mosaicism.1,4 NF2 is characterized by formation of bilateral
vestibular schwannomas. In addition, patients commonly develop
multiple schwannomas on other cranial and peripheral nerves, on
spinal nerve roots and as intracutaneous plaques, as well as
meningiomas and ependymomas. Schwannomas originate from
Schwann cells, while meningiomas originate from cells of the
arachnoid layer of the leptomeninges that line the brain and
spinal cord.5 NF2 patients may also present ependymomas found
mostly in the spinal cord. Intramedullary ependymomas arise from
ependymal cells that line the central canal of the spinal cord.6,7
NF2 patients can eventually develop peripheral neuropathy.1,4,8
Electrophysiological studies found that 66% of NF2 patients
presented neuropathy, mostly of axonal type.9 In many cases, the
neuropathy results from compression produced by the tumor;
however, non-tumor-related peripheral neuropathy may be
caused by the deleterious effect of merlin loss in neurons.4,10,11
Interestingly, schwannomas and meningiomas also develop in
non-NF2 patients and commonly exhibit NF2 somatic mutations,
epigenetic changes or protein inactivation. Notably, NF2 muta-
tions are present in several malignant cancers including meso-
theliomas, breast, prostate, colorectal, hepatic, clear cell renal cell
carcinoma and melanomas.

The ﬁrst symptoms of NF2 usually appear in the late teens or
early twenties and include hearing loss with or without tinnitus

and dizziness or imbalance caused by the vestibular schwanno-
mas (mostly unilateral at the beginning) that ultimately lead to
deafness.1,4 Other NF2 symptoms depend on the nerve or
structure affected by the tumors. Despite the benign nature of
schwannomas, their morbidity is based on their location and size,
and the only currently available treatment is surgical resection.
Surgical outcomes, however, are poor because nerve function
cannot always be salvaged and some tumors are inoperable due
to location. Stereotactic radiosurgery has been explored, but
remains controversial because of the potential for subsequent
radiation-induced malignant transformation. Thus, the current
standard of care, while the subject of continuing debate, consists
of initial monitoring followed by surgical schwannoma resection
when rapid tumor growth is
life
threatening.4 Meningiomas, the second most frequent tumors in
NF2 patients, are 45–58% intracranial and 20% intradural
extramedullary spinal tumors. Similar to schwannomas, associated
symptoms relate to tumor location and include headaches (most
common) and seizures. On the optic nerve and lower cranial
nerves, very small meningiomas may produce compression
symptoms and loss of visual acuity.8 Overall, the presence of
intracranial meningiomas is associated with poor prognosis and
increases the relative risk of mortality.12 The surgical removal of
intracranial and spinal meningiomas can be achieved in most
location.4 In line with
cases depending on the anatomical
schwannomas and meningiomas, the recommended treatment
for ependymomas
is observation while asymptomatic, and
maximum surgical resection if symptoms develop or rapid growth
is identiﬁed. Only for anaplastic ependymomas, rare in NF2,
is
postoperative adjuvant radiation considered.7,13

identiﬁed or becomes

Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA. Correspondence: Dr C Fernández-Valle, Burnett School of Biomedical
Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Central Florida, 6900 Lake Nona Blvd., Orlando, FL 32827, USA.
E-mail: cfv@ucf.edu
Received 30 December 2014; revised 20 February 2015; accepted 16 March 2015

2

NF2 in tumor biology
AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

Figure 1. Merlin domain organization and molecular conformation. (a) Diagram of merlin structural domains. (b) Diagram of merlin molecular
conformation based on ERM analogy. (c) Diagram of merlin molecular conformation based on experimental data.

function.2,3 FERM domain proteins

Identiﬁcation of NF2 as a member of the Band 4.1 FERM gene
family predicted a mechanism of action for merlin’s tumor
link plasma
suppressor
membrane receptors to the cortical actin cytoskeleton.3 Merlin
shares 64% sequence similarity with family members in the
conserved FERM (4.1, ezrin, radixin, moesin) domain at the N
terminus. The FERM domain is followed by an α-helical domain
and a C-terminal domain (Figure 1a). In contrast to the other ERM
proteins, merlin lacks the actin-binding site located in the
C-terminal domain, instead it has a unique actin binding motif
in the N-terminal domain.14 ERM proteins including merlin from
head-to-tail homo- and hetero-dimeric intermolecular and intra-
molecular associations. Although merlin’s intramolecular associa-
tion is more dynamic and weaker compared with other ERMs, it is
nonetheless
suppressor
activity.15,16 Merlin can be regarded as a scaffold protein indirectly
linking F-actin, transmembrane receptors and intracellular effec-
tors to modulate receptor mediated signaling pathways control-
ling cell proliferation and survival. These include receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK), cell adhesion, small GTPases, mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR), PI3K/Akt and hippo pathways.17 However,
merlin’s tumor suppressor function is not restricted to regulating
events at the plasma membrane. Unraveling the myriad of merlin
interactions in relation to tumor suppression has proven to be a
daunting task.

regulating its

critical

tumor

for

to

its

prevent

interaction with

Merlin’s conformation and activity are regulated by post-
translational modiﬁcations. Merlin is phosphorylated at Ser10,
Thr230 and Ser315 by Akt (also known as protein kinase B, PKB)
and controls merlin’s proteasome-mediated degradation by
ubiquitination
binding
partners.18,19 Merlin-Ser10 is also a substrate for cyclic AMP-
dependent protein kinase, also known as protein kinase A (PKA);
Ser10 phosphorylation modulates cell morphology by modifying
the actin cytoskeleton.20 The most studied phosphorylation site is
Ser518 located in the C terminal. It is a substrate for both p-21
activated kinase (PAK) and PKA and inactivates merlin tumor
suppressor activity.21–24 Conversely, myosin phosphatase MYPT1-
PP1δ dephosphorylates Ser518,
thereby activating its tumor
function.25 Confusion regarding the relationship
suppressor
between activity and conformation for merlin stems from the
initial assumption that merlin’s conformation-activity resembles
the ERM proteins. Merlin, similar to ERMs, is active as a scaffold
protein at the plasma membrane where it is phosphorylated at
Ser518 and by this means facilitates or promotes receptor-
mediated signaling events associated with cell proliferation and
survival. Following the ERM model, phosphorylated merlin would
adopt an open, active conﬁguration at the plasma membrane. In
this way, both merlin and ERMs are active as scaffolds in the open
conformation (Figure 1b).26,27 Dephosphorylation at S518 and thus
transition to a closed conformation inactivates its scaffold function
but activates its tumor suppressor activity. The closed, head-to-tail

conformation of the active tumor-suppressor was believed to be
incapable of interaction with growth factor receptors.28–30 Recent
results of ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer analysis of
merlin conformational changes, characterization of a series of
merlin variants with different degrees of head-to-tail association,
and small-angle neutron scattering studies of full-length merlin,
have suggested a new conformational model.31–33 The results
indicate that in solution both unphosphorylated merlin and a
phospho- mimetic, merlin S518D, adopt closed conformations,
and both forms are capable of binding partner proteins.
Furthermore, unphosphorylated merlin adopts a more open, but
still closed, conformation upon binding phoshatidylinositol 4,5
biphosphate lipid, whereas the merlinS518D phosphomimetic
remains fully closed31–33 (Figure 1c). The exact
relationship
between merlin’s conformation, binding partners and sub-
cellular localization critical for tumor suppressor activity has yet
to be fully understood.

Merlin is essential for early embryogenesis as evidenced by the
ﬁnding that mice embryos carrying homozygous Nf2 mutations
failed to initiate gastrulation and generally died at E6.5–E7.0.34
These embryos lacked extra-embryonic ectoderm and failed to
layer.34 Other conditional
form an identiﬁable mesodermal
knockout mouse models partially mimic the multifaceted human
disease.35–38 Discrepancies between the models and human
disease could be caused by several factors, acting individually or
in combination,
including differences in biological genome/
proteome, physiological properties and lifespans; timing of loss
of heterozygosity (LOH) or merlin inactivation; and single cell-type
targeting for genetic manipulation when NF2 is active globally.39
Another area for further investigation that may reveal essential
insights to merlin’s mechanism of action is the production of
splice variants for merlin. Two major isoforms are produced by
alternative splicing of 17 exons of the NF2 gene. Isoform 1 is the
predominant and longest, consisting of 595 amino acids and
lacking exon 16, while isoform 2 with 590 amino acids contains
exon 16, but has a truncated C-terminal domain.40 A recent
publication highlights the importance of Schwann cell-axon
interactions
in preventing schwannoma formation and the
contribution of axonal expression of merlin isoform 2.10,11,41

This review will discuss the contribution of merlin loss of
function in NF2-related tumors and common human cancers and
the molecular mechanisms that lead to tumorigenesis, tumor
progression or pharmacological resistance.

MERLIN IN SCHWANNOMAS, MENINGIOMAS AND
EPENDYMOMAS
NF2/merlin status
NF2 mutations cause the development of schwannomas, menin-
giomas and ependymomas (for an in-depth review on NF2

Oncogene (2015) 1 – 12

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

mutations see Evans1). NF2-associated schwannomas exhibit NF2
inactivation and merlin expression is absent.42 Notably, merlin
expression assessed by western blot was found to be highly
reduced or absent in 11 of 14 sporadic schwannomas, 16 of 19
sporadic meningiomas and 3 of 8 sporadic ependymomas.43
Mutational NF2 inactivation and LOH is the cause of most NF2-
associated schwannomas and sporadic schwannomas; however,
transcriptional
inactivation causes 15.3% of NF2-associated
schwannomas and 19.3% of sporadic schwannomas.44 One study
reported that methylation of three cis-regulatory elements, CpG
sites,
in the NF2 promoter elements was found in ~ 60% of
vestibular schwannomas and correlated with decreased promoter
activity and mRNA expression.45 By contrast, another study of 35
sporadic vestibular schwannomas reported that in 65% of tumors
the NF2 promoter was unmethylated and in the remaining 35%
the results were inconclusive.46 At the same time, 50–60% of
sporadic meningiomas contain NF2 somatic mutations and
epigenetic inactivation.47,48 In another study of 88 sporadic
meningiomas, 49% exhibited allelic loss of chromosome 22, 24%
had NF2 somatic mutations and 26% had aberrant NF2 promoter
methylation, whereas in 17% of the meningiomas, epigenetic NF2
inactivation was the only cause of NF2 deﬁciency. Similarly, o10%
of sporadic ependymomas exhibited NF2 promoter methylation.49
In some of the schwannomas and meningiomas without genetic
or epigenetic NF2 inactivation, merlin inactivation was caused by
μ-calpain constitutive activation that mediated merlin proteolytic
cleavage/degradation.50 Finally, a recent meningioma study of 73
patients found a high incidence of TERT promoter-activating
mutations in meningiomas undergoing malignant transformation
in both NF2-related and sporadic meningiomas, whereas no TERT
mutations were found in benign tumors. This suggests that TERT
independently of NF2 could be used as a biomarker of risk of
malignant transformation of a meningioma.51

Because NF2 mutations and inactivation are present

in
ependymomas and both benign and malignant schwannomas
and meningiomas,
reasonable to speculate that NF2
inactivation could be an early tumorigenic event that disrupts
key signaling pathways in a speciﬁc molecular context leading to
tumor development. Although a complete understanding of the

is

it

NF2 in tumor biology
AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

biological functions of merlin is lacking, current knowledge of
merlin-related signaling pathways and merlin binding partners
shed some light on its role in cellular proliferation, survival and
tumor development.

3

inactivation of

suppression and/or

Signaling pathways regulated by merlin
Membrane receptors and RhoGTPase family. Merlin’s
tumor
suppressor activity was initially related to a role in contact
inhibition of cell proliferation. Merlin levels in various cell types
were shown to be two- to threefold higher in high density as
opposed to low density cells in cultures. Thus, merlin appears
necessary for
receptor-
dependent mitogenic signaling pathways.52,53 There are several
studies supporting this mechanism of action for merlin. First,
merlin co-localizes and binds CD44, a recognized cell-cell, cell-
substrate adhesion receptor and the major receptor for hyalur-
onan, an abundant extracellular matrix (ECM) component.54,55
Binding of merlin unphosphorylated at Ser518 with the cytoplasmic
tail of CD44 mediates contact inhibition at high cell density.
Consistent with this phenomenon, treatment of sub-conﬂuent
cells of various cell types with a soluble glycosaminoglycan
hyaluronan rapidly induced merlin dephosphorylation and inhibi-
tion of growth, and thus activated merlin tumor suppressor
activity.52 Furthermore, merlin overexpression in Tr6BC1 mouse
schwannoma cells inhibited the binding of ﬂuorescein-labeled
hyaluronan to CD44 and inhibited subcutaneous tumor growth in
immunocompromised mice, and overexpression of a merlin
mutant lacking the CD44 binding domain was unable to inhibit
schwannoma growth.56 Collectively, these results indicate that
merlin inhibits cell growth by contact inhibition in part by binding
CD44 and negatively regulating CD44 function (Figure 2).

CD44 signaling through Rac1activation is demonstrated in
multiple cell types. Hyaluronan–CD44 interaction in astrocytes and
an immortalized mouse mammary epithelial cell
line, EpH4,
leads
to Rac1 signaling activation and actin cytoskeleton
rearrangement.57,58 The activation of Rac1 through CD44 was
identiﬁed via the interaction of CD44 with Tiam-1, a Rac1 guanine
nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) that catalyzes the replacement
of the tightly-bound GDP with GTP.
In various cell types, the

Figure 2. Merlin inhibits membrane receptors and RhoGTPase family signaling cascade.

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Oncogene (2015) 1 – 12

4

NF2 in tumor biology
AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

binding of hyaluronan to CD44 stimulates Tiam1-dependent Rac1
signaling and cytoskeleton-mediated tumor cell migration.59,60
Moreover, expression of constitutively active Rac mutants, as well
as activated cell division cycle-42 (Cdc42), induced phosphoryla-
tion of merlin at Ser518 and decreased merlin’s association with
the actin cytoskeleton. Merlin phosphorylation at Ser518 inacti-
vated its growth inhibitory function (Figure 2).21 In ﬁbroblasts,
merlin overexpression inhibited Rac1-induced signaling, whereas
a merlin S518D phosphomimetic did not. As expected, increased
levels of active Rac1 were found in NF2-deﬁcient Schwann cells
and human schwannoma samples compared with controls.61–63
Independent of merlin–CD44 interactions, merlin has been
shown to modulate Rac signaling by specifying its subcellular
localization. For example,
in conﬂuent human umbilical vein
endothelial cells, merlin suppressed recruitment of Rac to the
plasma membrane, and its silencing promoted recruitment of
Rac1 to sites of extracellular matrix adhesion and promoted cell
growth.64 In addition, merlin has been shown to inhibit Rac1
signaling responsible for suppression of PAK activation by binding
through its FERM domain to the PAK-Cdc42/Rac binding
domain.65 In turn, Rac/Cdc42-dependent activation of PAK leads
to merlin phosphorylation at Ser518, which inhibits merlin
translocation to the plasma membrane in a paxillin-dependent
manner, mitigating its inhibitory effect on Rac/Cdc42, and hence,
its tumor suppressor activity (Figure 2).22,66,67

In primary rat Schwann cells, CD44 was shown to constitutively
associate with the heterodimer receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB2/
ErbB3 and CD44 enhanced neuregulin-induced ErbB2-activating
phosphorylation.68 ErbB2/ErbB3 receptor expression levels and
activation were reported to be elevated in human schwannomas
and NF2-deﬁcient cell lines.69–71 Accordingly, merlin was shown to
reduce the levels of ErbB2/ErbB3 receptor levels at the plasma
membrane. Previously, we showed that activation of ErbB2/ErbB3
receptors in primary rat Schwann cells by neuregulin-1 induced
merlin phosphorylation at Ser518 via PKA.72 Signiﬁcantly, ErbB2
activation was also found to be elevated in NF2-ependymomas.73
ErbB2 activation in mouse Nf2-deﬁcient spinal cord neural
progenitor cells was shown to be caused by Rac-mediated
retention of the receptor at the plasma membrane.73 Merlin re-
expression in Nf2− / − Schwann cells similarly reduced the transport
of growth factor receptors ErbB2/ErbB3, insulin-like growth factor
1 receptor (IGF1R) and platelet-derived growth factor receptor
(PDGFR). Accordingly, the loss of merlin in Nf2−/− peripheral
mouse nerves resulted in elevated levels of these growth factor
receptors compared with wild type before the development of
tumors, and importantly, similar overexpression was observed in
human Schwannomas (Figure 2).74–77

In sub-conﬂuent primary Schwann cells, we found that merlin
binds to paxillin and mediates merlin localization at the plasma
membrane and association with β1-integrin and ErbB2, modifying
the organization of the actin cytoskeleton in a cell density-
dependent manner.78 We reported that merlin associates with
β1-integrin in primary Schwann cells and undifferentiated Schwann
cell/neuron co-cultures, and in primary Schwann cell cultures,
laminin-1 stimulated integrin signaled though PAK1 and caused
merlin Ser518 phosphorylation and inactivation of
its tumor
suppressor function.72,79,80 In sum, multiple lines of evidence have
established a feedback regulation loop with merlin being
phosphorylated at Ser518 (growth permissive form) via activated
Rho small GTPases Rac1/Cdc42 through PAK, and in turn, merlin
associating with PAK to inhibit Rac1/Cdc42 signaling (Figure 2).
Loss of merlin causes continuous activation of Rac1/Cdc42/PAK
signaling, which is associated with cell growth and deregulation of
the actin cytoskeleton. Actin cytoskeleton abnormalities have
been reported in NF2-deﬁcient human schwannomas and the
defects were reversed by reintroduction of merlin.81,82 Related to
that, the PAK substrates, LIM domain kinases 1and 2 (LIMK1/2),
were also reported to be elevated in human Schwannomas and

mouse Schwann cells in which merlin was inactivated compared
with normal controls.83 LIMK1/2 phosphorylates and inactivates
coﬁlin, an F-actin severing and depolymerizing agent. Further-
more,
it was shown that overactive PAK/LIMK pathway activity
contributed to cell proliferation through coﬁlin phosphorylation
and auroraA activation.83 When merlin was
inactivated in
immortalized Nf2ﬂox2/ﬂox2 mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts (MEFs) by
Adeno-Cre infection,
loss of contact inhibition of growth and
increased Rac1 and canonical Wnt signaling were observed
compared with controls.84 Pharmacological or genetic inhibition
of Rac1 in Nf2−/− MEFs reduced the Wnt signaling activation to
basal levels as assessed by reporter assay of transactivation of the
nuclear β-catenin-dependent T-cell factor 4 transcription factor.84
These ﬁndings were corroborated and further studied in human
schwannoma cells,
in which overactivation of canonical Wnt
signaling with elevated nuclear β-catenin, upregulation of c-myc
and cyclin D1 target genes and activation of the Rac1/PAK and
PDGFR/Src pathways were observed (Figure 2).85

Soon after merlin was cloned, evidence that merlin inhibits
another important member of the Rho GTPases family, Ras, was
reported in v-Ha-Ras-transformed NIH3T3cells in which merlin
overexpression counteracted the oncogenic role of Ras.86 In
immortalized nf2−/− rat Schwann cells, reintroduced merlin acted
downstream of receptor tyrosine kinase through the growth factor
receptor binding protein 2-Son of
(Grb2-SOS)
complex.87 SOS is a GEF that activates Ras by catalyzing the
nucleotide exchange.88 Merlin action on Ras signaling is indirect
by blocking the assembly of ERM proteins, SOS and the Ras
complex.87,89

sevenless

Another

receptor

family of

tyrosine kinases activated in
schwannomas is the Tyfo3-Axl-Mer (TAM) family. TAM receptors
were strongly overexpressed in schwannomas.77 Moreover,
increased activation of Axl receptor and Gas6 ligand was also
observed in the absence of merlin in primary human schwannoma
cells compared with normal Schwann cells, resulting in recruit-
ment and activation of Src and focal adhesion kinase (FAK)
signaling.90 Merlin inactivation of Src signaling was also shown in
CNS glial cells, where merlin competitively inhibits Src binding to
ErbB2, thereby preventing ErbB2-mediated Src phosphorylation
In Nf2− / − glial cells, Src
and downstream mitogenic signaling.
regulated cell growth by sequentially regulating FAK and paxillin
activity.91 Primary human schwannoma cells also showed
increased cell-matrix adhesion compared with control Schwann
cells. Interestingly, it was shown that schwannoma cells release
insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 1, which in β1-integrin-
dependent manner activates Src/FAK signaling.75 In addition, FAK
was overexpressed and activated in schwannoma cells where it
localized to the nucleus and decreased p53 levels by increasing its
export to the cytosol and proteasomal degradation. FAK silencing
decreased schwannoma cell proliferation and was associated with
increased levels of total and nuclear p53.75,92

3-kinase

(PI3K)/Akt pathway

In human schwannomas and
PI3K/mTOR/Akt and HDAC signaling.
meningiomas, loss of merlin leads to activation of the phospho-
inositide
and Schwann cell
proliferation.93–96 Merlin inhibits PI3K activity by binding phos-
phatidylinositol 3-kinase enhancer-L (PIKE-L), the GTPase that
binds and activates PI3K.94,97 Merlin association with PIKE-L
disrupts PIKE-L binding to and activation of PI3K. Moreover,
neuregulin survival signaling through the ErbB2/ErbB3 receptor
activates PI3K in rat Schwann cells through the activation of Akt
and inhibition of Bad, a pro-apoptotic Blc-2 family protein.98 We
recently showed that PI3K inhibition in merlin-deﬁcient mouse
Schwann cells selectively decreased their proliferation. A good
number of
inhibitors showed strong anti-proliferative activity,
causing cell death with diverse kinetics via caspase-dependent
apoptosis.99 Inhibition of Akt also inhibits schwannoma and
meningioma growth.100,101 Akt phosphorylation is
indirectly

Oncogene (2015) 1 – 12

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

NF2 in tumor biology
AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

5

binding 14–3–3, and functional inactivation of YAP seems to be
cell-type speciﬁc.115

locations,

two cellular

In the canonical hippo pathway, mammalian Ste20-like kinases
(Mst1/2; hippo homolog) phosphorylate large tumor suppressor
kinases (LATS 1/2), which in turn phosphorylate and inactivate
YAP/TAZ, blocking their role as TEAD/MEAD transcription factor
co-activators.116–118 Proteomic screening of 68 human schwanno-
mas showed that YAP and YAP transcriptional targets such as
Her2, Her3 and PDGFRβ were commonly activated.119 Studies in
human meningioma tumors and in paired cell lines—KY21MG1 or
lines and AC1 arachnoidal cells—
MENII-1 meningioma cell
demonstrated that merlin loss was associated with increased
YAP expression and nuclear localization. Merlin loss increased
arachnoidal cell proliferation, entry into S-phase and cyclinE1
levels, whereas YAP silencing reversed the effect of merlin loss on
cell proliferation.120 Merlin negatively regulates the hippo path-
way at
the nucleus and cell cortex.
Prominent staining of merlin in the nucleus in non-neoplastic
human Schwann cells, HEI286, among multiple cell types, was
observed using an N-terminal merlin antibody and an optimized
for detection of nuclear proteins.121
immunostaining protocol
Translocation of merlin to the nucleus allows merlin to bind and
the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4DCAF1 (DDB1- and Cul4-
inhibit
Associated Factor 1).121,122 CRL4DCAF1 regulates cell proliferation,
survival, DNA repair and genomic integrity via ubiquitination of
critical regulators. Only unphosphorylated merlin binds DCAF1;
transfected merlin S518A bound DCAF1 in HEK293T cells, whereas
merlinS518D did not bind. Further genetic experiments in HEI286
cells showed that merlin association with DCAF1 suppressed
proliferation. In addition, in vitro DCAF1 silencing in mouse Nf2−/−
FC-1801 Schwannoma and FH-912 normal control cells caused
selective growth inhibition in merlin-null cells compared with
control. In support of a proliferative role of DCAF1 in cells with loss
of merlin, DCAF1 silencing in FC-1801 cells grown subcutaneously
in mouse xenografts decreased tumor growth. Either expression of
merlin or DCAF1 silencing in FC-1801 schwannoma cells reduced
expression of a group of genes regulated by YAP.121 Signiﬁcantly,
silencing of DCAF1 in schwannoma cells isolated from NF2
patients also reduced their proliferation.123 Additional studies
showed that CRL4DCAF1 is responsible for LATS1 polyubuquityla-
tion and LATS2 oligoubiquitylation, thereby promoting LATS1
proteosomal degradation and inhibition of LATS2 kinase activity,
which in turn suppresses YAP phosphorylation. This provides a
molecular pathway by which the absence of merlin results in YAP
activation (Figure 4).124

In the mammalian hippo pathway, merlin appears to act
upstream and independent of Mst1/2 at the cell cortex. Merlin
promoted LATS association with the plasma membrane in mouse
Schwann cells. Studies in Nf2−/− mouse Schwann cells (FC-912)
revealed low LATS phosphorylation levels and LATS1/2 enrich-
ment
in the cytoplasm relative to the membrane fraction
compared with control Nf2ﬂox2/ﬂox2 mouse FH-912 Schwann cells.
Re-expression of merlin in Nf2−/− FC-912 cells rescued LATS
plasma membrane localization.125 Direct binding of wild-type, full-
length merlin to the plasma membrane and recruitment of
LATS1/2 promoted its phosphorylation by Mst1/2 without
regulating intrinsic Mst1/2 enzymatic activity (Figure 4).125
Deregulation of the actin cytoskeleton resulting from merlin loss
also induces cell proliferation signaling through the hippo
pathway, and YAP/TAZ have been recently identiﬁed as
mechanosensors.63,76,81–83,126,127 Mechanical
such as
stretching, geometry, cell density and rigidity of the substrate
inﬂuence YAP/TAZ activity.128,129 Interestingly, F-actin capping
and severing proteins including coﬁlin restrained YAP/TAZ activity
in contact inhibited cells that have low mechanical stress via a
mechanism that depended on merlin.130 Consistent with this
phenomenon, disruption of F-actin stress ﬁbers with LatrunculinA
inhibited YAP nuclear localization and activity.131 The relationship

factors

Figure 3. Merlin inhibits PI3K/mTORC1/Akt signaling pathways.

regulated by histone deacetylases (HDAC) 1 and 6 through their
interaction with protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), which functions as
an Akt phosphatase.102,103 HDAC inhibitors disrupt the PP1-HDAC
interaction facilitating Akt dephosphorylation and decrease
human meningioma and schwannoma cell proliferation and
schwannoma growth in an allograft model and meningioma
growth in an intracranial xenograft model.102,104,105 Finally, gene-
expression proﬁling of 49 schwannomas and 7 normal vestibular
nerves identiﬁed overexpression of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway
(Figure 3).106

of mTORC1

Consistent with this last ﬁnding, constitutive activation of
the mTORC1 signaling pathway has been reported in NF2-
schwannomas and meningiomas. Loss of merlin activated
mTORC1 signaling independently of Akt or ERK in these tumor
cells; however, the molecular mechanism connecting merlin loss
to mTORC1 activation remains to be elucidated.107 In orthotopic
sciatic nerve allograft mice, syngeneic subcutaneous grafted mice
and transgenic P0-SCH-Δ(39–121)-27 mice, pharmacological
inhibition
of NF2-
schwannomas.108 Western blot analysis of these tumors indicated
a strong reduction of phosphorylation of mTORC1 downstream
substrates S6 and 4E-BP1 as well as a small
increase of Akt
phosphorylation in treated mice, analogous to patients’ response
to rapamycin treatment that was characterized by Akt activation
resulting from the loss of
the p71 S6K1 negative feedback
loop.43,109,110 In contrast to mTORC1, in Schwann and arachnoidal
cells, merlin activates mTORC2 in response to growth factor
stimulation. However, attenuation of mTORC2 signaling was not
observed in merlin-deﬁcient schwannomas and meningiomas
(Figure 3).111

reduced

growth

the

In addition to alterations in kinases and phosphatase activity,
we reported that loss of merlin altered the protein acetylation
pattern in mouse Schwann cells.
Interestingly, merlin loss
correlated with increased expression levels of the deacetylase
sirtuin 2 (SIRT2). Inhibiting SIRT2 deacetylase activity with small
molecules considerably decreased merlin-null Schwann cell
viability via a necrotic mechanism while sparing normal Schwann
cells.112

Mammalian hippo pathway.
Studies in primary mouse Schwann
cells and in vitro assays highlighted the role of merlin modulation
of the Schwann cell microtubule cytoskeleton.113 Further studies
showed that wild-type merlin is transported throughout the cell
by microtubule motors and merlin mutants or depletion of the
microtubule motor kinesin-1 suppressed merlin transport and was
associated with accumulation of yorkie, a Drosophila homolog of
the hippo pathway transcriptional co-activator Yes-associated
in the nucleus.114 It is signiﬁcant to note that
protein (YAP),
phosphorylation of YAP excludes it from the nucleus in part by

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Oncogene (2015) 1 – 12

6

NF2 in tumor biology
AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

Figure 4. Role of merlin in the activation of the mammalian hippo
pathway.

between mechanical factor signaling in schwannomas, meningio-
mas and ependymomas and merlin loss warrants further study.

In addition, at the cell cortex, components of the cell-cell
contact complexes, including angiomotins (Amot), α-catenin and
E-cadherin among others, can complex with YAP and TAZ and
inhibit their activity by keeping them at the cell junctions and
preventing their nuclear localization.132–134 Amot-p130 isoform
bound to the WW domains of YAP and blocked LATS1 access to
YAP.
in 10 human schwannoma samples, Amot
staining was abundant by IHC, whereas normal human nerve had
weak Amot expression (Figure 4).135

Interestingly,

In peripheral nerves, merlin and Amot co-localize in paranodes
and Schimidt-Lantermann incisures. Moreover,
in cultured
Schwann cells, merlin interaction with Amot was demonstrated
the endogenous proteins.136
by co-immunoprecipitation of
Merlin–Amot interaction was required for merlin regulation of
mitogenic MAPK signaling. Consistently, in RT4–67 cells, loss of
merlin or presence of patient-derived merlin mutants that fail to
bind Amot resulted in a lack of inhibition of c-Raf and ERK
phosphorylation. Silencing of Amot in Nf2−/− Schwann cells (SC4)
selectively reduced cell proliferation because it did not change the
proliferation rate of SC4 with merlin re-expression. Similarly, Amot
knockdown decreased tumor growth of SC4 cells in sciatic nerve
orthotopic mice. Furthermore, Amot silencing attenuated the Rac1
and Ras/MAPK signaling pathway.
In HEK293 transfected cells,
merlin competed with Rich1, a small GTPase-activating protein, for
Amot binding, releasing Rich1 to inactivate Rac1 (Figure 4).136

MERLIN IN MALIGNANT CANCERS
Merlin in mesothelioma
Malignant mesothelioma is an aggressive form of cancer that most
commonly develops in the mesothelium of
the pleura and
peritoneum tissue. It is primarily caused by exposure to asbestos;
however, the long latency after exposure suggests that predis-
posing genetic mutations
likely have a role in disease
development.137 Interestingly, somatic NF2 mutations are present
in a large percentage of malignant mesothelioma patients.138–140
In addition, in human mesothelioma patients without detectable
NF2 mutations, merlin was phosphorylated at Ser518 consistent
with an inactive tumor suppressor state.141 Furthermore, Nf2
hemizygosity was
initially reported to be associated with
increased susceptibility to asbestos-induced mesotheliomas in
Nf2KO3/+ mice inoculated with crocidolite asbestos ﬁbers.

Subsequent DNA analysis of peritoneal mesothelioma cells from
these mice showed homozygous Nf2 inactivation.142 Moreover,
another Nf2(+/ − ) mouse line treated with asbestos to induce
malignant mesotheliomas phenocopied the human disease.143
The mesothelioma cells from these mice frequently exhibited Nf2
homozygous deletions, supporting a role for LOH in malignant
mesothelioma etiology and the possibility that Nf2 heterozygosity
increases susceptibility to asbestos-induced mesothelioma. Taken
together, such observations support the idea that NF2 mutations
or defective merlin tumor suppressor signaling might trigger or
contribute to development of mesotheliomas.141

Additional evidence supports a link between merlin-dependent
regulatory pathways and mesotheliomas. First, protein kinase
C-potentiated phosphatase inhibitor (CPI-17), which is frequently
overexpressed in mesothelioma tumors, inhibits merlin phospha-
tase MYPT1-PP1δ, providing one potential pathway by which
merlin’s tumor suppressor function might be inactivated through
maintenance of phosphorylation at Ser518.25 Second, similar to
NF2 schwannomas, mesothelioma cells with NF2 inactivation
exhibit activated PAK1 and AKT, and re-expression of merlin in
merlin-null human mesothelioma cells (Meso-17) decreases PAK1
activity.144,145 The loss of merlin was linked to increased cell
proliferation via a PAK1-induced increase in cyclin-D1, which
resulted in activation of Cdk4 and phosphorylation of retinoblas-
toma protein.141,144 The observed upregulation of cyclin-D1 in
Meso-17 cells was similar
to ﬁndings in mouse embryonic
ﬁbroblasts from Nf2-deﬁcient mice.144,146 Further supporting the
relationship between merlin and cyclin-D1,
reintroduction of
merlin into Meso-17 cells by NF2-adenovirus infection resulted in
reduced cyclin-D1levels. Finally, an independent analysis of eleven
malignant mesothelioma cell lines found activation of mTORC1.
Loss of merlin results in integrin-mediated activation of mTORC1
through PAK1, which promotes cell cycle progression by inducing
translation of cyclin-D1 mRNA and cyclin-D1 expression.80 The
mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin selectively inhibited proliferation of
seven merlin-null mesothelioma cell lines, but not merlin-positive
cell
for
merlin-deﬁcient mesotheliomas.80

lines, suggesting a potential pharmacological

target

An important functional

link has been reported in mesothe-
lioma cells between merlin and the hippo pathway (through CRL4-
DCAF1). Silencing DCAF1 in Meso-33, merlin-deﬁcient mesothe-
lioma cells reduced their proliferation by arresting the cell cycle in
G1 phase. When LATS1/2 was additionally silenced in these cells,
cell cycle progression was restored. By contrast, silencing of
DCAF1 in normal, Met-5A mesothelial cells resulted only in a
moderate reduction of cell proliferation, suggesting that the
absence of merlin sensitized cells to DCAF1 inactivation.121 In
addition, in a panel of human mesothelioma cell lines, western
the absence of merlin was
blot experiments showed that
accompanied by decreased LATS1
expression and YAP
phosphorylation.124 Further conﬁrming merlin’s functional rela-
tionship with the hippo pathway in mesothelioma cells, YAP1
expression studies found elevated YAP1 in malignant pleural
mesothelioma samples and silencing of YAP1 reduced the growth
of NCI-H290 mesothelioma cells carrying NF2 homozygous
deletion.147 Notably, NF2 transfection into these cells induced
YAP1 phosphorylation at Ser127, YAP1 retention in the cytoplasm
and consequent reduction of YAP1 nuclear localization. Moreover,
co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that merlin inter-
acts with YAP1, although the interaction is not direct.147 Increased
proliferation of mesothelioma cells with loss of merlin function
was reported to be concurrent with LATS2 inactivation; however,
reintroduction of wild-type merlin to Y-Meso-14 cells with
homozygous deletion of LATS2 suppressed cell growth. If LATS1
cannot compensate for LATS2 function,
link
between merlin and the hippo pathway in mesothelioma cells
might not be that of a single axis growth suppression pathway.148

the functional

Oncogene (2015) 1 – 12

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Studies comparing Meso-33 cells lacking merlin and those with
reintroduction of merlin also identiﬁed merlin as a microtubule
stabilizer.149 Merlin interacts with tubulin and acetylated-tubulin
and stabilizes the microtubules by attenuating tubulin turnover,
lowering the rates of microtubule polymerization and depolymer-
ization. Thus, merlin is a regulator of both the actin and
microtubule cytoskeleton, which links merlin localization through-
out the cell with its roles in proliferation, morphology, migration,
mitosis and survival.

Loss of merlin in mesotheliomas has been linked not only to
increased proliferation, but also increased invasiveness, spreading
and migration. Adenoviral transduction of NF2 in Meso-17 and
Meso-25 cell
lines decreased invasion through Matrigel mem-
branes compared with cells transduced with empty vector.
Similarly, re-expression of merlin in these cells decreased the
percentage of cells that spread onto ﬁbronectin-coated coverslips
and decreased the motility of cells into the scratch area in a
classical wound-healing assay.150 Merlin expression in Meso-17
and Meso-25 cells decreased FAK Tyr397 phosphorylation and
consequently disrupted FAK-Src and PI3K interaction, providing a
mechanism for
invasion and
spreading caused by merlin inactivation.150 Interestingly, research
has
shown that malignant mesothelioma cells as well as
schwannomas and meningiomas with merlin loss have in
common deregulation of several pathways (hippo, mTOR, PAK,
FAK-Src and PI3K); thus, we speculate that treatments for these
malignancies might share commonalities.

the observed enhancement of

it

frequently metastasize,

Merlin in other malignant cancers
Considering that Nf2 heterozygous mice are prone to develop
cancer, primarily osteosarcomas, ﬁbrosarcomas and hepatocellular
carcinomas with Nf2 LOH that
is
tempting to assume that NF2 patients commonly develop other
malignant cancers.151 However, the transformation of schwanno-
mas into malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors or develop-
ment of other common cancers in NF2 patients is very rare.
Moreover, the incidence of NF2 mutations in common human
cancers is low. Although NF2 mutations have been detected in
multiple human tumor types, mutational analysis of 315 human
carcinoma samples found a low prevalence of NF2 mutations, for
example, NF2 mutations were found in just 2.2% of hepatocellular,
acute myelogenous
lung
carcinomas.152,153 In common cancers, methylation of CpG islands
has been reported in promoter regions that are non-methylated in
control tissue resulting in transcriptional
inactivation of tumor
suppressors.154,155 Comprehensive studies of promoter methyla-
tion, methyl-binding proteins, DNA methyltransferases and HDACs
have not been addressed in NF2-tumors or common cancers in
relation to NF2/merlin.

squamous

cell

leukemia

and

The role of cancer stem cells has been gaining increased
attention and we foresee merlin taking a place in this discussion.
The participation of merlin in the mammalian hippo pathway
might suggest a role in stem cell maintenance, differentiation or
regulation of the stem cell niche.156–160

Breast and colorectal cancer
A low incidence of NF2 mutations in breast cancer was reported
by the Japanese National Cancer Center Research Institute.161
More recently, a systematic mutational analysis of 22 breast and
colorectal cancers found NF2 somatic mutations in 4.5% of the
samples. Notably, groups of eleven different genes were
frequently mutated per tumor demonstrating molecular hetero-
geneity of cancer.162,163 Interestingly, PAK1 ampliﬁcation was
identiﬁed in ~ 33% of breast
tumor samples, providing a
mechanism of MAPK pathway activation and tumorigenesis.
PAK1 expression increased merlin Ser518 phosphorylation (inacti-
vation) in a human mammary epithelial cell transformation cell

NF2 in tumor biology
AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

7

line (HMLE), whereas silencing of NF2 promoted anchorage-
independent proliferation.164 The data suggest that despite the
low incidence of NF2 somatic mutations in breast cancer, merlin
inactivation, together with the inhibitory regulation through PAK1,
may contribute to the transformation or maintenance of the
tumor state. In the NF2−/− breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cell line,
merlin re-expression inhibited YAP/TEAD activity that was
eliminated by LATS1/2 silencing. However, LATS1/2 silencing did
not rescue YAP/TAZ inhibition by soft extracellular matrix that
provides a low mechanical stress, suggesting that cytoskeletal
changes caused by merlin loss regulate YAP more powerfully than
the core kinase hippo pathway. Overall, YAP signaling is activated
in NF2−/− breast cancer cells.130

After the discovery of the NF2 gene, two independent studies
found a low rate of somatic NF2 mutations in colorectal
carcinomas, 2 of 44 tumors in one study and 2 of 24 in another
study exhibited mutations.165,166 However, a recent
study
reported that 113 of 185 colorectal carcinoma samples lacked
one functional copy of the NF2 gene and there was NF2 LOH in
20% of heterozygous samples, more frequently in larger and less
differentiated tumors. Moreover, among all the samples, the level
of NF2 mRNA expression measured by RT-PCR was signiﬁcantly
lower in poorly differentiated tumors. Similarly, merlin expression
assessed by immunostaining was weaker in less differentiated
tumors and the proportional
fraction of merlin that was
phosphorylated was higher in tumors compared with normal
mucous tissue.167 This new data suggest a potential relationship
between merlin expression and prognosis.

Hepatobiliar cancer
In hepatobiliary tumor cell lines, FOCUS and HA22TVGH, a study
reported two NF2 homozygous deletions, ex1 and ex2-3,
respectively.168 Interestingly,
in developing and adult mice, Nf2
deletion in the liver signiﬁcantly expanded liver progenitor cells
without affecting differentiated hepatocytes. These liver progeni-
tor cells increased proliferation by increasing EGFR activity
independent of the hippo pathway and associates Nf2 absence
in liver progenitor cells with tumor development.169

Deregulation of the hippo pathway occurs in several human
carcinomas including liver cancer.170–172 A speciﬁc role of
merlin in liver was investigated in the Abl-Cre;Nf2ﬂox2/ﬂox2 mice.
These mice initially developed bile duct hamartomas and in within
a year all developed hepatocellular carcinomas. Their
livers
showed reduced YAP phosphorylation,
increased YAP nuclear
localization and reduced LATS membrane association and
phosphorylation.125,173 The data suggest
in hepatocytes
merlin is functionally linked to the hippo pathway and acts
upstream Mst1/2 by recruiting LATS to the membrane comparable
to what has been shown in FH912 Schwann cell line.

that

Prostate cancer
In prostate cancer, the second leading cause of cancer death in
males, inactivation of NF2 reportedly contributes to the progres-
sion of the cancer toward a highly invasive and chemoresistant
state.174,175 Studies of merlin expression and merlin Ser518
phosphorylation in several prostate cancer cell
including
LNCaP, PC3, 22RV1 and LAPC-4, have indicated an overall decrease
in merlin expression. In the DUI145 cell line, which exhibits merlin
expression, phosphorylated merlin-Ser518 (inactive as tumor
suppressor) was abundant and the high levels were sustained at
high cell density concurrent with PAK1 activation. In sum, absence
or inactivation of merlin in prostate cell lines appears to contribute
to tumor development and progression.176

lines,

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Oncogene (2015) 1 – 12

8

NF2 in tumor biology
AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

Glioblastomas
In a very aggressive brain tumor, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM),
merlin expression was reported to be reduced in 61% (n = 23) of
tumors. Merlin protein and mRNA levels were decreased by over
50% in GBM compared with normal human astrocytes and brain
tissue.177 Another study reported that merlin was absent in 32%
(n = 53) of tumors and its expression was reduced in the rest, and
in one-third of seven GBM cell lines merlin was missing and re-
expression suppressed proliferation.178 In addition, microarray
expression analysis of GBM cells revealed that the absence of
merlin induced changes in gene expression, decreasing transcripts
that activate LATS2 signaling and decreasing expression of
transcripts that inhibit the canonical Wnt and RhoA signaling
pathway.177 These results were conﬁrmed by RT-PCR, luciferase-
reporter assays and western blot, with merlin re-expression
resulting in activation of the hippo pathway and inhibition of
the canonical (β-catenin) and non-canonical Wnt pathways in
GBM cells. Importantly, merlin re-expression decreased GBM cell
proliferation in vitro and in subcutaneous and intracranial
xenograft mouse models.177 In GBM cell
lines that expressed
merlin, an alternative mechanism of merlin inactivation was
revealed that operated through ezrin interaction. Ezrin was found
to be expressed at higher levels in GBM cells and associated with
merlin, removing merlin from its cortical localization, prohibiting
its inhibitory action on Rac1, and thereby enhancing cell
growth.178 Interestingly, a study of U251 glioblastoma cells
identiﬁed different cell subpopulations, one with a high prolifera-
tion rate, spindle morphology, and EGFR and NOTCH1 expression
(U251-S), and another with a lower proliferation rate, rhomboid
morphology, no NOTCH1 expression and low EGFR expression
(U251-R). Notably, both subpopulations exhibited similar merlin
expression levels as measured by western blot; however, merlin-
Ser518 phosphorylation was higher in U251-S cells regardless of
cell density. The disrupted cell-contact inhibition signaling and
merlin phosphorylation correlated with increased expression of
NOTCH1 and its downstream target gene, HES1, which represses
the transcription factor E2F in cell-contact growth arrest. Also
increased was the EGFR effector CCND1, the Cdk1 gene, which is
essential
in the G1-S phase transition, providing an alternative
mechanism for glioblastoma cell proliferation regulated by merlin
phosphorylation when NF2 is not mutated or epigenetically
inactivated.179

Medullary thyroid carcinoma
NF2 allelic loss has also been reported to be of potential value in
determining the risk of recurrence of rare metastatic medullary
thyroid carcinomas. Among a tumor suppressor gene panel, NF2
was found to be one of the most frequent allelic losses (75%) in 11
medullary thyroid carcinomas. When considered in association
with age and disease stage, NF2 allelic loss helped deﬁne high-
and low-risk recurrence groups with excellent prognostic
certainty.180

Melanoma
After an initial report of NF2 somatic mutations in 6 of 20 human
melanoma samples, a larger study reported only a 5% incidence of
NF2 somatic mutation in melanoma.152,181 Merlin inactivation in
WM1552C and MeWo human melanoma cell
lines in vitro and
in vivo enhanced migration and invasion in addition to cell
proliferation. Of interest, transduction of NF2 wild-type in MeWo
cells activated Mst1/2 kinases (hippo pathway) as evidenced by
increased levels of active phosphorylated Mst1/2.181 An additional
molecular mechanism that contributes to increased melanoma
cell motility observed with merlin loss was identiﬁed in merlin-
deﬁcient MV3 human melanoma cells. Despite decreased Na+/H+
exchanger 1 (NHE1) expression, NH4Cl pre-pulse experiments

Oncogene (2015) 1 – 12

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
Merlin’s role as a scaffolding protein can explain how it regulates
multiple signaling pathways and integrates extracellular signals to
modulate morphology, motility, proliferation and survival. Here we

revealed increased NHE1 activity and overexpression of NHE1
further increased migration, suggesting a functional link between
merlin and NHE1 activity.182 Importantly, treatment of the human
melanoma cell line A375 (this cell line carries the BRAF gain-of-
function V600E mutation) with the RAF inhibitor vemurafenib
allowed screening for genes involved in development of drug
resistance in surviving cells by negative selection with the new
CRISPR-Cas9 technology. NF2 was found, among 18 080 genes
screened in the genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 knockout (GeCKO)
library, to have a role in vemurafenib resistance. Experiments
comparing resistance between NF2 knockout and knockdown in
vemurafenib-treated cells demonstrated that merlin absence was
necessary for resistance development and the presence of merlin
even at very low levels was sufﬁcient to maintain sensitivity.183 In
agreement, a whole-exome sequencing and pharmacological
response analysis of sixty cell
lines of the US National Cancer
Institute (NCI-60) showed that cancer cell lines that harbor NF2
mutations were resistant to vemurafenib treatment.184 Taken
together, these data implicate NF2 mutations in the development
of drug resistance in melanoma rather than oncogenesis and
indicate that mutations are typically not of the non-functional
passenger alteration variety. This makes treatment of melanoma
tumors with loss of merlin function particularly challenging.

JNK-9L. However,

the JNK inhibitor

Interestingly, the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer project
(a collaboration between the Cancer Genome Project at the
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, UK and the Center for Molecular
Therapeutics, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, USA)
has compiled information about NF2 mutations and drug
sensitivity in a large panel of cancer cell lines.185,186 Supporting
the results from the GeCKO library and the NCI-60 screens with
vemurafenib, this project found that all cancer cell lines carrying
NF2 mutations (22 of 641 lines tested) were less sensitive to
SB590885, a B-RAF inhibitor, irrespective of the tissue of origin. In a
similar manner, NF2 mutations increased the resistance to
dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors methotrexalate and pyremetha-
mine as well as
this
collaborative project also found instances in which NF2 mutations
increased sensitivity to drugs such as dasatinib (ABL, SRC, KIT and
PDGFR inhibitor), WH-4-023 (SRC family and ABL inhibitor),
PHA-665752 (Hepatocyte Growth Factor Receptor MET inhibitor),
6881640 (WEE1 and CHK1 inhibitor) and FH535 (unknown
target).185 The information can be accessed on their website:
http://www.cancerrxgene.org/translation/Gene/1268. Therapeutic
resistance is a complex problem. Drug resistance may be related
to several
landscape,
development of secondary mutations in the drug target, changes
in the tumor microenvironment and activation of bypass or
feedback signaling loops.
In vemurafenib-resistant melanoma
tumors and tumor-matched short-term cultures from clinical trial
patients, resistance to vemurafenib was found to develop due to
upregulation of PDGFRβ or an NRas mutation.187 We speculate
that NF2 mutations in B-Raf mutated melanomas may help confer
resistance to vemurafenib because the absence of merlin per se
activates the PDGFR signaling assisting in establishment of a
compensatory route.
In contrast, NF2 mutations may confer
sensitivity to Src, KIT and PDGFR inhibitors because cells with
only NF2 inactivation when treated with these inhibitors
decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis.76,91,188–190 Thus,
targeting pathways known to be activated by loss of merlin
function in combination with drugs targeting the primary gene
mutation in cancer cells may decrease development of drug
resistance.

the genomic tumor

factors,

that

is,

NF2 in tumor biology
AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

9

summarized the role of NF2/merlin in NF2-related tumors and
common human cancers. Although NF2 mutations are not
frequent in common human malignant cancers, when present
can affect disease progression, therapeutic approach or prognosis.
Moving forward,
larger studies evaluating transcriptional NF2
inactivation in common human cancers might require reassess-
ment of its participation. In addition, the multiplicity of signaling
pathways affected by merlin loss/inactivation in tumor cells and
the differential inﬂuence of the microenvironment might guide
selection of the most appropriate molecular target/s for therapy.
Consequently, combinatorial molecular therapy might represent
the most successful pharmacological approach; however, further
research and a better understanding of molecular cross-signaling
are still required to identify the best therapeutic strategies.

A better understanding of the role of merlin loss/inactivation in
tumorigenesis and tumor progression is still required. The fact that
loss of merlin in humans mostly leads to tumor formation from
Schwann, meningeal and ependymal cells, whereas other cell
types do not transform despite ubiquitous merlin expression in
normal tissues, suggests tissue-speciﬁc molecular context and
microenvironment dependence that requires further elucidation.
In addition, the signiﬁcance of NF2/merlin inactivation in common
human cancers deserves more investigation for its potential
contribution to progression, prognosis and therapeutics.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the National
Institute of Health 5R01DC10189
and 5R01NS062825 grants. We thank AB Knott for editorial assistance and
Dr C Vivacharawongse for reviewing the manuscript and helpful discussions.

REFERENCES

1 Evans DG. Neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2): a clinical and molecular review.

Orphanet J Rare Dis 2009; 4: 16.

2 Rouleau GA, Merel P, Lutchman M, Sanson M, Zucman J, Marineau C et al.
Alteration in a new gene encoding a putative membrane-organizing protein
causes neuro-ﬁbromatosis type 2. Nature 1993; 363: 515–521.

3 Trofatter JA, MacCollin MM, Rutter JL, Murrell JR, Duyao MP, Parry DM et al.
A novel moesin-, ezrin-, radixin-like gene is a candidate for the neuroﬁ-
bromatosis 2 tumor suppressor. Cell 1993; 72: 791–800.

4 Asthagiri AR, Parry DM, Butman JA, Kim HJ, Tsilou ET, Zhuang Z et al.

Neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Lancet 2009; 373: 1974–1986.

5 Wiemels J, Wrensch M, Claus EB. Epidemiology and etiology of meningioma.

J Neuro-oncol 2010; 99: 307–314.

6 Bydon M, Mathios D, Aguayo-Alvarez JJ, Ho C, Gokaslan ZL, Bydon A. Multiple
primary intramedullary ependymomas: a case report and review of the literature.
Spine J 2013; 13: 1379–1386.

7 Plotkin SR, O'Donnell CC, Curry WT, Bove CM, MacCollin M, Nunes FP. Spinal
ependymomas in neuroﬁbromatosis Type 2: a retrospective analysis of 55
patients. J Neurosurg Spine 2011; 14: 543–547.

8 Lloyd SK, Evans DG. Neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2): diagnosis and manage-

ment. Handbook Clin Neurol 2013; 115: 957–967.

9 Sperfeld AD, Hein C, Schroder JM, Ludolph AC, Hanemann CO. Occurrence and
characterization of peripheral nerve involvement in neuroﬁbromatosis type 2.
Brain 2002; 125(Pt 5): 996–1004.

10 Schulz A, Baader SL, Niwa-Kawakita M, Jung MJ, Bauer R, Garcia C et al. Merlin
isoform 2 in neuroﬁbromatosis type 2-associated polyneuropathy. Nat Neurosci
2013; 16: 426–433.

11 Schulz A, Zoch A, Morrison H. A neuronal function of the tumor suppressor

protein merlin. Acta Neuropathol Commun 2014; 2: 82.

12 Aboukais R, Zairi F, Baroncini M, Bonne NX, Schapira S, Vincent C et al. Intra-
cranial meningiomas and neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Acta Neurochirurgica 2013;
155: 997–1001 discussion.

13 Gilbert MR, Ruda R, Sofﬁetti R. Ependymomas in adults. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep

2010; 10: 240–247.

14 Xu HM, Gutmann DH. Merlin differentially associates with the microtubule and

actin cytoskeleton. J Neurosci Res 1998; 51: 403–415.

15 Gronholm M, Sainio M, Zhao F, Heiska L, Vaheri A, Carpen O. Homotypic and
heterotypic interaction of the neuroﬁbromatosis 2 tumor suppressor protein
merlin and the ERM protein ezrin. J Cell Sci 1999; 112(Pt 6): 895–904.

16 Nguyen R, Reczek D, Bretscher A. Hierarchy of merlin and ezrin N- and C-terminal
domain interactions in homo- and heterotypic associations and their relation-
ship to binding of scaffolding proteins EBP50 and E3KARP. J Biol Chem 2001;
276: 7621–7629.

17 Stamenkovic I, Yu Q. Merlin, a ‘magic’ linker between extracellular cues and
intracellular signaling pathways that regulate cell motility, proliferation, and
survival. Curr Protein Peptide Sci 2010; 11: 471–484.

18 Tang X, Jang SW, Wang X, Liu Z, Bahr SM, Sun SY et al. Akt phosphorylation
regulates the tumour-suppressor merlin through ubiquitination and degradation.
Nat Cell Biol 2007; 9: 1199–1207.

19 Laulajainen M, Muranen T, Nyman TA, Carpen O, Gronholm M. Multistep phos-
phorylation by oncogenic kinases enhances the degradation of the NF2 tumor
suppressor merlin. Neoplasia 2011; 13: 643–652.

20 Laulajainen M, Muranen T, Carpen O, Gronholm M. Protein kinase A-mediated
phosphorylation of the NF2 tumor suppressor protein merlin at serine 10 affects
the actin cytoskeleton. Oncogene 2008; 27: 3233–3243.

21 Shaw RJ, Paez JG, Curto M, Yaktine A, Pruitt WM, Saotome I et al. The Nf2 tumor
suppressor, merlin, functions in Rac-dependent signaling. Dev Cell 2001; 1: 63–72.
22 Xiao GH, Beeser A, Chernoff J, Testa JR. p21-activated kinase links Rac/Cdc42

signaling to merlin. J Biol Chem 2002; 277: 883–886.

23 Surace EI, Haipek CA, Gutmann DH. Effect of merlin phosphorylation on neu-

roﬁbromatosis 2 (NF2) gene function. Oncogene 2004; 23: 580–587.

24 Alfthan K, Heiska L, Gronholm M, Renkema GH, Carpen O. Cyclic AMP-dependent
protein kinase phosphorylates merlin at serine 518 independently of p21-
activated kinase and promotes merlin-ezrin heterodimerization. J Biol Chem
2004; 279: 18559–18566.

25 Jin H, Sperka T, Herrlich P, Morrison H. Tumorigenic transformation by CPI-17

through inhibition of a merlin phosphatase. Nature 2006; 442: 576–579.

26 Pearson MA, Reczek D, Bretscher A, Karplus PA. Structure of the ERM protein
moesin reveals the FERM domain fold masked by an extended actin binding
tail domain. Cell 2000; 101: 259–270.

27 Scoles DR. The merlin interacting proteins reveal multiple targets for NF2 ther-

apy. Biochim Biophys Acta 2008; 1785: 32–54.

28 Curto M, Cole BK, Lallemand D, Liu CH, McClatchey AI. Contact-dependent

inhibition of EGFR signaling by Nf2/Merlin. J Cell Biol 2007; 177: 893–903.

29 James MF, Beauchamp RL, Manchanda N, Kazlauskas A, Ramesh V. A NHERF
binding site links the betaPDGFR to the cytoskeleton and regulates cell
spreading and migration. J Cell Sci 2004; 117(Pt 14): 2951–2961.

30 Yogesha SD, Sharff AJ, Giovannini M, Bricogne G, Izard T. Unfurling of the band
4.1, ezrin, radixin, moesin (FERM) domain of the merlin tumor suppressor. Protein
Sci 2011; 20: 2113–2120.

31 Hennigan RF, Foster LA, Chaiken MF, Mani T, Gomes MM, Herr AB et al.
Fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis of merlin conformational
changes. Mol Cell Biol 2010; 30: 54–67.

32 Sher I, Hanemann CO, Karplus PA, Bretscher A. The tumor suppressor merlin
controls growth in its open state, and phosphorylation converts it to a less-active
more-closed state. Dev Cell 2012; 22: 703–705.

33 Ali Khajeh J, Ju JH, Atchiba M, Allaire M, Stanley C, Heller WT et al. Molecular
conformation of the full-length tumor suppressor NF2/Merlin-a small-angle
neutron scattering study. J Mol Biol 2014; 426: 2755–2768.

34 McClatchey AI, Saotome I, Ramesh V, Gusella JF, Jacks T. The Nf2 tumor sup-
pressor gene product is essential for extraembryonic development immediately
prior to gastrulation. Genes Dev 1997; 11: 1253–1265.

35 Giovannini M, Robanus-Maandag E, van der Valk M, Niwa-Kawakita M,
Abramowski V, Goutebroze L et al. Conditional biallelic Nf2 mutation in the
mouse promotes manifestations of human neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Genes Dev
2000; 14: 1617–1630.

36 Kalamarides M, Niwa-Kawakita M, Leblois H, Abramowski V, Perricaudet M,
Janin A et al. Nf2 gene inactivation in arachnoidal cells is rate-limiting for
meningioma development in the mouse. Genes Dev 2002; 16: 1060–1065.

37 Gehlhausen JR, Park SJ, Hickox AE, Shew M, Staser K, Rhodes SD et al. A murine
model of neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 that accurately phenocopies human
schwannoma formation. Hum Mol Genet 2014; 24: 1–8.

38 Kalamarides M, Peyre M, Giovannini M. Meningioma mouse models. J Neuro-

oncol 2010; 99: 325–331.

39 Rangarajan A, Weinberg RA. Opinion: Comparative biology of mouse versus
human cells: modelling human cancer in mice. Nat Rev Cancer 2003; 3: 952–959.
40 Gusella JF, Ramesh V, MacCollin M, Jacoby LB. Merlin: the neuroﬁbromatosis 2

tumor suppressor. Biochim Biophys Acta 1999; 1423: M29–M36.

41 Schulz A, Kyselyova A, Baader SL, Jung MJ, Zoch A, Mautner VF et al.
Neuronal merlin inﬂuences ERBB2 receptor expression on Schwann cells
through neuregulin 1 type III signalling. Brain 2014; 137(Pt 2): 420–432.

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Oncogene (2015) 1 – 12

10

NF2 in tumor biology
AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

42 Sainz J, Huynh DP, Figueroa K, Ragge NK, Baser ME, Pulst SM. Mutations of the
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 gene and lack of the gene product in vestibular
schwannomas. Hum Mol Genet 1994; 3: 885–891.

43 Gutmann DH, Giordano MJ, Fishback AS, Guha A. Loss of merlin expression in
sporadic meningiomas, ependymomas and schwannomas. Neurology 1997; 49:
267–270.

44 Gonzalez-Gomez P, Bello MJ, Alonso ME, Lomas J, Arjona D, Campos JM et al.
CpG island methylation in sporadic and neuroﬁbromatis type 2-associated
schwannomas. Clin Cancer Res 2003; 9: 5601–5606.

45 Kino T, Takeshima H, Nakao M, Nishi T, Yamamoto K, Kimura T et al. Identiﬁcation
of the cis-acting region in the NF2 gene promoter as a potential target for
mutation and methylation-dependent silencing in schwannoma. Genes Cells
2001; 6: 441–454.

46 Koutsimpelas D, Ruerup G, Mann WJ, Brieger J. Lack of neuroﬁbromatosis type 2
gene promoter methylation in sporadic vestibular schwannomas. ORL J Otorhi-
nolaryngol Relat Spec 2012; 74: 33–37.

47 Lomas J, Bello MJ, Arjona D, Alonso ME, Martinez-Glez V, Lopez-Marin I et al.
Genetic and epigenetic alteration of the NF2 gene in sporadic meningiomas.
Genes Chromosomes Cancer 2005; 42: 314–319.

48 Riemenschneider MJ, Perry A, Reifenberger G. Histological classiﬁcation
2006; 5:

Lancet Neurol

and molecular genetics of meningiomas.
1045–1054.

49 Alonso ME, Bello MJ, Gonzalez-Gomez P, Arjona D, de Campos JM, Gutierrez M
et al. Aberrant CpG island methylation of multiple genes in ependymal tumors.
J Neuro-oncol 2004; 67: 159–165.

50 Kimura Y, Koga H, Araki N, Mugita N, Fujita N, Takeshima H et al. The involve-
ment of calpain-dependent proteolysis of the tumor suppressor NF2 (merlin) in
schwannomas and meningiomas. Nat Med 1998; 4: 915–922.

51 Goutagny S, Nault JC, Mallet M, Henin D, Rossi JZ, Kalamarides M. High incidence
of activating TERT promoter mutations in meningiomas undergoing malignant
progression. Brain Pathol 2014; 24: 184–189.

52 Morrison H, Sherman LS, Legg J, Banine F, Isacke C, Haipek CA et al. The NF2
tumor suppressor gene product, merlin, mediates contact inhibition of growth
through interactions with CD44. Genes Dev 2001; 15: 968–980.

53 Shaw RJ, McClatchey AI, Jacks T. Regulation of the neuroﬁbromatosis type 2
tumor suppressor protein, merlin, by adhesion and growth arrest stimuli. J Biol
Chem 1998; 273: 7757–7764.

54 Sainio M, Zhao F, Heiska L, Turunen O, den Bakker M, Zwarthoff E et al.
Neuroﬁbromatosis 2 tumor suppressor protein colocalizes with ezrin and CD44
and associates with actin-containing cytoskeleton. J Cell Sci 1997; 110(Pt 18):
2249–2260.

55 Herrlich P, Morrison H, Sleeman J, Orian-Rousseau V, Konig H, Weg-Remers S
et al. CD44 acts both as a growth- and invasiveness-promoting molecule and
as a tumor-suppressing cofactor. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2000; 910: 106–118
discussion 18-20.

56 Bai Y, Liu YJ, Wang H, Xu Y, Stamenkovic I, Yu Q. Inhibition of the hyaluronan-
CD44 interaction by merlin contributes to the tumor-suppressor activity
of merlin. Oncogene 2007; 26: 836–850.

57 Bourguignon LY, Gilad E, Peyrollier K, Brightman A, Swanson RA. Hyaluronan-
CD44 interaction stimulates Rac1 signaling and PKN gamma kinase activation
leading to cytoskeleton function and cell migration in astrocytes. J Neurochem
2007; 101: 1002–1017.

58 Oliferenko S, Kaverina I, Small JV, Huber LA. Hyaluronic acid (HA) binding to
CD44 activates Rac1 and induces lamellipodia outgrowth. J Cell Biol 2000; 148:
1159–1164.

59 Bourguignon LY, Zhu H, Shao L, Chen YW. CD44 interaction with tiam1 promotes
Rac1 signaling and hyaluronic acid-mediated breast tumor cell migration. J Biol
Chem 2000; 275: 1829–1838.

60 Sherman LS, Gutmann DH. Merlin: hanging tumor suppression on the Rac.

Trends Cell Biol 2001; 11: 442–444.

61 Kaempchen K, Mielke K, Utermark T, Langmesser S, Hanemann CO. Upregulation
of the Rac1/JNK signaling pathway in primary human schwannoma cells. Hum
Mol Genet 2003; 12: 1211–1221.

62 Nakai Y, Zheng Y, MacCollin M, Ratner N. Temporal control of Rac in Schwann
cell-axon interaction is disrupted in NF2-mutant schwannoma cells. J Neurosci
2006; 26: 3390–3395.

63 Flaiz C, Ammoun S, Biebl A, Hanemann CO. Altered adhesive structures and their
relation to RhoGTPase activation in merlin-deﬁcient Schwannoma. Brain Pathol
2009; 19: 27–38.

64 Okada T, Lopez-Lago M, Giancotti FG. Merlin/NF-2 mediates contact inhibition of
growth by suppressing recruitment of Rac to the plasma membrane. J Cell Biol
2005; 171: 361–371.

65 Kissil JL, Wilker EW, Johnson KC, Eckman MS, Yaffe MB, Jacks T. Merlin, the
product of the Nf2 tumor suppressor gene, is an inhibitor of the p21-activated
kinase, Pak1. Mol Cell 2003; 12: 841–849.

66 Kissil JL, Johnson KC, Eckman MS, Jacks T. Merlin phosphorylation by p21-
activated kinase 2 and effects of phosphorylation on merlin localization. J Biol
Chem 2002; 277: 10394–10399.

67 Thaxton C, Lopera J, Bott M, Baldwin ME, Kalidas P, Fernandez-Valle C.
Phosphorylation of the NF2 tumor suppressor in Schwann cells is mediated
by Cdc42-Pak and requires paxillin binding. Mol Cell Neurosci 2007; 34:
231–242.

68 Sherman LS, Rizvi TA, Karyala S, Ratner N. CD44 enhances neuregulin signaling

by Schwann cells. J Cell Biol 2000; 150: 1071–1084.

69 Ahmad Z, Brown CM, Patel AK, Ryan AF, Ongkeko R, Doherty JK. Merlin knock-
down in human Schwann cells: clues to vestibular schwannoma tumorigenesis.
Otol Neurotol 2010; 31: 460–466.

70 Hansen MR, Roehm PC, Chatterjee P, Green SH. Constitutive neuregulin-1/ErbB
signaling contributes to human vestibular schwannoma proliferation. Glia 2006;
53: 593–600.

71 Wickremesekera A, Hovens CM, Kaye AH. Expression of ErbB-1 and 2 in vestibular

schwannomas. J Clin Neurosci 2007; 14: 1199–1206.

72 Thaxton C, Lopera J, Bott M, Fernandez-Valle C. Neuregulin and laminin stimu-
late phosphorylation of the NF2 tumor suppressor in Schwann cells by distinct
protein kinase A and p21-activated kinase-dependent pathways. Oncogene 2008;
27: 2705–2715.

73 Garcia C, Gutmann DH. Nf2/Merlin controls spinal cord neural progenitor

function in a Rac1/ErbB2-dependent manner. PLoS One 2014; 9: e97320.

74 Lallemand D, Manent J, Couvelard A, Watilliaux A, Siena M, Chareyre F et al.
Merlin regulates transmembrane receptor accumulation and signaling at the
plasma membrane in primary mouse Schwann cells and in human schwanno-
mas. Oncogene 2009; 28: 854–865.

75 Ammoun S, Schmid MC, Ristic N, Zhou L, Hilton D, Ercolano E et al. The role of
insulin-like growth factors signaling in merlin-deﬁcient human schwannomas.
Glia 2012; 60: 1721–1733.

76 Ammoun S, Flaiz C, Ristic N, Schuldt J, Hanemann CO. Dissecting and targeting
the growth factor-dependent and growth factor-independent extracellular
signal-regulated kinase pathway in human schwannoma. Cancer Res 2008; 68:
5236–5245.

77 Ammoun S, Cunliffe CH, Allen JC, Chiriboga L, Giancotti FG, Zagzag D et al. ErbB/
lapatinib in vestibular

HER receptor activation and preclinical efﬁcacy of
schwannoma. Neuro-oncology 2010; 12: 834–843.

78 Fernandez-Valle C, Tang Y, Ricard J, Rodenas-Ruano A, Taylor A, Hackler E et al.
Paxillin binds schwannomin and regulates its density-dependent localization
and effect on cell morphology. Nat Genet 2002; 31: 354–362.

79 Obremski VJ, Hall AM, Fernandez-Valle C. Merlin, the neuroﬁbromatosis type 2
gene product, and beta1 integrin associate in isolated and differentiating
Schwann cells. J Neurobiol 1998; 37: 487–501.

80 Lopez-Lago MA, Okada T, Murillo MM, Socci N, Giancotti FG. Loss of
the
constitutively
activates integrin-dependent mTORC1 signaling. Mol Cell Biol 2009; 29:
4235–4249.

encoding merlin,

gene NF2,

tumor

suppressor

81 Bashour AM, Meng JJ, Ip W, MacCollin M, Ratner N. The neuroﬁbromatosis type 2
gene product, merlin, reverses the F-actin cytoskeletal defects in primary human
Schwannoma cells. Mol Cell Biol 2002; 22: 1150–1157.

82 Pelton PD, Sherman LS, Rizvi TA, Marchionni MA, Wood P, Friedman RA et al.
Rufﬂing membrane, stress ﬁber, cell spreading and proliferation abnormalities in
human Schwannoma cells. Oncogene 1998; 17: 2195–2209.

83 Petrilli A, Copik A, Posadas M, Chang LS, Welling DB, Giovannini M et al. LIM
domain kinases as potential therapeutic targets for neuroﬁbromatosis type 2.
Oncogene 2014; 33: 3571–3582.

84 Bosco EE, Nakai Y, Hennigan RF, Ratner N, Zheng Y. NF2-deﬁcient cells depend
on the Rac1-canonical Wnt signaling pathway to promote the loss of contact
inhibition of proliferation. Oncogene 2010; 29: 2540–2549.

85 Zhou L, Ercolano E, Ammoun S, Schmid MC, Barczyk MA, Hanemann CO.
Merlin-deﬁcient human tumors show loss of contact inhibition and activation of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling linked to the PDGFR/Src and Rac/PAK pathways.
Neoplasia 2011; 13: 1101–1112.

86 Tikoo A, Varga M, Ramesh V, Gusella J, Maruta H. An anti-Ras function of neu-
roﬁbromatosis type 2 gene product (NF2/Merlin). J Biol Chem 1994; 269:
23387–23390.

87 Morrison H, Sperka T, Manent J, Giovannini M, Ponta H, Herrlich P. Merlin/
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 suppresses growth by inhibiting the activation of Ras
and Rac. Cancer Res 2007; 67: 520–527.

88 Li N, Batzer A, Daly R, Yajnik V, Skolnik E, Chardin P et al. Guanine-nucleotide-
releasing factor hSos1 binds to Grb2 and links receptor tyrosine kinases to Ras
signalling. Nature 1993; 363: 85–88.

89 Geissler KJ, Jung MJ, Riecken LB, Sperka T, Cui Y, Schacke S et al. Regulation of
Son of sevenless by the membrane-actin linker protein ezrin. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2013; 110: 20587–20592.

Oncogene (2015) 1 – 12

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

90 Ammoun S, Provenzano L, Zhou L, Barczyk M, Evans K, Hilton DA et al. Axl/Gas6/
NFkappaB signalling in schwannoma pathological proliferation, adhesion and
survival. Oncogene 2014; 33: 336–346.

91 Houshmandi SS, Emnett RJ, Giovannini M, Gutmann DH. The neuroﬁbromatosis
regulates glial cell growth in an ErbB2- and Src-

2 protein, merlin,
dependent manner. Mol Cell Biol 2009; 29: 1472–1486.

92 Ammoun S, Schmid MC, Zhou L, Hilton DA, Barczyk M, Hanemann CO. The p53/
mouse double minute 2 homolog complex deregulation in merlin-deﬁcient
tumours. Mol Oncol 2015; 9: 236–248.

93 Hilton DA, Ristic N, Hanemann CO. Activation of ERK, AKT and JNK signalling

pathways in human schwannomas in situ. Histopathology 2009; 55: 744–749.

94 Rong R, Tang X, Gutmann DH, Ye K. Neuroﬁbromatosis 2 (NF2) tumor suppressor
merlin inhibits phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase through binding to PIKE-L. Proc Natl
Acade Sci USA 2004; 101: 18200–18205.

95 Jacob A, Lee TX, Neff BA, Miller S, Welling B, Chang LS. Phosphatidylinositol 3-
kinase/AKT pathway activation in human vestibular schwannoma. Otol Neurotol
2008; 29: 58–68.

96 Mawrin C, Sasse T, Kirches E, Kropf S, Schneider T, Grimm C et al. Different
activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase and Akt signaling is associated
with aggressive phenotype of human meningiomas. Clin Cancer Res 2005; 11:
4074–4082.

97 Ye K. Phosphorylation of merlin regulates its stability and tumor suppressive

activity. Cell Adh Migr 2007; 1: 196–198.

98 Li Y, Tennekoon GI, Birnbaum M, Marchionni MA, Rutkowski JL. Neuregulin
signaling through a PI3K/Akt/Bad pathway in Schwann cell survival. Mol Cell
Neurosci 2001; 17: 761–767.

99 Petrilli AM, Fuse MA, Donnan MS, Bott M, Sparrow NA, Tondera D et al.
A chemical biology approach identiﬁed PI3K as a potential therapeutic target for
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Am J Transl Res 2014; 6: 471–493.

100 Lee TX, Packer MD, Huang J, Akhmametyeva EM, Kulp SK, Chen CS et al. Growth
inhibitory and anti-tumour activities of OSU-03012, a novel PDK-1 inhibitor, on
vestibular schwannoma and malignant schwannoma cells. Eur J Cancer 2009; 45:
1709–1720.

101 Johnson MD, Okedli E, Woodard A, Toms SA, Allen GS. Evidence for phospha-
tidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt-p7S6K pathway activation and transduction of mito-
genic signals by platelet-derived growth factor in meningioma cells. J Neurosurg
2002; 97: 668–675.

102 Bush ML, Oblinger J, Brendel V, Santarelli G, Huang J, Akhmametyeva EM et al.
AR42, a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor, as a potential therapy for vestibular
schwannomas and meningiomas. Neuro-oncology 2011; 13: 983–999.

103 Chen CS, Weng SC, Tseng PH, Lin HP, Chen CS. Histone acetylation-independent
effect of histone deacetylase inhibitors on Akt through the reshufﬂing of protein
phosphatase 1 complexes. J Biol Chem 2005; 280: 38879–38887.

104 Jacob A, Oblinger J, Bush ML, Brendel V, Santarelli G, Chaudhury AR et al.
Preclinical validation of AR42, a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor, as treatment
for vestibular schwannomas. Laryngoscope 2012; 122: 174–189.

105 Burns SS, Akhmametyeva EM, Oblinger JL, Bush ML, Huang J, Senner V et al.
Histone deacetylase inhibitor AR-42 differentially affects cell-cycle transit in
meningeal
inhibiting NF2-deﬁcient
potently
meningioma growth. Cancer Res 2013; 73: 792–803.

and meningioma

cells,

106 Agnihotri S, Gugel

I, Remke M, Bornemann A, Pantazis G, Mack SC et al.
Gene-expression proﬁling elucidates molecular signaling networks that can be
therapeutically targeted in vestibular schwannoma. J Neurosurg 2014; 121:
1434–1445.

107 James MF, Han S, Polizzano C, Plotkin SR, Manning BD, Stemmer-Rachamimov
AO et al. NF2/merlin is a novel negative regulator of mTOR complex 1, and
activation of mTORC1 is associated with meningioma and schwannoma growth.
Mol Cell Biol 2009; 29: 4250–4261.

108 Giovannini M, Bonne NX, Vitte J, Chareyre F, Tanaka K, Adams R et al. mTORC1
inhibition delays growth of neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 schwannoma. Neuro-
oncology 2014; 16: 493–504.

109 O'Reilly KE, Rojo F, She QB, Solit D, Mills GB, Smith D et al. mTOR inhibition
induces upstream receptor tyrosine kinase signaling and activates Akt. Cancer
Res 2006; 66: 1500–1508.

110 Cloughesy TF, Yoshimoto K, Nghiemphu P, Brown K, Dang J, Zhu S et al.
Antitumor activity of rapamycin in a Phase I trial for patients with recurrent
PTEN-deﬁcient glioblastoma. PLoS Med 2008; 5: e8.

111 James MF, Stivison E, Beauchamp R, Han S, Li H, Wallace MR et al. Regulation of
mTOR complex 2 signaling in neuroﬁbromatosis 2-deﬁcient target cell types. Mol
Cancer Res 2012; 10: 649–659.

112 Petrilli A, Bott M, Fernandez-Valle C. Inhibition of SIRT2 in merlin/NF2-mutant

Schwann cells triggers necrosis. Oncotarget 2013; 4: 2354–2365.

113 Muranen T, Gronholm M, Lampin A, Lallemand D, Zhao F, Giovannini M et al. The
tumor suppressor merlin interacts with microtubules and modulates Schwann
cell microtubule cytoskeleton. Hum Mol Genet 2007; 16: 1742–1751.

NF2 in tumor biology
AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

11

114 Bensenor LB, Barlan K, Rice SE, Fehon RG, Gelfand VI. Microtubule-mediated
transport of the tumor-suppressor protein Merlin and its mutants. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. 2010; 107: 7311–7316.

115 Pan D. The hippo signaling pathway in development and cancer. Dev Cell 2010;

19: 491–505.

116 Piccolo S, Dupont S, Cordenonsi M. The Biology of YAP/TAZ: Hippo signaling

and beyond. Physiol Rev 2014; 94: 1287–1312.

117 Kodaka M, Hata Y. The mammalian Hippo pathway: regulation and function of

YAP1 and TAZ. Cell Mol Life Sci 2014; 72: 285–306.

118 Barron DA, Kagey JD. The role of the Hippo pathway in human disease and

tumorigenesis. Clin Transl Med 2014; 3: 25.

119 Boin A, Couvelard A, Couderc C, Brito I, Filipescu D, Kalamarides M et al. Pro-
teomic screening identiﬁes a YAP-driven signaling network linked to tumor cell
proliferation in human schwannomas. Neuro-oncology 2014; 16: 1196–1209.

120 Striedinger K, VandenBerg SR, Baia GS, McDermott MW, Gutmann DH, Lal A. The
neuroﬁbromatosis 2 tumor suppressor gene product, merlin, regulates human
meningioma cell growth by signaling through YAP. Neoplasia 2008; 10: 1204–1212.
121 Li W, You L, Cooper J, Schiavon G, Pepe-Caprio A, Zhou L et al. Merlin/NF2
suppresses tumorigenesis by inhibiting the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4(DCAF1) in
the nucleus. Cell 2010; 140: 477–490.

122 Mori T, Gotoh S, Shirakawa M, Hakoshima T. Structural basis of DDB1-and-Cullin
4-associated Factor 1 (DCAF1) recognition by merlin/NF2 and its implication in
tumorigenesis by CD44-mediated inhibition of merlin suppression of DCAF1
function. Genes Cells 2014; 19: 603–619.

123 Cooper J, Li W, You L, Schiavon G, Pepe-Caprio A, Zhou L et al. Merlin/NF2
functions upstream of the nuclear E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4DCAF1 to suppress
oncogenic gene expression. Sci Signal 2011; 4: pt6.

124 Li W, Cooper J, Zhou L, Yang C, Erdjument-Bromage H, Zagzag D et al. Merlin/
NF2 loss-driven tumorigenesis linked to CRL4(DCAF1)-mediated inhibition of the
hippo pathway kinases Lats1 and 2 in the nucleus. Cancer Cell 2014; 26: 48–60.
125 Yin F, Yu J, Zheng Y, Chen Q, Zhang N, Pan D. Spatial organization of Hippo
signaling at the plasma membrane mediated by the tumor suppressor Merlin/
NF2. Cell 2013; 154: 1342–1355.

126 Flaiz C, Utermark T, Parkinson DB, Poetsch A, Hanemann CO. Impaired inter-
cellular adhesion and immature adherens junctions in merlin-deﬁcient human
primary schwannoma cells. Glia 2008; 56: 506–515.

127 Low BC, Pan CQ, Shivashankar GV, Bershadsky A, Sudol M, Sheetz M. YAP/TAZ as
mechanosensors and mechanotransducers in regulating organ size and
tumor growth. FEBS Lett 2014; 588: 2663–2670.

128 Zhao B, Wei X, Li W, Udan RS, Yang Q, Kim J et al. Inactivation of YAP onco-
protein by the Hippo pathway is involved in cell contact inhibition and tissue
growth control. Genes Dev 2007; 21: 2747–2761.

129 Dupont S, Morsut L, Aragona M, Enzo E, Giulitti S, Cordenonsi M et al. Role of

YAP/TAZ in mechanotransduction. Nature 2011; 474: 179–183.

130 Aragona M, Panciera T, Manfrin A, Giulitti S, Michielin F, Elvassore N et al.
A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP/TAZ reg-
ulation by actin-processing factors. Cell 2013; 154: 1047–1059.

131 Wada K, Itoga K, Okano T, Yonemura S, Sasaki H. Hippo pathway regulation by

cell morphology and stress ﬁbers. Development 2011; 138: 3907–3914.

132 Boggiano JC, Fehon RG. Growth control by committee: intercellular junctions,
cell polarity, and the cytoskeleton regulate Hippo signaling. Dev Cell 2012; 22:
695–702.

133 Robinson BS, Moberg KH. Cell-cell junctions: alpha-catenin and E-cadherin help

fence in Yap1. Curr Biol 2011; 21: R890–R892.

134 Schroeder MC, Halder G. Regulation of the Hippo pathway by cell architecture

and mechanical signals. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2012; 23: 803–811.

135 Yi C, Shen Z, Stemmer-Rachamimov A, Dawany N, Troutman S, Showe LC et al.
The p130 isoform of angiomotin is required for Yap-mediated hepatic epithelial
cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. Sci Signal 2013; 6: ra77.

136 Yi C, Troutman S, Fera D, Stemmer-Rachamimov A, Avila JL, Christian N et al. A
tight junction-associated Merlin-angiomotin complex mediates Merlin's regula-
tion of mitogenic signaling and tumor suppressive functions. Cancer Cell 2011;
19: 527–540.

137 Pass HI, Vogelzang N, Hahn S, Carbone M. Malignant pleural mesothelioma. Curr

Probl Cancer 2004; 28: 93–174.

138 Sekido Y, Pass HI, Bader S, Mew DJ, Christman MF, Gazdar AF et al. Neuroﬁ-
bromatosis type 2 (NF2) gene is somatically mutated in mesothelioma but not in
lung cancer. Cancer Res 1995; 55: 1227–1231.

139 Cheng JQ, Lee WC, Klein MA, Cheng GZ, Jhanwar SC, Testa JR. Frequent muta-
tions of NF2 and allelic loss from chromosome band 22q12 in malignant
mesothelioma: evidence for a two-hit mechanism of NF2 inactivation. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 1999; 24: 238–242.

140 Baser ME, De Rienzo A, Altomare D, Balsara BR, Hedrick NM, Gutmann DH et al.
Neuroﬁbromatosis 2 and malignant mesothelioma. Neurology 2002; 59:
290–291.

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Oncogene (2015) 1 – 12

12

NF2 in tumor biology
AM Petrilli and C Fernández-Valle

141 Thurneysen C, Opitz I, Kurtz S, Weder W, Stahel RA, Felley-Bosco E. Functional
inactivation of NF2/merlin in human mesothelioma. Lung Cancer 2009; 64:
140–147.

142 Fleury-Feith J, Lecomte C, Renier A, Matrat M, Kheuang L, Abramowski V et al.
Hemizygosity of Nf2 is associated with increased susceptibility to asbestos-
induced peritoneal tumours. Oncogene 2003; 22: 3799–3805.

143 Altomare DA, Vaslet CA, Skele KL, De Rienzo A, Devarajan K, Jhanwar SC et al.
A mouse model recapitulating molecular features of human mesothelioma.
Cancer Res 2005; 65: 8090–8095.

144 Xiao GH, Gallagher R, Shetler J, Skele K, Altomare DA, Pestell RG et al. The NF2
tumor suppressor gene product, merlin, inhibits cell proliferation and cell cycle
progression by repressing cyclin D1 expression. Mol Cell Biol 2005; 25:
2384–2394.

145 Altomare DA, You H, Xiao GH, Ramos-Nino ME, Skele KL, De Rienzo A et al.
Human and mouse mesotheliomas exhibit elevated AKT/PKB activity, which can
be targeted pharmacologically to inhibit tumor cell growth. Oncogene 2005; 24:
6080–6089.

146 Lallemand D, Curto M, Saotome I, Giovannini M, McClatchey AI. NF2 deﬁciency
promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis by destabilizing adherens junctions.
Genes Dev 2003; 17: 1090–1100.

147 Yokoyama T, Osada H, Murakami H, Tatematsu Y, Taniguchi T, Kondo Y et al.
YAP1 is involved in mesothelioma development and negatively regulated by
Merlin through phosphorylation. Carcinogenesis 2008; 29: 2139–2146.

148 Murakami H, Mizuno T, Taniguchi T, Fujii M, Ishiguro F, Fukui T et al. LATS2 is a
tumor suppressor gene of malignant mesothelioma. Cancer Res 2011; 71:
873–883.

149 Smole Z, Thoma CR, Applegate KT, Duda M, Gutbrodt KL, Danuser G et al. Tumor
suppressor NF2/Merlin is a microtubule stabilizer. Cancer Res 2014; 74: 353–362.
150 Poulikakos PI, Xiao GH, Gallagher R, Jablonski S, Jhanwar SC, Testa JR.
Re-expression of the tumor suppressor NF2/merlin inhibits invasiveness in
mesothelioma cells and negatively regulates FAK. Oncogene 2006; 25:
5960–5968.

151 McClatchey AI, Saotome I, Mercer K, Crowley D, Gusella JF, Bronson RT et al. Mice
heterozygous for a mutation at the Nf2 tumor suppressor locus develop a range
of highly metastatic tumors. Genes Dev 1998; 12: 1121–1133.

152 Bianchi AB, Hara T, Ramesh V, Gao J, Klein-Szanto AJ, Morin F et al. Mutations in
the neuroﬁbromatosis 2 gene in multiple human

isoforms of

transcript
tumour types. Nat Genet 1994; 6: 185–192.

153 Yoo NJ, Park SW, Lee SH. Mutational analysis of tumour suppressor gene
NF2 in common solid cancers and acute leukaemias. Pathology 2012; 44:
29–32.

154 Baylin SB, Herman JG, Graff JR, Vertino PM, Issa JP. Alterations in DNA methy-

lation: a fundamental aspect of neoplasia. Adv Cancer Res 1998; 72: 141–196.

155 Esteller M. CpG island hypermethylation and tumor suppressor genes: a

booming present, a brighter future. Oncogene 2002; 21: 5427–5440.

156 Larsson J, Ohishi M, Garrison B, Aspling M, Janzen V, Adams GB et al. Nf2/merlin
regulates hematopoietic stem cell behavior by altering microenvironmental
architecture. Cell Stem Cell 2008; 3: 221–227.

157 Ramalho-Santos M, Yoon S, Matsuzaki Y, Mulligan RC, Melton DA.

‘Stemness’:
transcriptional proﬁling of embryonic and adult stem cells. Science 2002; 298:
597–600.

158 Hiemer SE, Varelas X. Stem cell regulation by the Hippo pathway. Biochim

Biophys Acta 2013; 1830: 2323–2334.

159 Ramos A, Camargo FD. The Hippo signaling pathway and stem cell biology.

Trends Cell Biol 2012; 22: 339–346.

160 Zhao B, Tumaneng K, Guan KL. The Hippo pathway in organ size control, tissue

regeneration and stem cell self-renewal. Nat Cell Biol 2011; 13: 877–883.

161 Yaegashi S, Sachse R, Ohuchi N, Mori S, Sekiya T. Low incidence of a nucleotide
sequence alteration of the neuroﬁbromatosis 2 gene in human breast cancers.
Jpn J Cancer Res 1995; 86: 929–933.

162 Allison KH, Sledge GW Jr.. Heterogeneity and Cancer. Oncology 2014; 28:

772–778.

163 Sjoblom T, Jones S, Wood LD, Parsons DW, Lin J, Barber TD et al. The consensus
coding sequences of human breast and colorectal cancers. Science 2006; 314:
268–274.

164 Shrestha Y, Schafer EJ, Boehm JS, Thomas SR, He F, Du J et al. PAK1 is a breast
cancer oncogene that coordinately activates MAPK and MET signaling. Oncogene
2012; 31: 3397–3408.

165 Arakawa H, Hayashi N, Nagase H, Ogawa M, Nakamura Y. Alternative splicing of
the NF2 gene and its mutation analysis of breast and colorectal cancers. Hum
Mol Genet 1994; 3: 565–568.

166 Rustgi AK, Xu L, Pinney D, Sterner C, Beauchamp R, Schmidt S et al. Neuroﬁ-
bromatosis 2 gene in human colorectal cancer. Cancer Genet Cytogenet 1995; 84:
24–26.

167 Cacev T, Aralica G, Loncar B, Kapitanovic S. Loss of NF2/Merlin expression in

advanced sporadic colorectal cancer. Cell Oncol 2014; 37: 69–77.

168 Pineau P, Marchio A, Nagamori S, Seki S, Tiollais P, Dejean A. Homozygous
deletion scanning in hepatobiliary tumor cell lines reveals alternative pathways
for liver carcinogenesis. Hepatology 2003; 37: 852–861.

169 Benhamouche S, Curto M, Saotome I, Gladden AB, Liu CH, Giovannini M et al.
Nf2/Merlin controls progenitor homeostasis and tumorigenesis in the liver.
Genes Dev 2010; 24: 1718–1730.

170 Zhou D, Conrad C, Xia F, Park JS, Payer B, Yin Y et al. Mst1 and Mst2 maintain
hepatocyte quiescence and suppress hepatocellular carcinoma development
through inactivation of the Yap1 oncogene. Cancer Cell 2009; 16: 425–438.

171 Song H, Mak KK, Topol L, Yun K, Hu J, Garrett L et al. Mammalian Mst1 and Mst2
kinases play essential roles in organ size control and tumor suppression. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2010; 107: 1431–1436.

172 Lu L, Li Y, Kim SM, Bossuyt W, Liu P, Qiu Q et al. Hippo signaling is a potent
in vivo growth and tumor suppressor pathway in the mammalian liver. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2010; 107: 1437–1442.

173 Zhang N, Bai H, David KK, Dong J, Zheng Y, Cai J et al. The Merlin/NF2 tumor
suppressor functions through the YAP oncoprotein to regulate tissue home-
ostasis in mammals. Dev Cell 2010; 19: 27–38.

174 Kawana Y, Ichikawa T, Suzuki H, Ueda T, Komiya A, Ichikawa Y et al. Loss of
heterozygosity at 7q31.1 and 12p13-12 in advanced prostate cancer. Prostate
2002; 53: 60–64.

175 Malhotra A, Shibata Y, Hall IM, Dutta A. Chromosomal structural variations during
progression of a prostate epithelial cell
line to a malignant metastatic state
inactivate the NF2, NIPSNAP1, UGT2B17, and LPIN2 genes. Cancer Biol Ther 2013;
14: 840–852.

176 Horiguchi A, Zheng R, Shen R, Nanus DM. Inactivation of the NF2 tumor suppressor

protein merlin in DU145 prostate cancer cells. Prostate 2008; 68: 975–984.

177 Lau YK, Murray LB, Houshmandi SS, Xu Y, Gutmann DH, Yu Q. Merlin is a potent

inhibitor of glioma growth. Cancer Res 2008; 68: 5733–5742.

178 Morales FC, Molina JR, Hayashi Y, Georgescu MM. Overexpression of ezrin inacti-

vates NF2 tumor suppressor in glioblastoma. Neuro-oncology 2010; 12: 528–539.

179 Guerrero PA, Yin W, Camacho L, Marchetti D. Oncogenic role of Merlin/NF2 in
glioblastoma. Oncogene 2014; e-pub ahead of print 21 July 2014; doi:10.1038/
onc.2014.185.

180 Sheikh HA, Tometsko M, Niehouse L, Aldeeb D, Swalsky P, Finkelstein S et al.
tumor

Molecular genotyping of medullary thyroid carcinoma can predict
recurrence. Am J Surg Pathol 2004; 28: 101–106.

181 Murray LB, Lau YK, Yu Q. Merlin is a negative regulator of human melanoma

growth. PLoS One 2012; 7: e43295.

182 Frontzek F, Nitzlaff S, Horstmann M, Schwab A, Stock C. Functional

inter-
dependence of NHE1 and merlin in human melanoma cells. Biochem Cell Biol
2014; 92: 530–540.

183 Shalem O, Sanjana NE, Hartenian E, Shi X, Scott DA, Mikkelsen TS et al. Genome-
scale CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screening in human cells. Science 2014; 343: 84–87.
184 Reinhold WC, Varma S, Sousa F, Sunshine M, Abaan OD, Davis SR et al. NCI-60
whole exome sequencing and pharmacological CellMiner analyses. PLoS One
2014; 9: e101670.

185 Garnett MJ, Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD, Dastur A, Lau KW et al.
Systematic identiﬁcation of genomic markers of drug sensitivity in cancer cells.
Nature 2012; 483: 570–575.

186 Yang W, Soares J, Greninger P, Edelman EJ, Lightfoot H, Forbes S et al. Genomics
of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC): a resource for therapeutic biomarker
discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic Acids Res 2013; 41(Database issue): D955–D961.
187 Nazarian R, Shi H, Wang Q, Kong X, Koya RC, Lee H et al. Melanomas acquire
resistance to B-RAF(V600E) inhibition by RTK or N-RAS upregulation. Nature
2010; 468: 973–977.

188 Sabha N, Au K, Agnihotri S, Singh S, Mangat R, Guha A et al. Investigation of
the in vitro therapeutic efﬁcacy of nilotinib in immortalized human NF2-null
vestibular schwannoma cells. PLoS One 2012; 7: e39412.

189 Mukherjee J, Kamnasaran D, Balasubramaniam A, Radovanovic I, Zadeh G,
Kiehl TR et al. Human schwannomas express activated platelet-derived growth
factor receptors and c-kit and are growth inhibited by Gleevec (Imatinib
Mesylate). Cancer Res 2009; 69: 5099–5107.

190 Ammoun S, Schmid MC, Triner J, Manley P, Hanemann CO. Nilotinib alone or in
combination with selumetinib is a drug candidate for neuroﬁbromatosis type 2.
Neuro-oncology 2011; 13: 759–766.

Oncogene (2015) 1 – 12

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

