03/2014

ChemMedChem, European in origin but international in scope,
deals with all aspects of drug discovery. It is co-owned by
Chemistry Publishing Society Europe (ChemPubSoc Europe) and is published by Wiley-VCH.
Contributions in ChemMedChem cover medicinal and pharmaceutical sciences, drug design, drug
development and delivery, molecular modeling, combinatorial chemistry, target validation, lead
generation, and ADMET studies, that is, research from the overlapping areas between biology,
chemistry, and medicine. ChemMedChem publishes Communications and Full Papers, as well as
Reviews, Minireviews, Highlights, Concepts, Essays, Book Reviews, and occasionally Conference
Reports. Authors can submit manuscripts to ChemMedChem online through our homepage (see
over) by clicking on “Submit an Article” and following the simple instructions.

Discover this journal online at:

wileyonlinelibrary.com

Most of the articles in this issue have already appeared online on wileyonlinelibrary.com.
See www.chemmedchem.org under Early View

CHEMMEDCHEM
EDITORIAL

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.201400084

Targeting Epigenetics in Drug Discovery
Antonello Mai*[a]

Epigenetics has gained ground in recent years within the

drug discovery and medicinal chemistry research communities,
as an increased understanding
of the role of epigenetics in
various diseases has emerged
and epigenetic targets have
been validated for therapy.

Epigenetics has gained
ground in recent years
within the drug
discovery and medicinal
chemistry research
communities …

This Special

Issue of Chem-
MedChem on Epigenetics and
Drug Discovery brings together a diverse group of papers on
a range of topics from bromodomain inhibitors and long non-

[a] Prof. A. Mai

Department of Drug Chemistry & Technologies
Sapienza University of Rome
P. le Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome (Italy)
E-mail: antonello.mai@uniroma1.it

coding RNAs to classic agents targeting histone deacetylases
(HDACs) and less typical HDAC inhibitors, such as the chimeric
compounds designed by Greg Thatcher et al. and featured on
the Front Cover of the issue that both target HDACs and act as
selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs).

Epigenetics is related to but distinct from genetics. The classi-

cal definition of epigenetics involves the mitotically and/or
meiotically heritable changes in gene activity that do not im-
plicate alterations in DNA sequence. Today, this definition
should be expanded to the study of regulation of gene activity
that includes heritable and non-heritable alterations. Thus,
epigenetic events also comprise of,
for instance, reversible
changes that can be induced by environmental factors at dif-
ferent points in life.

Epigenetics focuses on at least five series of events involving

changes of chromatin at molecular levels: DNA modifications,

 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemMedChem 2014, 9, 415 – 417 415

CHEMMEDCHEM
EDITORIAL

histone modifications, histone variants, noncoding RNAs, and
nucleosome remodeling. Epigenetic control of transcription is
essential to drive cells towards their normal phenotype, and
epigenetic deregulation can lead to initiation and progression
of human diseases, including cancer, inflammation, cardiovas-
cular and neurodegenerative diseases, and metabolic disor-
ders.

DNA methylation is controlled by the DNA methyltransferas-

es DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B, three enzymes that catalyze
the transfer of a methyl group from the substrate S-adenosyl-
l-methionine (AdoMet) to the C5-position of cytosine, predom-
inantly in the CpG islands. DNA methylation is essential and
plays a crucial role in cell development and many other phys-
iological events, but aberrant DNA methylation can lead to ge-
nomic instability and silencing of tumor-suppressor genes with
cancer onset and development. Even though DNMT was the
first epigenetic target investigated for which inhibitors were
identified, only two drugs (azacytidine and decitabine, both
nucleoside inhibitors), used for the treatment of myelodyspla-
sia, have been approved to date by the US Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA). Furthermore, only a small number of non-
nucleoside DNMT inhibitors have been reported so far, and
these have been typically characterized by low potency and/or
chemical or metabolic instability. In the present Special Issue,
two research articles address this topic: Medina-Franco et al.
discuss the repositioning of olsalazine, a known anti-inflamma-
tory drug, as a novel DNA hypomethylating agent, and Ari-
mondo and Cantagrel describe a multifaceted medicinal
chemistry study around SGI-1027, a valuable non-nucleoside
DNMT inhibitor.

Chromatin remodeling mainly involves three types of pro-

teins: writers, which add epigenetic marks such as acetyl or
methyl groups to histones (and also to non-histone proteins)
through covalent bonds; erasers, which remove these marks
from the lysine residues of histones; and readers, which read
and recognize the epigenetic marks on histone tails thus acti-
vating appropriate signaling pathways. Really, the concept of
the acetylome should be extended to the “acylome”, since we
now know that acylations other than acetylation can constitute
epigenetic marks at the lysine e–amino groups; this concept of
the expanding acylome is nicely covered in this Special Issue
by Christian A. Olsen.

Among the writers, histone acetyltransferases (HATs) catalyze

the transfer of acetyl groups from acetyl-CoA to the e–amino
groups of lysine residues in histones, as well non-histone pro-
teins, and their aberrant activity can lead to leukemia and
other cancers. Writers such as HATs and histone methyltransfer-
ases (HMTs) are the subject of intense research, and three
Communications in the Special Issue aim at elucidating further
their roles in disease through novel assays (A. Jeltsch), chemi-

www.chemmedchem.org

cal probe development (J. Jin), and inhibitor design for p300
HAT (D. Rotili, A. Mai) and Tip60 HAT (Y. G. Zheng).

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are without a doubt the most

famous class of eraser enzymes, and two HDAC inhibitors (vori-
nostat and romidepsin) have been approved by the US FDA
for the treatment of the refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
After the boom over the last decade of research identifying
HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) for cancer therapy, and in light of
emerging skepticism on the therapeutic value of HDACis as
single agents, the focus of this field is now turning towards dif-
ferent directions.
In particular, hot topics within the HDACi
field involve: 1) the dissection of their mechanisms of action
(see papers from L. Zhang, W. Xu, and X. Li); 2) the targeting of
the multi-protein- and multi-HDAC-containing complexes
rather than the deacetylases themselves (see papers from
M. W. Van Dyke, and H.-J. Kim, G. Han); 3) the identification of
isoform-selective (see papers from T. Suzuki, N. Miyata, and F.
Thaler, C. Mercurio) or non-hydroxamate (see the research
paper from C. A. Olsen et al.) inhibitors; 4) the design of hy-
brids molecules with both HDAC inhibitory and another che-
motherapeutic activity, such as estrogen receptor modulation
(G. R. J. Thatcher); and 5) the design of HDACi for diseases
beyond cancer, such as malaria (see the Full Paper from K. T.
Andrews, T. Kurz et al.).

Another important class of erasers is the lysine demethylases

(comprising the lysine-specific demethylases and the Jumonji-
containing enzymes), for which aberrant activity or overexpres-
sion has been related to the onset and development of cancer,
and the number of studies seeking to identify selective inhibi-
tors of these enzymes has grown in recent years. In this Special
Issue, Schofield and Kawamura report the improved potency
and selectivity in cells of the n-octyl ester of IOX-1, a known
Jmj-C inhibitor previously reported by the same group.

In the last few years, many studies have been devoted to the

investigation of reader enzymes rather than the classic writers
and erasers (epi-enzymes), with the aim to obtain a sharper
and more selective modulation of cellular signaling pathways
with respect to what has been achieved so far through epi-
enzyme inhibition. Thus, a great deal of effort has been made
to identify small molecules capable of interacting with bromo-
domains (for acetylation mark), and the progress to date is
nicely summarized by Hilmar Weinmann and his colleagues
from Bayer. Novel approaches are reported in this Special Issue
directed towards molecular dynamics simulations (D. Huang, A.
Caflisch) and towards the identification of novel inhibitors (O.
Mirguet et al.). The state-of-art for readers for the methylation
mark (methyl-lysine binding proteins)
is overviewed by
Manfred Jung and co-workers in their Review article.

Finally, an emerging topic in the field of epigenetic drug dis-

covery is long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). These are gene tran-

 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemMedChem 2014, 9, 415 – 417 416

CHEMMEDCHEM
EDITORIAL

scripts that never get translated into proteins and are reported
to play crucial roles in the regulation of genomic integrity and
imprinting, mRNA processing, and other cell functions, such as
differentiation and development, through epigenetic mecha-
nisms. The modes of action of lncRNAs (cis- or trans-acting) in
epigenetics are summarized in this Special Issue by Irene Boz-
zoni et al., and given the critical roles of lncRNAs, it is likely
their therapeutic potential will emerge in the near future.

Epigenetics is a diverse and expansive area of research with

vast therapeutic potential, as can be seen from the topics cov-
ered in this Special Issue. The
contributions herein go some
way to exemplifying the diver-
sity of the research currently
underway in both industry and
academia, and from the work

Epigenetics is a diverse
and expansive area of
research with vast
therapeutic potential …

www.chemmedchem.org

described and reviewed, the future is certainly bright for epi-
genetics in drug discovery. I hope that the readers of Chem-
MedChem will appreciate and enjoy this Special Issue.

Prof. Antonello Mai
Special Issue Guest Editor
International Advisory Board Member
ChemMedChem

 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemMedChem 2014, 9, 415 – 417 417

