© American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

Care of adults with neurofibromatosis type 1:

a clinical practice resource of the American College

of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)

Douglas R. Stewart, MD1, Bruce R. Korf, MD, Ph.D2, Katherine L. Nathanson, MD3,4,

David A. Stevenson, MD5 and Kaleb Yohay, MD6

Disclaimer: This practice resource is designed primarily as an educational resource for medical geneticists and other clinicians

to help them provide quality medical services. Adherence to this practice resource is completely voluntary and does not necessarily
assure a successful medical outcome. This practice resource should not be considered inclusive of all proper procedures and tests or
exclusive of other procedures and tests that are reasonably directed to obtaining the same results. In determining the propriety of any

specific procedure or test, the clinician should apply his or her own professional judgment to the specific clinical circumstances

presented by the individual patient or specimen.

Clinicians are encouraged to document the reasons for the use of a particular procedure or test, whether or not it is in

conformance with this practice resource. Clinicians also are advised to take notice of the date this practice resource was adopted,

and to consider other medical and scientific information that becomes available after that date. It also would be prudent to

consider whether intellectual property interests may restrict the performance of certain tests and other procedures.

type 1 (NF1)

Purpose: Neurofibromatosis
is an autosomal
is caused by a heterozygous loss-of-
dominant disorder that
function variant in the tumor suppressor gene NF1;
it affects
~ 1/1,900–1/3,500 people worldwide. The disorder is associated
with an 8–15-year reduction in average life expectancy in both men
and women, primarily due to malignant neoplasms and cardio-
vascular causes.
Methods: A work group of experts sought to determine the
prevalence, morbidity and mortality, and available treatments of
common and emerging NF1-related clinical problems in adults.
Work-group members identified peer-reviewed publications from
PubMed. Publications derived from populations and multi-
institution cohorts were prioritized. Recommendations for manage-
ment arose by consensus from this literature and the collective
expertise of the authors.

Results: Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST), breast
cancer, cutaneous neurofibromas, and significant psychiatric and
neurologic diagnoses are common problems in patients with NF1.
Conclusion: Patient education and sensitization to worrisome signs
and symptoms such as progressive severe pain (MPNST), changes in
tumor volume (MPNST), new, unexplained neurologic symptoms
(MPNST, brain tumors), and diaphoresis/palpitations (pheochromo-
cytoma) are important. Although many issues in adults with NF1 can
be managed by an internist or family physician, we strongly encourage
evaluation by, and care coordination with, a specialized NF1 clinic.

Genet Med advance online publication 26 April 2018
Key Words: breast cancer; cutaneous neurofibromas; malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor; neurofibromatosis type 1; osteope-
nia/osteoporosis

that arises

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant
tumor-predisposition disorder
from loss-of-
in the tumor-suppressor gene NF11,2.
function variants
Features of the disorder typically appear in early childhood.
It is fully penetrant by adulthood, although the spectrum of
severity can vary considerably, even within families. It affects
~ 1/1,900–1/3,5003 people worldwide. The disorder is asso-
ciated with an 8–15-year reduction in average life expectancy
in both men and women, due primarily to malignant

neoplasms and cardiovascular causes.3,4 Most adults with
NF1 are clinically diagnosed in childhood, according to NIH
consensus criteria5 (Supplemental Table S1 online). The
criteria are both highly specific and sensitive in adults with
NF1.6 In most cases, the diagnosis can be easily made based
on a history, physical exam, and pedigree review and no
additional imaging or NF1 genetic testing is needed. These
issues and recommendations for the health supervision of
children with NF1 are available elsewhere.7 In childhood, NF1

1Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Rockville, Maryland, USA; 2Department of Genetics, University of
Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama, USA; 3Division of Translational Medicine and Human Genetics, Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; 4Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA;
5Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California, USA; 6Department of Neurology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA. Correspondence: Douglas R. Stewart (drstewart@mail.nih.gov)
The Board of Directors of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics approved this clinical practice resource on 19 December 2017.

Submitted 22 January 2018; accepted 22 January 2018; advance online publication 26 April 2018. doi:10.1038/gim.2018.28

GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number

| Month

1

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

genetic testing can quickly establish a diagnosis and relieve
anxiety, but that is less likely an issue for adults. A limited
genotype–phenotype
number of NF1
are
known8–11 and can be clinically useful
in some cases. In
general, however,
the NF1
the spectrum of severity of
phenotype, even within a family, can be striking.

correlations

There are many reasons why adults may present for care.

These include:

1) assistance with a specific problem in a person with

known NF1;

2) diagnostic evaluation of a parent with a child newly

diagnosed with NF1;

3) guidance during pregnancy;
4) diagnostic evaluation because of clinical signs (e.g., café-

au-lait macules);

5) diagnostic evaluation after detection of an NF1 variant of
uncertain significance from a hereditary cancer predisposition
gene panel.

METHODS

At the request of the American College of Medical Genetics
and Genomics (ACMG) Professional Practice and Guidelines
(PP&G) committee, a work group of experts was convened in
July 2015 to develop a Clinical Practice Resource for the
clinical care of adults with NF1. Work-group members were
selected based on published expertise in content areas relevant
to care of an adult with NF1, including bone biology (DAS),
genetics (BRK, KLN, DAS, DRS), malignancy (DRS, KLN,
BRK, KY), breast cancer (KLN), neuropathy and chronic pain
(BRK, DRS, KY), and vasculopathy (DRS, KY). A review of
potential or actual conflicts of interest for each member was
conducted as per ACMG policy. The group developed a list of
common and emerging NF1-related clinical problems. For
each problem, we sought to determine its prevalence, most
common causes of morbidity and mortality, and available
treatments. After outlining the key clinical areas to review,
each expert assembled relevant peer-reviewed literature based
on knowledge of the existing literature supplemented with
additional searches of PubMed to identify any new publica-
tions (as of December 2016). We prioritized publications that
studied populations,
large clinic cohorts (preferably from
multiple institutions), and large case series. We acknowledge
that not all pertinent literature may have been found. Our
recommendations for clinical management are derived by
consensus from this literature and the collective expertise of
the authors. Working and final drafts were reviewed and
approved by members of the PP&G committee and the
ACMG Board of Directors. Guidance for the care of children
with NF17 and advice for the transition from pediatric to
adult care are also available.12

MALIGNANCY

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
In NF1, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST), a
type of soft-tissue sarcoma, frequently arises from a pre-
existing plexiform neurofibroma (PN), a benign, congenital

2

STEWART et al

| Care of adult NF1

series

lesion affecting approximately 50% of NF1 patients.13 MPNST
is clinically aggressive and tends to metastasize early. A
(n = 1,404; 19,076
population-based NF1 patient
person-years’ observation) linked to incident cancers in the
Finnish Cancer Registry confirmed the dramatically increased
risk of MPNST (standardized incidence ratio [SIR] =
2,056).14 The risk of NF1-associated MPNST to ages 30, 50,
and 85 years was 8.5%, 12.3%, and 15.8% respectively, as
previously reported.15 These data also showed that high-grade
MPNSTs were usually fatal, contributing significantly to NF1
mortality (standardized mortality ratio > 2,000). No gender
differences in survival were found. The Finnish data also
showed no difference in MPNST survival in those with or
without NF1. These results differ from a meta-analysis of
> 1,800 patients from 48 studies over five decades, which
showed increased mortality for NF1 patients with MPNST
compared with sporadic cases of MPNST, although outcomes
have improved in the past decade16.

There are no pathognomonic molecular or immunohisto-
chemical studies for MPNST and the histologic features are
nonspecific. Low-grade MPNST accounts for ~ 5% of NF1-
associated MPNST and is associated with a 100% ten-year
survival,17 in contrast with high-grade tumors (~20% 5-year
survival14,15). Surgery remains the cornerstone of treatment
for high-grade MPNST, with the aim of achieving clear
margins. This approach has demonstrated benefit even for
large, non-extremity (e.g., abdominal) MPNST.18 We did not
identify any randomized studies evaluating the benefit of
adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation in MPNST, but a meta-
analysis and recent studies suggest that there may be a role for
them in some MPNST patients with non-metastatic disease.19
In advanced and metastatic MPNST, the prognosis is very
poor; response rates to doxorubicin plus ifosfamide are ~ 21%
in a multi-institutional retrospective study.20

In two studies (n = 148; n = 130) of NF1-associated
MPNST, the median age at diagnosis was 33–34 years, about
than sporadic MPNST.17,21 Clinical
ten years younger
suspicion (pain, rapid growth, neurologic symptoms, deep,
truncal location of PN), and awareness of known risk factors
the NF1 locus,22 previous
(germline microdeletion of
radiation23–25) remain paramount
for early detection of
MPNST, which is facilitated by targeted MRI imaging. The
optimal use, timing, and utility of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose
positron emission tomography (18F-FDG PET), PET/CT, and
MRI (whole-body and focused studies) to screen for MPNST
are not known. In the largest study of its kind to date (116
lesions, 59 with histologic confirmation) from 105 NF1
patients, Ferner and colleagues used 18F-FDG-PET and PET/
CT to diagnose NF1-associated MPNST with a sensitivity of
0.89 and a specificity of 0.95.26 Review of 12 studies of 353
NF1 patients revealed that the maximum standardized uptake
value (SUVmax) of 3.5 is a commonly accepted threshold for
biopsy of a lesion,27 but this finding needs validation in large,
prospective, randomized studies with histologic confirmation.
The difference in SUVmax in benign and malignant tumors is
a function of imaging time after injection, and both early

Volume 00 | Number

| Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE

Care of adult NF1 | STEWART et al

(90 minutes) and late (four hours) imaging can be used
clinically.28

SUMMARY

(1) MPNST often arises from a PN. High-grade MPNSTs

are usually fatal, frequently from metastasis.

(2) Clinical suspicion (progressive, persistent pain, and
rapid growth) is key to diagnosis of MPNST. Early
detection is essential for improved long-term survival.
(3) Diagnosis and grading of MPNST can be a challenge.
(4) Surgery is
for high-grade
MPNST and can be curative. The role of adjuvant
chemotherapy and radiation needs further definition.

the primary treatment

(5) The optimal use, timing, and utility of screening with

whole-body MRI are not known.

RECOMMENDATIONS

 Consider referral to specialized high-volume centers for

MPNST diagnosis and management.

 Imaging of an asymptomatic PN is a matter

for
clinical judgment. If a lesion involves only subcutaneous
tissue with no deeper component, imaging may not be
necessary.

 If a deeper component of a PN is suspected, imaging can
be useful to assess the full extent of the lesion, to serve as a
baseline to judge future growth, and to identify whether
there is a nodular component that may be associated with
an increased risk of malignant change.29

 MRI is preferred over CT scanning to reduce ionizing

radiation exposure.

 Educate patients about MPNST signs and symptoms at

initial and follow-up visits.

Breast cancer
Women with NF1 have an increased risk of breast cancer,
which may present at an earlier age than in the general
population. The Finnish population-based study of 1,404
persons with NF1 diagnosed clinically (19,076 person-years)
from 1987 to 2012 demonstrated a significant excess of breast
cancer in all women (SIR = 3.04; p o 0.001), especially in
women under 40 years of age (SIR = 11.1; p o 0.001), with
the youngest cases diagnosed around age 30. The investigators
also reported significantly poorer five-year survival of patients
with NF1-related breast cancer versus controls (67.9% vs.
87.8%; p = 0.004), as well as excess mortality (SMR =
5.20).14 Breast cancer death (proportionate mortality ratio)
was 3.5-fold increased in women with NF1 (diagnosed
clinically) over population controls in a study of 1,186 people
with NF1 in northwest England.4 A study of hospitalization
and mortality statistics in England (~ 53 million people) from
1999 to 2011 identified 58 cases of breast cancer in 3,672
women with NF1. The investigators calculated relative and
absolute risk per year in women with NF1; the highest rates

GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number

| Month

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

were in women aged 30–39 years (RR = 6.5), decreasing to
general population risk by age of around 70 years.30
Histopathology review of 43 tumors
from clinic- and
population-based studies with available tissue showed a
predominance of invasive ductal carcinoma, which is the
most common subtype in the general population.31–35 We did
not find comprehensive studies investigating estrogen and
progesterone receptor status or the frequency of concomitant
pathogenic germline BRCA1/2 variants in people with NF1.
Similarly, we could not find definitive studies on the risk of
male breast cancer in NF1, although individual cases have
been reported.36 Differences in chemotherapy efficacy, if any,
in NF1-associated breast cancers warrants
investigation.
Although two studies describe women with NF1 and
contralateral breast cancer,33,35 the risk and rate in the NF1
population are unknown.

risk,

similar

Patients with a clinical diagnosis of NF1 are at moderately
increased breast cancer
in magnitude to
pathogenic variants in genes such as ATM, CHEK2, and
NBN.37 Rare case reports document the concomitant carriage
of pathogenic NF1 and breast cancer (BRCA1) alleles in the
same person.38,39 One proposed strategy to clinically manage
moderate-penetrance disorders that confer breast cancer risks
similar to NF1 advocates initiating surveillance at the age
when a woman’s five-year risk approaches that at which
screening is routinely initiated for women in the general
population ( ~1% in the USA).40 The National Comprehen-
sive Cancer Network guidelines
recommend an annual
mammogram, starting at age 30 years, and consideration of
contrast-enhanced breast MRI between ages 30 and 50 years
for patients with NF1. These recommendations are based
primarily on expert opinion rather than solid evidence, and
application.40 Research
thus warrant
investigating the utility of mammography and breast MRI
in women with NF1 is critically needed. Consideration should
be given to the possibility of false positives arising on breast
imaging from breast neurofibromas, which in turn leads to an
increased number of breast biopsies. Multiple case reports
have described delays in breast-cancer diagnosis due to
cutaneous and breast neurofibromas that impair palpation of
a concerning mass and the interpretation of mammography.41
The difficulty of imaging interpretation may contribute to the
higher mortality observed in NF1-associated breast cancer.4,14
The threshold at which risk-reducing mastectomy should be
considered in an at-risk but unaffected woman with NF1 is
unknown. Such procedures are rarely performed on women
with atypical ductal hyperplasia or lobular carcinoma in situ,
conditions for which the average annual breast cancer risk is
~ 1%, a rate that is higher than that observed in carriers of
moderate-penetrance breast cancer genes.40

caution in their

SUMMARY

(1) Women with NF1 are at an increased risk for breast
cancer, especially at o 40 years; the earliest cases
appear at ~ 30 years. The relative risk decreases with

3

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

STEWART et al

| Care of adult NF1

age, so that women with NF1 are at general population
risk at ~ 70 years.

(2) Women with NF1-related breast

significantly poorer
mortality.

five-year

cancer have a
survival and excess

(3) The predominant histology is invasive ductal carcinoma,

the most common subtype in the general population.

(4) Contralateral breast-cancer risk, male breast-cancer
rates, differences in chemotherapy efficacy, estrogen
and progesterone receptor
status, and specificity/
sensitivity of mammography and breast MRI merit
additional study in NF1-associated breast cancer.

RECOMMENDATIONS

 National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines
recommend an annual mammogram starting at age 30
years, and consideration of contrast-enhanced breast MRI
between ages 30 and 50 years for women with a clinical
diagnosis of NF1.

 Individualized shared decision-making on the timing and
frequency of screening warrants consideration, given the
absence of data on the performance characteristics of
mammography or breast MRI in women with NF1.

 The decision to perform risk-reducing mastectomy
should be guided by family history (e.g., the larger the
number of first- and second-degree relatives with breast
cancer, particularly early onset or bilateral breast cancer,
the greater the breast-cancer risk to the patient).

 Consider the possibility of the coexistence of other breast-

tomography (FDOPA-PET). The latter was superior for
detection of pheochromocytomas in patients with a hereditary
pheochromocytoma syndrome in a small (25 patients; 64
lesions) non-randomized study.47 If
laboratory testing is
suggestive of pheochromocytoma with negative abdominal
and pelvic
imaging, meta-iodobenzylguanidine may be
considered. In patients with pheochromocytomas, long-term
follow-up
plasma
metanephrines.48

surveillance with

includes

annual

SUMMARY
The median age of pheochromocytoma presentation in one
study was 43 years (range 14–61 years) with exclusively
adrenal disease (no paragangliomas); 20% were multifocal and
12% were malignant.

RECOMMENDATIONS

 Pheochromocytoma should be considered in hypertensive
NF1 patients who are over 30 years of age, pregnant, and/
or have paroxysmal hypertension, hypertension-associated
headache, palpitations, or sweating.

 Biochemical or

patients with NF1 for pheochromocytoma
recommended.

imaging screening in asymptomatic
is not

 Measurement of plasma free metanephrines as a single
test is more sensitive and specific than other studies in an
NF1 patient clinically suspected to harbor a pheochro-
mocytoma. A follow-up 24-hour urine collection for
catecholamines and metanephrines should be done if
plasma testing is equivocal (less than fourfold elevation).

cancer risk alleles (e.g., BRCA1/2) with NF1.

Pheochromocytoma
The incidence of pheochromocytoma in NF1 is estimated at
0.1–5.7%; 22% are asymptomatic.42 The incidence in autopsy
series is higher (3.3–13.0%).42 A study of 25 patients from a
pheochromocytoma registry found a median age of presenta-
tion of 43 years (range 14–61 years) with exclusively adrenal
disease (no paragangliomas); 20% were multifocal and 12%
were malignant, a rate similar to that in sporadic disease.43
Individuals with NF1 may harbor mixed pheochromocytoma
and ganglioneuroma tumors.44 A second study of 48 NF1
patients evaluated at a hypertension clinic found that 15%
harbored a pheochromocytoma; of these patients, 57% were
symptomatic at diagnosis.45

We did not find any randomized studies on the efficacy of
biochemical or imaging screening to detect pheochromocy-
toma in asymptomatic patients with NF1. Measurement of
plasma free metanephrine levels as a single test is more
sensitive and specific than other studies in an NF1 patient
a pheochromocytoma.46
clinically suspected to harbor
Although localization of the pheochromocytoma is generally
done by CT or MRI, functional imaging is helpful to detect
multifocal disease, by either meta-iodobenzylguanidine or 3,4-
dihydroxy-6-18F-fluoro-L-phenylalanine positron emission

4

Other malignancies
NF1 causes an increased risk for several other tumor types. In
the Finnish epidemiological study of 1,404 persons with NF1,
other non-NF1-specific cancers for which a statistically
significant excess has been found include those of the brain
and central nervous system, “other endocrine glands,” “ill-
defined or unknown,” gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST),
malignant fibrous histiocytoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma.14
An excess of deaths was reported for thyroid and “ill-defined
or unknown” malignancies in this cohort. The excess of brain
tumors included higher grade, non-optic pathway gliomas.
An epidemiologic analysis of adult glioma (n = 489) and
adolescent and adult NF1 (n = 2,108) found a 20-100-fold
increased risk (vs. US rates) of developing malignant glioma,
including glioblastoma multiforme.49 The increased risk for
tumors of the endocrine organs in the Finnish study may arise
from periampullary somatostatinomas, a type of carcinoid
tumor that is estimated to affect 1% of people with NF1
and has been observed to cluster with GISTs
and
pheochromocytomas.50 The association in NF1 with GIST
intestine and multifocal)50 and
(adult,
typically urogenital)50 has
rhabdomyosarcoma (pediatric,
been well established. The association with thyroid cancer
and malignant fibrous histiocytoma was unexpected. The

typically small

Volume 00 | Number

| Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE

Care of adult NF1 | STEWART et al

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

number of people affected with each of these cancers was
small (≤ 5 in a study of 1,404 Finns with NF1 over 25 years);
this observation needs replication in other large population-
based studies. In the Finnish study, there was no excess of
leukemia or lymphoma, including juvenile myelomonocytic
leukemia, despite an established genetic association with NF1
in children.51

Plexiform neurofibromas are highly vascular and can
spontaneously bleed, sometimes seriously enough to be life-
threatening. The hemorrhage may clinically present as a
rapidly growing tumor. Patients who undergo surgery to
remove a plexiform neurofibroma may have a significant
intra-operative transfusion requirement, given the challenges
of maintaining adequate hemostasis in these tumors.

SUMMARY
Malignancies with epidemiologic evidence of association with
NF1 include malignant gliomas, GISTs, rhabdomyosarcoma,
thyroid, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Tumors with
genetic evidence of association include pheochromocytoma,
somatostatinomas, and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.

RECOMMENDATIONS
We are not aware of evidence supporting special screening for
rarer NF1-associated malignancies in asymptomatic patients.

Hypertension and vasculopathy
Hypertension is commonly observed in persons with NF1,
and its incidence increases with age.52 The most common
causes of hypertension in NF1 are essential hypertension,
pheochromocytoma (above), and,
in young adults, renal
artery stenosis.52 Renal artery abnormalities may be seen in up
individuals with NF1.53 For patients with a
to 1% of
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) > 30mL/min, contrast-
enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is highly
sensitive and specific.54,55 The incidence of stroke (predomi-
nantly hemorrhagic) may be increased in NF1 compared with
the general population.56 Pregnant women with NF1 may
have additional risk of hypertension and cerebrovascular
complications compared with pregnant women without
NF1.57

NF1-associated vasculopathy affects small, medium, and
large vessels. The arterial vasculature is most often affected,
although venous and pulmonary artery involvement also may
occur.58 NF1-associated vasculopathy is frequently asympto-
matic, and thus the incidence, spectrum, and natural history
of these lesions are poorly characterized. Types of associated
vascular abnormalities include arterial stenosis, moyamoya
arteriopathy, aneurysms, arteriovenous malformations, car-
diac valve abnormalities, and vessel compression and/or
invasion by neurofibromatosis-related tumors.59 The overall
incidence of vasculopathy in NF1 is estimated to be between
0.4% and 6.4%;52,60,61 the incidence specifically of cerebro-
vascular vasculopathy is estimated to be 2% to 5%.62 In a
retrospective review of reported cases of NF1 vasculopathy,
renal artery stenosis was most commonly reported (41%),
followed by cerebrovascular vasculopathy (19%) and abnorm-
alities of the abdominal aorta (12%).59 A vasculopathy is
presumed to underlie NF1-associated pulmonary hyperten-
sion, a rare but potentially fatal complication.58 We did not
find prospective studies of the incidence and natural history
of NF1-related vasculopathy and we could not find data on
the role of routine vascular screening in adults with NF1.

GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number

| Month

SUMMARY

(1) The most common causes of elevated blood pressure in
NF1 are essential hypertension, pheochromocytoma,
and, in young adults, renal artery stenosis. Pregnant
women with NF1 may have additional
risk of
hypertension and cerebrovascular complications.

(2) The incidence of stroke (predominantly hemorrhagic)

may be increased in NF1.

(3) NF1-associated vasculopathy affects small, medium,
and large vessels (primarily arteries); venous and
pulmonary artery involvement also may occur.

(4) NF1-associated vasculopathy is frequently asympto-
matic; the incidence, spectrum, and natural history of
these lesions are poorly characterized.

(5) The overall

incidence of vasculopathy in NF1 is
estimated to be between 0.4% and 6.4%; the incidence
specifically of cerebrovascular vasculopathy is estimated
to be 2% to 5%.

RECOMMENDATIONS

 For hypertensive NF1 patients who are under 30 years of
age, pregnant and/or have abdominal bruits, causes of
renovascular hypertension should be first evaluated (see
Supplemental Figure S1).

 MRA is the preferred imaging modality for evaluation of
renovascular hypertension. However, for patients with
impaired renal function (GFR o 30mL/min), spiral CT
and CT angiography may be used. If imaging is negative,
consider formal renal angiography. Concomitant screen-
ing for pheochromocytoma with plasma free metane-
phrines is also recommended.

 Treatment for NF1-associated hypertension should be

tailored to the specific etiology.

 Selective imaging should be performed for patients in

whom there is clinical suspicion of a vascular lesion.

 For identified vascular abnormalities, decisions regarding
timing and type of intervention should be the same as for
patients without NF1.

Bone health
Musculoskeletal findings are frequent in NF1; the presence of
a “distinctive osseous
the consensus
diagnostic criteria.5 The most morbid skeletal manifestations
are focal lesions such as long bone dysplasia/pseudarthrosis,
dystrophic scoliosis, and sphenoid wing dysplasia, which

is one of

lesion”

5

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

typically present in childhood but can have lasting effects into
adulthood.

Decreased bone mineral density and osteoporosis have been
documented in multiple studies as having a high prevalence in
NF1 adults.63–66 Several studies report an increased fracture
rate in NF1 adults,67–69 with one study showing a 5.2-fold
increase in relative risk for NF1 individuals > 41 years of age
compared with a control cohort of
individuals who had
undergone emergency appendectomy in Finland.69 It has been
proposed that Vitamin D deficiency contributes to osteo-
porosis in NF1.65,67,68,70 The impact of vitamin D supple-
mentation in NF1 on bone density and fractures
is
unclear.65,68 We were unable to find published evidence of a
proven association of parathyroid disease with NF1.

Osteoporosis occurs at an earlier age in adults with NF166
and progresses over time.66,71 Screening using dual-energy
X-ray absorptiometry (DXA)
is utilized in the general
population based on various protocols depending on age,
sex, hormonal status, and other risk factors. Earlier screening
with DXA may be warranted in individuals with NF1, but
data are lacking. There are guidelines
in the general
population for initiation of bisphosphonate therapy based
on DXA values and clinical history using several fracture risk
assessment tools, and NF1 should be entered as a risk factor
when using such algorithms.72–74 One study of six people with
NF1 and osteoporosis treated with alendronate observed an
increase in bone mineral density in five of six individuals after
treatment.71 The increase did not reach
23 months of
statistical significance, however, and one subject sustained a
new stress
In vitro studies have shown that
osteoclasts derived from individuals with NF1 display reduced
sensitivity to bisphosphonates, raising question about the
clinical effectiveness and dosing of these agents in NF1.75

fracture.

Scoliosis in NF1 is typically categorized as nondystrophic
and dystrophic.76 The dystrophic form typically presents in
childhood, whereas the nondystrophic form can develop into
adulthood. Significant scoliosis-associated spinal pathology
includes dural ectasia, vertebral degenerative changes, and
spinal compression. Curve progression is typically more rapid
in those with dystrophic features.77 A study of 17 young
adults with NF178 found that approximately 50% of those
with scoliosis diagnosed prior to adulthood had progression
of curvature, with significant back pain. In addition, 18% of
the young adults had developed a new mild scoliosis.

SUMMARY

(1) The most morbid skeletal manifestations (long bone
dysplasia/pseudarthrosis, dystrophic
and
sphenoid wing dysplasia) typically present in childhood
but can have lasting effects into adulthood.

scoliosis,

(2) Decreased bone-mineral density and osteoporosis have
been documented in multiple studies as having a high
prevalence in NF1 adults. Osteoporosis occurs at an
earlier age in adults with NF1 and progresses over time.

STEWART et al

| Care of adult NF1

(3) Scoliosis in NF1 is historically categorized as non-
dystrophic
scoliosis-
associated spinal pathology includes dural ectasia,
vertebral degenerative changes, and spinal compression.

dystrophic.

Significant

and

RECOMMENDATIONS

 Although lacking published evidence of efficacy, we
recommend vitamin D supplementation in individuals
with NF1 to reach serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concen-
trations in the sufficient range.

 Osteoporosis occurs at an earlier age in adults with NF1
and progresses over time. Treatment is not different from
what is recommended in the general population.

 Management of scoliosis in NF1 adults consists of
monitoring for curve progression. All individuals with
NF1 should have annual clinical evaluation of the back
with Adam’s forward bend test and be referred to
orthopedics if there is concern about scoliosis.

Neurofibroma burden and cosmesis
Cutaneous neurofibromas (cNF) can occur on the surface or
within the skin. cNFs are histologically similar to PN but do
not appear to undergo malignant transformation.79 Although
cNFs are not life-threatening, they can lead to significant
morbidity. A population-based survey in Wales found cNFs
in > 99% of adults with NF1,80 making this the most
common tumor manifestation in adults. This study described
an increase in the number of cNFs with increasing age and
revealed that 10 of 30 (33%) women underwent an increase in
size and number of cNFs during pregnancy. Another study
investigating patient-reported pregnancy outcomes in women
with NF1 found 64 of 105 (60%) developed new cNFs and 55
of 105 (52%) reported cNF size increases.81 Further, a cross-
sectional study of 721 pediatric and adult patients with NF1
showed that the number of cNFs strongly increased with
age.82 Collectively, these studies indicate that cNFs often begin
to appear in puberty, continue to increase in number with age,
and display periods of rapid growth during puberty and
pregnancy.

The growth and number of cNFs may impose a cosmetic
burden, may be symptomatic (tenderness, bleeding, itching),
and may be responsible for negative effects on quality of life.
A quality of life survey completed by 128 adults with NF1 in
France showed that visibility of lesions was associated with
negative effects on emotions, physical
symptoms, and
functioning.83 Similar findings were reported in Italian and
U.S. cohorts.84,85

for

cNF include

treatment options

Current
surgical
excision,
laser removal, or electrodesiccation. We are not
aware of published evidence to guide choice amongst these
options. Surgical excision typically targets a modest number
of symptomatic cNFs86 and leaves a scar. Laser removal of
cNFs has been used for several decades and encompasses
photocoagulation and CO2 laser ablation; radiofrequency

6

Volume 00 | Number

| Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE

Care of adult NF1 | STEWART et al

ablation is also used.87–92 Anesthesia is required to remove
50–100 superficial lesions per session. A retrospective study
queried 106 people with NF1 about pain and treatment safety
after CO2 laser treatment;93 > 90% were satisfied with the
treatment and reported minimal pain, good healing, and few
complications (e.g., bleeding, scarring, infection). Electrode-
siccation dehydrates and denatures the dermis. A retro-
spective study of 97 individuals with NF1 who had
electrodesiccation of cutaneous and subcutaneous cNFs in
one or more stages94 found that a mean of 450 lesions were
removed per session. Overall, there was minimal scarring,
minor discomfort, and high patient
the
postoperative visit. Similar findings were reported in another
retrospective study of six individuals with NF1 undergoing
electrodessication.95 Additional cNFs will appear over time
and repeated treatments will be required. We are not aware of
nonsurgical therapies for cNF. Progress in the identification of
agents controlling the growth of PN96 suggests that similar
agents for the control of cNF may be possible, especially given
the histologic similarities between the two tumors.

satisfaction at

In a small

study of French adults with NF1, 70%
reported daily or almost-daily moderate-intensity pruritus,
typically in the evenings. About half had pruritus loca-
lized to neurofibromas.97 A small minority (o 10%) regularly
used an emollient or oral antihistamine, with limited
effect.97

SUMMARY

(2) cNFs often begin to appear in puberty,

(1) cNFs can occur on the surface or within the skin, and
very rarely, if ever, undergo malignant transformation.
increase in
number with age, and display periods of rapid growth
during puberty and pregnancy.

(3) cNFs may impose a cosmetic burden, may be sympto-
matic (tenderness, bleeding, itching) and are associated
with negative effects on emotions, physical symptoms,
and functioning.

RECOMMENDATIONS

 Current

treatment options for cNF include surgical
excision, laser removal, or electrodesiccation. Physician
and patient preference and local expertise typically guide
choice of these options.

 Minimal scarring, minor discomfort, and high patient
satisfaction have been reported with all three therapies.
General anesthesia may be required for the removal of
many lesions.
 Nonsurgical

(medication and devices) are
under development but are not clinically available at
this time.

therapies

 NF1-associated pruritus may be neuropathic in origin and
thus may be responsive to localized and generalized
therapies (including gabapentin and pregabalin), but
NF1-specific data are lacking.98

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

Neurocognitive and psychiatric problems
DEPRESSION
Studies have demonstrated an increased prevalence of
depression and other psychiatric disorders, with at least one
third of adult NF1 patients affected. One cross-sectional study
found significant depressive symptoms in 55% of 498 adults
self-reported as having NF1.99

ADULT ATTENTION DEFICIT AND HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER
(ADHD)
ADHD is well characterized in the pediatric NF1 population.
We found limited data on the prevalence or characterization
of ADHD in adults with NF1, though several studies have
demonstrated impaired performance on attentional tests in
adults with NF1.100–102 One study has shown lower quality of
life and emotional stability in adults with NF1 and ADHD
than in adults with NF1 alone.103

into adulthood,100 affecting,

COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT
Cognitive impairment is well-characterized in children with
NF1 and persists
in our
experience, school performance and employability. Studies
have demonstrated that
IQ may be reduced in adults
compared to the general population, to a similar extent to
that of children with NF1.101,102 One study of 20 adults with
NF1 compared to age-matched controls (spouses of subjects)
demonstrated deficits
skills, memory,
selective attention, and components of executive function.101
We found limited data on cognitive function in elderly adults
with NF1, though one small study demonstrated cognitive
impairments similar to those found in children and younger
adults with NF1.104 Microdeletion of
the NF1 gene is
associated with more significant intellectual impairment.105

in visual–spatial

RECOMMENDATIONS

 Consider screening for depression in adults with NF1,

with appropriate referral.

 There are limited data on the prevalence of ADHD in
adults with NF1. ADHD can affect employability and
schooling.

 More severe cognitive impairment merits

thorough
evaluation (e.g., microarray, fragile X testing, concomitant
monogenic disorders) for other etiologies.

Chronic neurological conditions, neuropathy, and pain
A study of private health-insurance data in NF1 children and
adults (n = 8,579) and age-and gender-matched non-NF1
adults and children (n = 85,790) found significantly higher
odds of submission of claims for headache, headache with
migraine, epilepsy, and sleep disturbance/disorder in NF1
adults.106 This association remained significant after excluding
individuals with brain-tumor-related claims. The age at first
health-care claim for headache and headache with migraine was
significantly younger than the non-NF1 population, but there
were no age differences observed for epilepsy. The study also

GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number

| Month

7

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

STEWART et al

| Care of adult NF1

found significantly higher odds of an adult NF1 health-
insurance claim for Parkinson’s disease and multiple sclerosis;
however, the number of observations was small and there is a
need for replication.106 A clinic-based study of headache in 115
adults with NF1 found that migraine aura, symptom triggers,
age of onset, and phenotype mirror similar features in the
general population.107 A prospective questionnaire study of 114
adults with NF1 (but no controls) found a high frequency of
sleep disturbance,
impaired sleep, and excessive daytime
sleepiness.108 We did not identify any large studies evaluating
differences in treatment of NF1-associated migraine, seizures,
or sleep disorders.

A distinct,

rare (2–3%), adult-onset, non-progressive,
symmetrical polyneuropathy, originally termed “neurofibro-
matous neuropathy,” has been described.109 We were unable
to find data from large cohorts. Now referred to as “NF1
neuropathy,” it features a typically indolent, nerve-length-
dependent sensorimotor polyneuropathy with predominantly
sensory signs and modestly abnormal electrophysiological
findings. It is painless in the majority of patients109 and may
arise from nerve microlesions.110

Glomus tumors are small, benign, but painful tumors of the
glomus body, a thermoregulatory shunt in the fingertips, and
are part of the NF1 phenotype.111 These tumors should not be
confused with paragangliomas, which have also been called
glomus tumors in the older literature. The majority of people
affected have at least two of three symptoms of the classic
triad of localized tenderness, severe paroxysmal pain, and
sensitivity to cold.112 Women are more commonly affected
than men and multifocal tumors are common.112 Clinical
imaging may be useful.112
suspicion is essential; MRI
Although surgery can be curative, delay in diagnosis (years)
is not uncommon and can lead to chronic pain from the
complex regional pain syndrome.112

We were unable to find high-quality studies investigating
pain in adults with NF1. In our experience, chronic pain in NF1
adults is common, and negatively affects quality of life. NF1-
related pain may be nociceptive or neuropathic and can arise
from PN, scoliosis, or pseudarthrosis. Frequently, however, no
anatomic correlate can be identified. New-onset, increasingly
severe pain should be heeded as a possible symptom of an
MPNST (see section on MPNST). It is important to remember
that not all pain in individuals with NF1 is due to NF1, and
common etiologies (e.g., lower back pain) remain common.

Young adults with NF1, a chronic neurologic condition,
may inquire about their eligibility to serve in the armed forces.
In the United States, Army Regulation 40-501 (“Standards of
Medical Fitness,” guidance used by all branches of the US
military), notes that a history of neurofibromatosis is a
disqualification for enlistment.

SUMMARY

(1) Headache, headache with migraine, epilepsy, and sleep
disturbance/disorder are more common in NF1 adults,
based on insurance-claim data.

8

(2) A tumor-independent NF1 neuropathy is recognized
but rare and varied in symptomology and progression.
(3) Chronic pain is probably an underrecognized problem
in NF1. Chronic pain from fingertip glomus tumors is
rare but treatable.

RECOMMENDATIONS

 NF1-associated migraine, seizures, or sleep disorders

should be treated as in the non-NF1 population.

 Medication, physical therapy, and surgery (for compres-

sive tumors) may be beneficial to NF1 neuropathy.

 Adults with NF1 should be queried about chronic
fingertip and toe pain in the assessment of possible
glomus tumors.

 Screening and use of pain-interference scales may be
useful, with referral to a pain clinic as needed, preferably
those
and non-
pharmacologic approaches.

employ both pharmacologic

that

Contraception, pregnancy, and assisted fertility
A 1988 study of all individuals with “neurofibromatosis” in
Gothenburg, Sweden found a reduction in fertility by ~20%
and ascribed the difference to social rather than biologic
factors.113 There are limited data on the safety of oral or depot
contraceptives in women with NF1. However, the prevention
of unintended pregnancy is important, and thus the benefits
likely outweigh any theoretical concerns. Similarly, if oral or
depot contraceptives are required to treat a medical condition,
the benefits are likely greater than any theoretical concerns.
Expression of progesterone receptors has been found in 75%
of neurofibromas.114 One survey of 59 women with NF1
found that 53 (89%) who received oral estrogen-progestogen
or pure progestogen preparations reported no associated
neurofibroma growth. Two women (3%) in the study who
received depot contraceptives containing a high dose of
synthetic progesterone reported significant tumor growth.115
A retrospective, population-based cohort study in the USA of
19 million pregnancy-related admissions from 1988 to 2009
(1553 associated with NF1) found that NF1 was associated
with a statistically significant excess of maternal morbidity
(gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, intrauterine growth
restriction,
cerebrovascular disease, preterm labor, and
cesarean delivery), but not maternal mortality.57 We did not
find literature describing significant adverse events or
outcomes in women with NF1 undergoing epidural anesthe-
sia. In one study of 105 women (247 pregnancies), 55–60% of
women reported an increase in growth of new or existing
cNFs during pregnancy and 30% observed postpartum
regression of neurofibroma size.81 A study of 156 cycles of
preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) in couples with NF1
showed a lower proportion resulting in live birth (versus non-
NF1 couples), but the rate was comparable with that seen
in couples with other autosomal dominant or X-linked
disorders.116 Prenatal diagnosis is possible through fetal

Volume 00 | Number

| Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE

Care of adult NF1 | STEWART et al

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

Table 1 Assessment of adults with NF1
In addition to recommended age-and gender-specific screening and vaccinations, an annual general medical evaluation of the adult with NF1 should
consider questions about:
Medical history
Signs and symptoms of 1) malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, 2) pheochromocytoma, 3) neuropathy, 4) depression, 5) chronic pain and pruritus, 6)
fingertip pain
Bothersome/symptomatic cutaneous neurofibromas
Family planning/contraception (and referral for genetic counseling if needed)
Physical exam
Blood pressure
Clinical evaluation for scoliosis with Adam’s forward bend test with referral if needed
Laboratory investigation
Consider in context of clinical presentation and age: serum vitamin D concentrations and supplementation
Imaging
Mammogram (women): start annually at age 30 yearsa
MRI breast with contrast (women): consider between ages 30 and 50 yearsa
Consider baseline MRI of known or suspected nonsuperficial plexiform neurofibromas
Consider in context of clinical presentation and age: dual energy X-ray absorptiometry

aBased on expert recommendations made by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network. The evidence base for these guidelines in women with NF1 is minimal. These
suggestions were developed by analogy, based on the current approach to breast cancer screening in other intermediate-risk breast cancer susceptibility syndromes. Cau-
tion is warranted in applying these guidelines to NF1 patients.

DNA sequencing (obtained via amniocentesis or chorionic
villus sampling) of known disease-causing NF1 mutations.117
Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of NF1 has been reported, but
would be feasible only in the setting of an NF-related lesion
that is visible by ultrasound, which accounts for only a small
proportion of cases.118

RECOMMENDATIONS

 If pregnancy is not desired, contraception should be used.
 Referral to a high-risk obstetrician should be considered

for pregnant women with NF1.

 Preanesthesia neuraxial imaging to evaluate for spinal or
paraspinal neurofibromas is probably not needed. If there
are concerns, spinal anesthesia may be considered.

 Educate adults with NF1 that, as an autosomal dominant
disorder, the offspring recurrence risk is 50% for each
pregnancy.

 PGD and prenatal diagnosis of NF1 are available.
Individuals with de novo mutations, somatic mosaicism,
and large genomic rearrangements are much less likely to
be able to have PGD owing to technical limitations.

Concluding recommendations
In this Clinical Practice Resource, we have emphasized studies
that investigated populations, multi-institution clinic cohorts,
and large case series. We acknowledge that not all relevant
publications may have been identified. Table 1 lists suggested
items to review at initial and follow-up visits for an adult with
NF1. In addition, general population age- and gender-specific
health screening (e.g.,
for
cervical cancer) and vaccination schedules should be followed,

for cholesterol, colonoscopy,

GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number

| Month

regardless of NF1 diagnosis. Supplemental Resources lists
useful websites and organizations. Although it is important to
always consider NF1-associated etiologies for a new sign or
symptom, common explanations will remain common (e.g.,
most hypertension is essential and not pheochromocytoma-
related, most back pain will not be due to an MPNST, most
headaches will not be tumor-associated). Repeated patient
education and sensitization to worrisome signs and symptoms
such as progressive severe pain (MPNST), changes in tumor
volume (MPNST), new, unexplained neurologic symptoms
(MPNST, CNS tumors), and diaphoresis/palpitations (pheo-
chromocytoma) are important.12 Although many issues in
adults with NF1 can be managed by an internist or family
physician, we strongly encourage evaluation by and care
coordination with a specialized NF1 clinic. (The Children’s
Tumor Foundation (see Supplemental Resources) sponsors
the NF Clinic Network, a nationwide network of NF clinics.)
For some patients, a multidisciplinary NF clinic may serve
best as a medical home, although all patients should have a
primary care physician. In addition, through an NF clinic,
patients may more easily learn of research studies aimed to
develop novel therapies. To improve clinical care of adults
with NF1, future research efforts need to address, among
other issues, the sensitivity and specificity of breast MRI and
mammography in NF1,
the role of whole-body and/or
targeted MRI as a screen for MPNST, the full spectrum of
NF1-associated malignancy, the natural history and treatment
of NF1-associated osteoporosis and osteopenia, treatment
of chronic pain, NF1-associated Parkinson’s disease and
multiple sclerosis, and effective biomarkers and imaging
strategies for tumor screening (e.g., pheochromocytoma,
glioblastoma multiforme).

9

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material
paper at http://www.nature.com/gim

is linked to the online version of the

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of
the Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics of the National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD. K.N. acknowledges grants from
the Abramson Cancer Center (P30 CA016520) and from the
Breast Cancer Research Foundation. We thank Vincent Riccardi,
MD, Xia Wang, MD (Moffitt Cancer Center), and Ashley Cannon,
MS, PhD (UAB) for comments on the manuscript.

DISCLOSURE
D.A.S. has been a consultant for and received compensation from
Lineagen, Alexion, and GLG. B.R.K. has been a consultant for
Novartis and received a travel grant from AstraZeneca. The other
authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1. Wallace MR, Marchuk DA, Andersen LB, et al. Type 1 neurofibromatosis
gene: identification of a large transcript disrupted in three NF1 patients.
Science 1990;249:181–186.
Viskochil D, Buchberg AM, Xu G, et al. Deletions and a translocation
interrupt a cloned gene at the neurofibromatosis type 1 locus. Cell
1990;62:187–192.

2.

3. Uusitalo E, Leppavirta J, Koffert A, et al. Incidence and mortality of
neurofibromatosis: a total population study in Finland. J Invest Dermatol.
2015;135:904–906.
Evans DG, O’Hara C, Wilding A, et al. Mortality in neurofibromatosis 1: in
North West England: an assessment of actuarial survival in a region of the
UK since 1989. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011;19:1187–1191.

4.

5. National

Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference
Statement: neurofibromatosis. Bethesda, Md., USA, 13–15 July, 1987.
Neurofibromatosis 1988;1:172–178.
Friedman JM. Neurofibromatosis 1. In: Pagon RA, Adam, M.P., Ardinger,
H.H. et al., ed. GeneReviews. Seattle: University of Washington, Seattle;
2014.

6.

7. Hersh JH, American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Genetics.
Health supervision for children with neurofibromatosis. Pediatrics
2008;121:633–642.

8. Mautner VF, Kluwe L, Friedrich RE, et al. Clinical characterisation of 29
neurofibromatosis type-1 patients with molecularly ascertained 1.4 Mb
type-1 NF1 deletions. J Med Genet. 2010;47:623–630.

9. Upadhyaya M, Huson SM, Davies M, et al. An absence of cutaneous
neurofibromas associated with a 3-bp inframe deletion in exon 17 of the
NF1 gene (c.2970-2972 delAAT): evidence of a clinically significant NF1
genotype-phenotype correlation. Am J Hum Genet. 2007;80:140–151.
10. Pinna V, Lanari V, Daniele P, et al. p.Arg1809Cys substitution in
neurofibromin is associated with a distinctive NF1 phenotype without
neurofibromas. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015;23:1068–1071.

11. Burkitt Wright EM, Sach E, Sharif S, et al. Can the diagnosis of NF1 be
excluded clinically? A lack of pigmentary findings in families with spinal
neurofibromatosis demonstrates a limitation of clinical diagnosis. J Med
Genet. 2013;50:606–613.

12. Van Lierde A, Menni F, Bedeschi MF, et al. Healthcare transition in
patients with rare genetic disorders with and without developmental
disability: neurofibromatosis 1 and Williams-Beuren syndrome. Am J Med
Genet A. 2013;161A:1666–1674.

13. Mautner VF, Asuagbor FA, Dombi E, et al. Assessment of benign tumor
burden by whole-body MRI in patients with neurofibromatosis 1. Neuro
Oncol. 2008;10:593–598.

14. Uusitalo E, Rantanen M, Kallionpaa RA, et al. Distinctive cancer
associations in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1. J Clin Oncol.
2016.

15. Evans DG, Baser ME, McGaughran J, Sharif S, Howard E & Moran A.
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours in neurofibromatosis 1.
J Med Genet. 2002;39:311–314.

STEWART et al

| Care of adult NF1

16. Kolberg M, Holand M, Agesen TH, et al. Survival meta-analyses for 1800
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor patients with and without
neurofibromatosis type 1. Neuro Oncol. 2013;15:135–147.

17. Watson KL, Al Sannaa GA, Kivlin CM, et al. Patterns of recurrence and
survival in sporadic, neurofibromatosis Type 1-associated, and radiation-
J Neurosurg
associated malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
2017;126:319–329.

18. Dunn GP, Spiliopoulos K, Plotkin SR, et al. Role of resection of malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1.
J Neurosurg 2013;118:142–148.

19. Farid M, Demicco EG, Garcia R, et al. Malignant peripheral nerve

sheath tumors. Oncologist 2014;19:193–201.

20. Kroep JR, Ouali M, Gelderblom H, et al. First-line chemotherapy for
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
versus other
histological soft tissue sarcoma subtypes and as a prognostic factor for
MPNST: an EORTC soft tissue and bone sarcoma group study. Ann Oncol
2011;22:207–214.

(MPNST)

21. Valentin T, Le Cesne A, Ray-Coquard I, et al. Management and prognosis
of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors: The experience of the
French Sarcoma Group (GSF-GETO). Eur J Cancer. 2016;56:77–84.

22. De Raedt T, Brems H, Wolkenstein P, et al. Elevated risk for MPNST in NF1

microdeletion patients. Am J Hum Genet. 2003;72:1288–1292.

23. Ducatman BS & Scheithauer BW. Postirradiation neurofibrosarcoma.

Cancer 1983;51:1028–1033.

24. Meadows AT, Baum E, Fossati-Bellani F, et al. Second malignant
neoplasms in children: an update from the Late Effects Study Group.
J Clin Oncol. 1985;3:532–538.

25. Ducatman BS, Scheithauer BW, Piepgras DG, Reiman HM & Ilstrup DM.
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. A clinicopathologic study of
120 cases. Cancer 1986;57:2006–2021.

26. Ferner RE, Golding JF, Smith M, et al. [18F]2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose
positron emission tomography (FDG PET) as a diagnostic tool
for
neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) associated malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumours (MPNSTs): a long-term clinical study. Ann Oncol 2008;19:
390–394.

27. Treglia G, Taralli S, Bertagna F, et al. Usefulness of whole-body fluorine-
18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
in patients
with neurofibromatosis type 1: a systematic review. Radiol Res Pract.
2012;2012:431029.

28. Warbey VS, Ferner RE, Dunn JT, Calonje E & O’Doherty MJ. [18F]FDG PET/
CT in the diagnosis of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours in
neurofibromatosis type-1. Eur
Imaging. 2009;36:
751–757.

J Nucl Med Mol

29. Meany H, Dombi E, Reynolds J, et al. 18-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron
emission tomography (FDG-PET) evaluation of nodular lesions in patients
with neurofibromatosis type 1 and plexiform neurofibromas (PN) or
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST). Pediatr Blood
Cancer. 2013;60:59–64.

30. Seminog OO & Goldacre MJ. Age-specific risk of breast cancer in women

with neurofibromatosis type 1. Br J Cancer. 2015;112:1546–1548.

31. Zoller ME, Rembeck B, Oden A, Samuelsson M & Angervall L. Malignant
and benign tumors in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 in a defined
Swedish population. Cancer 1997;79:2125–2131.

32. Walker L, Thompson D, Easton D, et al. A prospective study of neuro-
fibromatosis type 1 cancer incidence in the UK. Br J Cancer. 2006;95:
233–238.

33. Sharif S, Moran A, Huson SM, et al. Women with neurofibromatosis 1 are
at a moderately increased risk of developing breast cancer and should be
considered for early screening. J Med Genet. 2007;44:481–484.

34. Madanikia SA, Bergner A, Ye X & Blakeley JO.

Increased risk of
breast cancer in women with NF1. Am J Med Genet A. 2012;158A:
3056–3060.

35. Wang X, Levin AM, Smolinski SE, Vigneau FD, Levin NK & Tainsky MA.
Breast cancer and other neoplasms in women with neurofibromatosis
type 1: a retrospective review of cases in the Detroit metropolitan area.
Am J Med Genet A. 2012;158A:3061–3064.

36. Lakshmaiah KC, Kumar AN, Purohit S, et al. Neurofibromatosis type I
with breast cancer: not only for women! Hered Cancer Clin Pract.
2014;12:5.

37. Easton DF, Pharoah PD, Antoniou AC, et al. Gene-panel sequencing and
the prediction of breast-cancer risk. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2243–2257.
38. Ceccaroni M, Genuardi M, Legge F, et al. BRCA1-related malignancies in
a family presenting with von Recklinghausen’s disease. Gynecol Oncol
2002;86:375–378.

10

Volume 00 | Number

| Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE

Care of adult NF1 | STEWART et al

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

39. Campos B, Balmana J, Gardenyes J, et al. Germline mutations in NF1 and
BRCA1 in a family with neurofibromatosis type 1 and early-onset
breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013;139:597–602.

40. Tung N, Domchek SM, Stadler Z, et al. Counselling framework for
moderate-penetrance cancer-susceptibility mutations. Nat Rev Clin
Oncol. 2016;13:581–588.

41. Da Silva AV, Rodrigues FR, Pureza M, Lopes VG & Cunha KS. Breast
cancer and neurofibromatosis type 1: a diagnostic challenge in patients
with a high number of neurofibromas. BMC Cancer 2015;15:183.

42. Walther MM, Herring J, Enquist E, Keiser HR & Linehan WM. Von
Recklinghausen’s disease and pheochromocytomas. J Urol 1999;162:
1582–1586.

43. Bausch B, Borozdin W & Neumann HP, European-American pheochro-
mocytoma study G. Clinical and genetic characteristics of patients with
neurofibromatosis type 1 and pheochromocytoma. N Engl
J Med.
2006;354:2729–2731.

44. Mezitis SG, Geller M, Bocchieri E, Del Pizzo J & Merlin S. Association of
in

pheochromocytoma
neurofibromatosis type 1. Endocr Pract. 2007;13:647–651.

ganglioneuroma:

unusual

and

finding

45. Zinnamosca L, Petramala L, Cotesta D, et al. Neurofibromatosis type 1
(NF1) and pheochromocytoma: prevalence, clinical and cardiovascular
aspects. Arch Dermatol Res. 2011;303:317–325.

46. Lenders JW, Pacak K, Walther MM, et al. Biochemical diagnosis of

pheochromocytoma: which test is best? JAMA 2002;287:1427–1434.

47. Fottner C, Helisch A, Anlauf M, et al. 6-18F-fluoro-L-dihydroxy-
phenylalanine positron emission tomography is
to 123I-
metaiodobenzyl-guanidine scintigraphy in the detection of extraadrenal
and hereditary pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas: correlation
J Clin Endocrinol
with vesicular monoamine transporter expression.
Metab. 2010;95:2800–2810.

superior

48. Amar L, Servais A, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Zinzindohoue F, Chatellier G &
Plouin PF. Year of diagnosis, features at presentation, and risk of
recurrence in patients with pheochromocytoma or secreting paragan-
glioma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90:2110–2116.

49. Gutmann DH, Rasmussen SA, Wolkenstein P, et al. Gliomas presenting
after age 10 in individuals with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1).
Neurology 2002;59:759–761.

50. Patil S & Chamberlain RS. Neoplasms associated with germline and

somatic NF1 gene mutations. Oncologist 2012;17:101–116.

51. Shannon KM, O’Connell P, Martin GA, et al. Loss of the normal NF1 allele
from the bone marrow of children with type 1 neurofibromatosis and
malignant myeloid disorders. N Engl J Med. 1994;330:597–601.

52. Friedman JM, Arbiser J, Epstein JA, et al. Cardiovascular disease in
neurofibromatosis 1: report of the NF1 Cardiovascular Task Force. Genet
Med 2002;4:105–111.

53. Finley JL & Dabbs DJ. Renal vascular smooth muscle proliferation in

neurofibromatosis. Hum Pathol 1988;19:107–110.

54. Postma CT, Joosten FB, Rosenbusch G & Thien T. Magnetic resonance
angiography has a high reliability in the detection of renal artery stenosis.
Am J Hypertens. 1997;10(9 Pt 1):957–963.

55. Schoenberg SO, Rieger J, Johannson LO, et al. Diagnosis of renal artery
stenosis with magnetic resonance angiography: update 2003. Nephrol
Dial Transplant. 2003;18:1252–1256.

56. Terry AR,

Jordan JT, Schwamm L & Plotkin SR.

Increased risk of
cerebrovascular disease among patients with neurofibromatosis type 1:
population-based approach. Stroke 2016;47:60–65.

57. Terry AR, Barker 2nd FG, , Leffert L, Bateman BT, Souter I & Plotkin SR.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 and pregnancy complications: a population-
based study. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2013;209:46 e41–48.

58. Stewart DR, Cogan JD, Kramer MR, et al.

Is pulmonary arterial
hypertension in neurofibromatosis type 1 secondary to a plexogenic
arteriopathy? Chest 2007;132:798–808.

59. Oderich GS, Sullivan TM, Bower TC, et al. Vascular abnormalities in
patients with neurofibromatosis syndrome type I: clinical spectrum,
management, and results. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46:475–484.

60. Hamilton SJ & Friedman JM.

Insights

into the pathogenesis of

neurofibromatosis 1 vasculopathy. Clin Genet. 2000;58:341–344.

61. Lin AE, Birch PH, Korf BR, et al. Cardiovascular malformations and other
cardiovascular abnormalities in neurofibromatosis 1. Am J Med Genet.
2000;95:108–117.

62. Cairns AG & North KN. Cerebrovascular dysplasia in neurofibromatosis

type 1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008;79:1165–1170.

63. Kuorilehto T, Poyhonen M, Bloigu R, Heikkinen J, Vaananen K & Peltonen J.
in neurofibromatosis

Decreased bone mineral density and content

type 1:
the body. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16:928–936.

lowest local values are located in the load-carrying parts of

64. Lammert M, Kappler M, Mautner VF, et al. Decreased bone mineral
density in patients with neurofibromatosis 1. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16:
1161–1166.

65. Seitz S, Schnabel C, Busse B, et al. High bone turnover and accumulation
of osteoid in patients with neurofibromatosis 1. Osteoporos Int. 2010;21:
119–127.

66. Heerva E, Leinonen P, Kuorilehto T, et al. Neurofibromatosis 1-related
osteopenia often progresses to osteoporosis in 12 years. Calcif Tissue Int.
2013;92:23–27.

67. Tucker T, Schnabel C, Hartmann M, et al. Bone health and fracture rate in
individuals with neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1). J Med Genet. 2009;46:
259–265.

68. Brunetti-Pierri N, Doty SB, Hicks J, et al. Generalized metabolic bone disease

in neurofibromatosis type I. Mol Genet Metab. 2008;94:105–111.

69. Heerva E, Koffert A, Jokinen E, et al. A controlled register-based study of
460 neurofibromatosis 1 patients: increased fracture risk in children and
adults over 41 years of age. J Bone Miner Res. 2012;27:2333–2337.

70. Lammert M, Friedman JM, Roth HJ, et al. Vitamin D deficiency associated
with number of neurofibromas in neurofibromatosis 1. J Med Genet.
2006;43:810–813.

71. Heerva E, Huilaja L, Leinonen P, Peltonen S & Peltonen J. Follow-up of six
patients with neurofibromatosis 1-related osteoporosis treated with
alendronate for 23 months. Calcif Tissue Int. 2014;94:608–612.

72. Crandall CJ. Risk assessment

screening in
postmenopausal women: a systematic review. Curr Osteoporos Rep.
2015;13:287–301.

for osteoporosis

tools

73. Rotondi NK, Beaton DE, Elliot-Gibson V, et al. Comparison of CAROC and
FRAX in fragility fracture patients: agreement, clinical utility, and
implications for clinical practice. J Rheumatol. 2016;43:1593–1599.

74. Pecina JL, Romanovsky L, Merry SP, Kennel KA & Thacher TD.
Comparison of clinical risk tools for predicting osteoporosis in women
ages 50-64. J Am Board Fam Med. 2016;29:233–239.

75. Heerva E, Peltonen S, Svedstrom E, Aro HT, Vaananen K & Peltonen J.
Osteoclasts derived from patients with neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) display
insensitivity to bisphosphonates in vitro. Bone 2012;50:798–803.

76. Tsirikos AI, Saifuddin A & Noordeen MH. Spinal deformity in neuro-
fibromatosis type-1: diagnosis and treatment. Eur Spine J. 2005;14:
427–439.

77. Durrani AA, Crawford AH, Chouhdry SN, Saifuddin A & Morley TR.
Modulation of spinal deformities in patients with neurofibromatosis type
1. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2000;25:69–75.

78. Oates EC, Payne JM, Foster SL, Clarke NF & North KN. Young Australian
adults with NF1 have poor access to health care, high complication rates,
and limited disease knowledge. Am J Med Genet A. 2013;161A:
659–666.

79. Carroll SL & Ratner N. How does the Schwann cell lineage form tumors

in NF1? Glia 2008;56:1590–1605.

80. Huson SM, Harper PS & Compston DA. Von Recklinghausen
neurofibromatosis. A clinical and population study in south-east Wales.
Brain 1988;111 (Pt 6):1355–1381.

81. Dugoff L & Sujansky E. Neurofibromatosis type 1 and pregnancy. Am J

Med Genet. 1996;66:7–10.

82. Duong TA, Bastuji-Garin S, Valeyrie-Allanore L, Sbidian E, Ferkal S &
Wolkenstein P. Evolving pattern with age of cutaneous signs in
neurofibromatosis type 1: a cross-sectional study of 728 patients.
Dermatology 2011;222:269–273.

83. Wolkenstein P, Zeller J, Revuz J, Ecosse E & Leplege A. Quality-of-life
impairment in neurofibromatosis type 1: a cross-sectional study of
128 cases. Arch Dermatol 2001;137:1421–1425.

84. Kodra Y, Giustini S, Divona L, et al. Health-related quality of life in
patients with neurofibromatosis type 1. A survey of 129 Italian patients.
Dermatology 2009;218:215–220.

85. Page PZ, Page GP, Ecosse E, Korf BR, Leplege A & Wolkenstein P. Impact
of neurofibromatosis 1 on quality of life: a cross-sectional study of 176
American cases. Am J Med Genet A. 2006;140:1893–1898.

86. Bromley GS, Sherman JE & Goulian Jr. D, Neurofibromatosis-distribution

of lesions and surgical treatment. Ann Plast Surg. 1982;8:272–276.

87. Becker Jr. DW, Use of the carbon dioxide laser in treating multiple

cutaneous neurofibromas. Ann Plast Surg. 1991;26:582–586.

88. Elwakil TF, Samy NA & Elbasiouny MS. Non-excision treatment of multiple
cutaneous neurofibromas by laser photocoagulation. Lasers Med Sci.
2008;23:301–306.

GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 00 | Number

| Month

11

ACMG PRACTICE GUIDELINE

STEWART et al

| Care of adult NF1

89. Kim HJ, Lee KG, Yi SM, Kim JH & Kim IH. Successful treatment of multiple
cutaneous neurofibromas using a combination of shave excision and
laser photothermocoagulation with a 1,444-nm neodymium-doped
yttrium aluminum garnet laser. Dermatol Surg 2012;38:960–963.

90. Kriechbaumer LK, Susani M, Kircher SG & Happak W. Vaporization of
cutaneous neurofibromas with an erbium: yttrium-aluminum-garnet
laser: a comparative histologic evaluation. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012;129:
602e–604e.

91. Moreno JC, Mathoret C, Lantieri L, Zeller J, Revuz J & Wolkenstein P.
Carbon dioxide laser for removal of multiple cutaneous neurofibromas. Br
J Dermatol. 2001;144:1096–1098.

92. Roenigk RK & Ratz JL. CO2 laser treatment of cutaneous neurofibromas. J

Dermatol Surg Oncol. 1987;13:187–190.

93. Meni C, Sbidian E, Moreno JC, et al. Treatment of neurofibromas with a
carbon dioxide laser: a retrospective cross-sectional study of 106 patients.
Dermatology 2015;230:263–268.

94. Levine SM, Levine E, Taub PJ & Weinberg H. Electrosurgical excision
technique for the treatment of multiple cutaneous lesions in neuro-
fibromatosis type I. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2008;61:958–962.

95. Lutterodt CG, Mohan A & Kirkpatrick N. The use of electrodessication in
the treatment of cutaneous neurofibromatosis: A retrospective patient
satisfaction outcome assessment. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2016;69:
765–769.

96. Gutmann DH, Blakeley JO, Korf BR & Packer RJ. Optimizing biologically
targeted clinical trials for neurofibromatosis. Expert Opin Investig Drugs.
2013;22:443–462.

97. Brenaut E, Nizery-Guermeur C, Audebert-Bellanger S, et al. Clinical
characteristics of pruritus in neurofibromatosis 1. Acta Derm Venereol.
2016;96:398–399.

98. Misery L, Brenaut E, Le Garrec R, et al. Neuropathic pruritus. Nat Rev

Neurol. 2014;10:408–416.

99. Cohen JS, Levy HP, Sloan J, Dariotis J & Biesecker BB. Depression among
adults with neurofibromatosis type 1: prevalence and impact on quality
of life. Clin Genet 2015;88:425–430.

100. Pavol M, Hiscock M, Massman P, Moore Iii B, Foorman B & Meyers C.
function in adults with von Recklinghausen’s

Neuropsychological
neurofibromatosis. Dev Neuropsychol. 2006;29:509–526.

101. Descheemaeker MJ, Plasschaert E, Frijns JP & Legius E. Neuropsycho-
logical profile in adults with neurofibromatosis type 1 compared to a
control group. J Intellect Disabil Res. 2013;57:874–886.

102. Ferner RE, Hughes RA & Weinman J.

Intellectual
neurofibromatosis 1. J Neurol Sci. 1996;138:125–133.

impairment

in

103. Mautner VF, Granstrom S & Leark RA. Impact of ADHD in adults with
neurofibromatosis type 1: associated psychological and social problems.
J Atten Disord. 2015;19:35–43.

104. Costa Dde S, de Paula JJ, de Rezende NA, et al. Neuropsychological
impairments in elderly neurofibromatosis type 1 patients. Eur J Med
Genet. 2014;57:216–219.

105. Tonsgard JH, Yelavarthi KK, Cushner S, Short MP & Lindgren V. Do NF1
gene deletions result in a characteristic phenotype? Am J Med Genet.
1997;73:80–86.

106. Madubata CC, Olsen MA, Stwalley DL, Gutmann DH & Johnson KJ.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 and chronic neurological conditions in the
United States: an administrative claims analysis. Genet Med 2015;17:
36–42.

107. Afridi SK, Leschziner GD & Ferner RE. Prevalence and clinical
presentation of headache in a national neurofibromatosis 1 service
life. Am J Med Genet A. 2015;167A:
and impact on quality of
2282–2285.

108. Leschziner GD, Golding JF & Ferner RE. Sleep disturbance as part of the
neurofibromatosis type 1 phenotype in adults. Am J Med Genet A.
2013;161A:1319–1322.

109. Ferner RE, Hughes RA, Hall SM, Upadhyaya M & Johnson MR.
Neurofibromatous neuropathy in neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1). J Med
Genet. 2004;41:837–841.

110. Schulz A, Grafe P, Hagel C, et al. Neuropathies in the setting of
neurofibromatosis tumor syndromes: complexities and opportunities.
Exp Neurol 2017.

111. Brems H,

et

al. Glomus

Park C, Maertens O,

in
neurofibromatosis type 1: genetic, functional, and clinical evidence of
a novel association. Cancer Res 2009;69:7393–7401.

tumors

112. Stewart DR, Sloan JL, Yao L, et al. Diagnosis, management, and
complications of glomus tumours of the digits in neurofibromatosis type
1. J Med Genet. 2010;47:525–532.

113. Samuelsson B & Akesson HO. Relative fertility and mutation rate in

neurofibromatosis. Hereditas 1988;108:169–171.

114. McLaughlin ME & Jacks T. Progesterone receptor expression in

neurofibromas. Cancer Res 2003;63:752–755.

115. Lammert M, Mautner VF & Kluwe L. Do hormonal contraceptives
stimulate growth of neurofibromas? A survey on 59 NF1 patients. BMC
Cancer 2005;5:16.

116. Merker VL, Murphy TP, Hughes JB, et al. Outcomes of preimplantation
genetic diagnosis in neurofibromatosis type 1. Fertil Steril 2015;103:
761–768 e761.

117. van Minkelen R, van Bever Y, Kromosoeto JN, et al. A clinical and
genetic overview of 18 years neurofibromatosis type 1 molecular
diagnostics in the Netherlands. Clin Genet 2014;85:318–327.

118. McEwing RL, Joelle R, Mohlo M, Bernard JP, Hillion Y & Ville Y. Prenatal
diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1: sonographic and MRI findings.
Prenat Diagn 2006;26:1110–1114.

12

Volume 00 | Number

| Month | GENETICS in MEDICINE

