Cancer Cell

Article

Malignant Astrocytomas Originate
from Neural Stem/Progenitor Cells
in a Somatic Tumor Suppressor Mouse Model

Sheila Alcantara Llaguno,1,4 Jian Chen,1,4 Chang-Hyuk Kwon,1,4,5 Erica L. Jackson,3 Yanjiao Li,1 Dennis K. Burns,2
Arturo Alvarez-Buylla,3 and Luis F. Parada1,*
1Department of Developmental Biology
2Department of Pathology
The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
3Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
4These authors contributed equally to this work
5Present address: Tumor Microenvironment Program and Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University Medical Center,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
*Correspondence: luis.parada@utsouthwestern.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.12.006

SUMMARY

Malignant astrocytomas are inﬁltrative and incurable brain tumors. Despite profound therapeutic implica-
tions, the identity of the cell (or cells) of origin has not been rigorously determined. We previously reported
mouse models based on conditional inactivation of the human astrocytoma-relevant tumor suppressors
p53, Nf1, and Pten, wherein through somatic loss of heterozygosity, mutant mice develop tumors with
100% penetrance. In the present study, we show that tumor suppressor inactivation in neural stem/progenitor
cells is both necessary and sufﬁcient to induce astrocytoma formation. We demonstrate in vivo that trans-
formed cells and their progeny undergo inﬁltration and multilineage differentiation during tumorigenesis.
Tumor suppressor heterozygous neural stem/progenitor cultures from presymptomatic mice show aberrant
growth advantage and altered differentiation, thus identifying a pretumorigenic cell population.

INTRODUCTION

Gliomas are the most common primary malignancies of the central
nervous system (CNS). Astrocytomas, which account for the
majority of these tumors, exhibit histologic resemblance to astro-
glial cells. The most malignant form, glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM), is one of the most lethal forms of cancer, with a median
survival of about one year (Maher et al., 2001; Zhu and Parada,
2002). These highly inﬁltrative tumors are resistant to conventional
radiation and chemotherapy, resulting in dismal survival outcomes
that, in contrast to some forms of cancer, have improved only
marginally in the past several decades (Stupp et al., 2005).

A variety of mutations have been described in human astrocy-
toma, and these frequently disrupt cell-cycle and apoptosis

regulation (INK4A, CDK4, RB, TP53) and growth factor receptor
signaling (EGFR, PDGFR, PTEN) (Furnari et al., 2007). These
genetic lesions have been exploited in mice to generate animal
models that phenocopy the human malignancy and thus allow
for in vivo investigation of tumor development and their use in
translational studies. A number of these mouse models involve
introduction of oncogenic mutations in the germline or speciﬁc
cell subpopulations in the brain. These include overexpression
of active forms of Ras, Akt, epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) as well as
transforming antigens such as v-src and polyoma middle
T-antigen, often in combination with mutations in tumor suppres-
sors such as Ink4A or Arf (Fomchenko and Holland, 2006). The
ﬁrst endogenous genetic tumor suppressor mouse model was

SIGNIFICANCE

Identiﬁcation of the original cell that gives rise to a tumor and whether it is a limited cell type has crucial implications for
understanding cancer development. This knowledge is also requisite for rigorous investigation of tumor initiation mecha-
nisms. Using fully penetrant mouse models, we identify neural stem/progenitor cells as cancer-initiating cells and derive
insight into the behavior of these tumors. We also report malignant astrocytoma mouse models wherein tumor suppressor
inactivation at embryonic, early postnatal, or adult ages induces tumor formation and demonstrates the capacity of tumor
cells to differentiate within the tumor. Our studies on presymptomatic mutant progenitor cultures indicate that the disease
could be disseminating and acquiring growth advantage long before the onset of clinical manifestations.

Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 45

Cell of Origin of Malignant Astrocytomas

Cancer Cell

based on heterozygous mice carrying cis-germline mutations in
Nf1, a Ras GTPase-activating protein (RasGAP) and effector of
receptor tyrosine kinase signaling, and Trp53 (p53). Depending
on genetic background, these mice develop brain tumors with
varying penetrance (Reilly et al., 2000).

Further reﬁnements have been made through cre/lox tech-
nology, wherein mouse strains with germline or somatic heterozy-
gous mutations of the p53, Nf1, and Pten tumor suppressors
develop high-grade astrocytomas with 100% penetrance (Kwon
et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2005a). TP53 and PTEN mutations are
among the most frequent mutations reported in astrocytomas
(Furnari et al., 2007; Maher et al., 2001). Patients with germline
mutations in NF1, called neuroﬁbromatosis type 1, have
increased susceptibility to astrocytomas (Gutmann et al., 2002),
and recent detailed investigations of this 350 kb gene by the
Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network indicate that along
with PTEN and TP53, somatic NF1 mutations are also prevalent
in sporadic GBMs. In fact, these three genes are among the top
ﬁve most mutated genes in human GBMs (McLendon et al., 2008).
Mouse models harboring a heterozygous germline or condi-
tional somatic p53 mutation combined with conditional somatic
Nf1 heterozygosity develop low- to high-grade (secondary) astro-
cytomas (Zhu et al., 2005a). Tumor formation is further acceler-
ated into high-grade astrocytomas similar to primary GBM by
additional loss of Pten (Kwon et al., 2008). These fully penetrant
endogenous tumor suppressor-based mouse models develop
tumors that are indistinguishable from the human malignancy
based on known histologic and molecular criteria that deﬁne
human astrocytomas.

The subventricular zone (SVZ) is an extensive germinal layer
that concentrates neural and glial progenitors on the walls of the
lateral ventricles of adult mammals (Alvarez-Buylla and Lim,
2004). In rodents, SVZ neural stem cells correspond to type B
cells. These primary progenitors give rise to transient amplifying
type C cells that undergo limited mitoses before differentiating
into neuroblasts that migrate through the rostral migratory stream
(RMS) and into the olfactory bulb (OB) (Doetsch et al., 1999).
Neurogenesis also occurs in the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the
dentate gyrus, which produces local neurons that incorporate
into the granular cell layer (GL) (Gage, 2000; Zhao et al., 2008).
In humans, the SVZ and SGZ have both been shown to harbor
neural stem cells (Eriksson et al., 1998; Sanai et al., 2004). Recent
studies have suggested the existence of additional, though minor,
stem/progenitor niches elsewhere in the brain (Gould, 2007).

Historically, astrocytomas have been thought to arise from
differentiated glia that undergo a process of dedifferentiation
(Sanai et al., 2005; Sauvageot et al., 2007). However, whether
mature differentiated astrocytes in their normal parenchymal
environment are capable of initiating tumor formation in vivo
has not been rigorously tested. The recent identiﬁcation of adult
neural stem cells, immature cells that divide throughout the life-
time of the individual, presents attractive targets for acquisition
of tumor-causing mutations.

In the clinical setting, it is impossible to determine either the
location of tumor origin or the nature of the cell type (or types)
capable of generating these tumors. Similarly, because of astro-
cytoma’s inﬁltrative nature from the early onset, it is impossible
to determine the in vivo fate of tumor cells. Many theories have
been put forth regarding these issues, including an astrocytic

46 Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

origin for GBM. Additionally, GBMs may contain highly heteroge-
neous tumor-derived cells that can differentiate. Despite the
fundamental implications for development of therapies, direct
examination or proof of these ideas remains to be provided.

Physiologically relevant genetic mouse models of high-grade
astrocytomas provide one approach to address these critical
questions. Examination of events preceding unassailable tumor
development in our mouse models suggested that the tumors
arise in the SVZ and possibly within stem/progenitor cells (Zhu
et al., 2005a; Kwon et al., 2008). To directly examine whether
neural stem/progenitors are the source of astrocytomas, we
undertook a two-pronged approach. Using both genetic and
stereotactic injection methods, we demonstrate that in the
context of prevalent mutations and aberrant signaling pathways
found in idiopathic glioma—TP53, NF1, and PTEN—embryonic,
early postnatal, and, importantly, adult neural stem/progenitor
cells can give rise to malignant astrocytomas in vivo, whereas
more mature cell types cannot.

RESULTS

Genetic Tumor Suppressor Targeting of Neural
Stem/Progenitor Cells Induces Astrocytomas
Our previous astrocytoma mouse models relied on heterozygous
deletion of the tumor suppressors Nf1, p53, and/or Pten using
a human GFAP promoter-controlled cre transgenic line
(hGFAP-cre) to drive recombination (Zhuo et al., 2001), followed
by spontaneous loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at these loci (Kwon
et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2005a). The GFAP promoter used in these
conditional knockout mice is expressed in both stem cells and
white matter astrocytes. Thus, whether the tumors arose from
the neural stem/progenitors cells could not be determined.

To directly examine whether tumor suppressor depletion in
neural stem/progenitors was sufﬁcient to induce astrocytoma
formation, we targeted neural stem/progenitor cells in vivo using
a transgene that expresses a cre recombinase-modiﬁed estrogen
receptor ligand-binding domain fusion protein (cre-ERT2) under the
control of the Nestin promoter/enhancer (Chen et al., 2009). Nestin
is an intermediate ﬁlament protein that is widely used to mark
neural stem/progenitor cells but not differentiated astrocytes,
and the second intron enhancer allows for neural precursor-
speciﬁc expression in the CNS (Lendahl et al., 1990; Zimmerman
et al., 1994). Tamoxifen administration induces nuclear transfer
of the cre-ERT2 protein in nestin-expressing cells, where it can
mediate loxP-dependent recombination (Feil et al., 1996). In
a Rosa26 b-galactosidase (R26-lacZ) reporter background (Sor-
iano, 1999), neural stem/progenitor cells and all of their progeny
are indelibly marked by lacZ, which can be identiﬁed by X-gal
staining (Figures 1A and 1B). Induction at embryonic day 13.5
(E13.5) produced a broad pattern of expression similar to the
hGFAP-cre transgene that was used for the Nf1-p53-Pten condi-
tional astrocytoma mouse models (Kwon et al., 2008; Zhu et al.,
2005a), reﬂecting expression in embryonic telencephalic progeni-
tors (Figure 1A). Induction at early postnatal stages exhibited
marked and progressively reduced recombination in parenchyma
(Chen et al., 2009), and by adult ages, lacZ staining in the forebrain
and midbrain almost exclusively labeled the neural stem cells in the
SVZ and its progeny along the RMS and OB, as well as progenitors
in the SGZ and their progeny in the dentate gyrus (Figure 1B).

Cancer Cell

Cell of Origin of Malignant Astrocytomas

Figure 1. Tumor Suppressor Inactivation in Nestin-Expressing Neural Stem/Progenitor Cells Induces High-Grade Astrocytoma Formation
(A and B) Nestin-cre-ERT2 transgenic mice possess cre recombinase activity in the neural stem/progenitor niches.
(A) Representative images of X-gal-stained adult brain sections show that cre activity of Nestin-cre-ERT2;R26-lacZ mice treated with tamoxifen at E13.5 reca-
pitulates that of hGFAP-cre transgenic mice. Scale bar = 2 mm.
(B) Representative images of X-gal-stained brain sections at 6 months postinjection (MPI) reveal that tamoxifen induction at 4 weeks of age mainly restricts cre
activity to neural stem cells and their progeny in the subventricular zone (SVZ), rostral migratory stream (RMS), and olfactory bulb (OB), as well as in the subgra-
nular zone and granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus in the hippocampus (HP). Transgene expression is also found in the cerebellum. No staining is found in the
adult cortex (CTX) or striatum (ST), or in vehicle-treated mouse brains. Scale bar = 2 mm.
(C) Mice with induced tumor suppressor inactivation (Nestin-cre-ERT2;Nf1ﬂox/+;p53ﬂox/ﬂox;Ptenﬂox/+ or Nestin-cre-ERT2;Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;p53ﬂox/ﬂox) by tamoxifen
treatment (TMX) have shortened survival compared to vehicle-treated (Veh) mice. Kaplan-Meier survival curves of Nestin-cre-ERT2 mice with tumor suppressor
inactivation induced at either E13.5 or 4 weeks of age show median survival durations of 16 weeks and 46 weeks, respectively. Red arrow indicates timing of adult
injection.
(D) Histologically identiﬁable high-grade astrocytomas develop in inducible mutant mice. Representative hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained brain sections
reveal formation of brain tumors in Nestin-cre-ERT2 mice with tumor suppressor inactivation induced at either E13.5 or 4 weeks of age. Grade III or IV astrocy-
tomas with characteristic features of nuclear atypia, mitoses (arrowheads), and necrosis (N) are shown. Scale bars = 100 mm.
(E) Tumors express traditional markers of astrocytomas, including Ki67, GFAP, nestin, and Olig2. Scale bar = 100 mm.

Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 47

Cell of Origin of Malignant Astrocytomas

Cancer Cell

brain

X-gal-stained

Figure 2. Cancer-Initiating Cells Exhibit
Inﬁltration and Differentiation During Tumor
Development
(A) b-galactosidase (b-gal)-positive mutant cells
inﬁltrate into adjacent brain structures, away from
their normal neural stem/progenitor niches. A
representative
tumor
section from a Nestin-cre-ERT2;Nf1ﬂox/+;p53ﬂox/ﬂox;
Ptenﬂox/+;R26-lacZ mouse 8 months after tumor
suppressor inactivation shows tumor cells found
outside of their original locations in the SVZ/SGZ
niches (compared to Figure 1B). b-gal-positive
tumor cells, shown here expressing GFAP, nestin,
and PDGFRa, are found elsewhere in the forebrain,
such as the cortex and striatum.
(B) Marked astrocytoma cells expressing multiline-
age markers are found in the tumor bulk. b-gal-
positive tumor cells in inducible mutant mice,
shown here in the thalamus, express markers of
neuronal (Tuj1) and glial (S100b and APC) differen-
tiation. Toto-3 was used to mark cell nuclei.

the tumor suppressor alleles in tumors
by immunostaining and genotyping (Fig-
ure S2). Thus, cre-mediated somatic
mutation of Nf1, p53, and Pten restricted
to the neural/stem progenitor compart-
ment is sufﬁcient to replicate the high-
grade astrocytoma phenotype previously
observed using combinations of germline
and somatic mutations and a less speciﬁc
hGFAP-cre driver (Kwon et al., 2008; Zhu
et al., 2005a). Furthermore, loss of Nf1,
p53, and/or Pten was present in all tumors
and is therefore apparently required for high-grade tumor
induction (Kwon et al., 2008).

Cancer-Initiating Cells Undergo Inﬁltration
and Spontaneous Differentiation
The presence of the R26-lacZ reporter in the context of the
ﬂoxed tumor suppressors allows for lineage tracing of cells as
they undergo tumorigenic transformation. While normal neural
stem cells and their progeny are principally restricted to the
SVZ-RMS-OB and SGZ-GL (Figure 1B), tumors arising from
inducible mutant mice were found in adjacent brain regions,
including the cortex and striatum, as shown by X-gal staining
(Figure 2A). The cre transgene is expressed in cerebellum, but
only one tumor was found in cerebellum, and it resembled astro-
cytoma rather than medulloblastoma, which is the idiotypic
tumor of this brain region. The b-galactosidase-positive tumor
cells costained with the astrocytoma markers GFAP, nestin,
and platelet-derived growth factor receptor a (PDGFRa; Fig-
ure 2A). Thus, mutant stem cells or their progeny migrate away
from their normal niches and invade the parenchyma during
tumor development.

Astrocytomas are heterogeneous tumors, with varying cellular
morphologies and presence of immature and mature markers for
all neural
lineages. Upon examination of the tumor bulk, we
found a variety of b-galactosidase-positive cells coexpressing

We bred the inducible Nestin-cre-ERT2 mice to incorporate
the tumor suppressor ﬂoxed alleles (either Nf1ﬂox/+;p53ﬂox/ﬂox;
Ptenﬂox/+ or Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;p53ﬂox/ﬂox) and injected pregnant females
with tamoxifen at E13.5 or adult mice at 4 weeks of age. All
tamoxifen-treated (TMX) mutant mice developed high-grade
astrocytomas, while vehicle-treated (Veh) mice did not (Fig-
ure 1C). E13.5 TMX mutant mice developed tumors at a rate
similar to the previously reported hGFAP-cre;Nf1ﬂox/+;p53-/ﬂox;
Ptenﬂox/+ mouse strain (Kwon et al., 2008), with a median survival
of around 16 weeks. Mutant mice injected with tamoxifen at
4 weeks of age developed tumors with a median survival of
around 46 weeks. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of these
tumors showed the classical features of diffusely inﬁltrating
astrocytomas, including nuclear atypia and prominent mitoses
as well as necrosis (Figure 1D). Both E13.5- and adult-treated
mutant mice developed tumors diagnosed as grade III or IV
(GBM) astrocytomas based on the World Health Organization
classiﬁcation system (see Figure S1A and Table S1 available on-
line). These tumors had large numbers of Ki67+ cells, indicating
robust proliferation, and were immunoreactive for GFAP, nestin,
and Olig2 (Figure 1E), acknowledged markers of human astro-
cytic tumors (Furnari et al., 2007). Consistent with activation of
the Ras and Akt signaling pathways by loss of Nf1 and Pten,
respectively, some tumor regions showed robust pERK and
pAKT expression (Figure S1B). We further conﬁrmed LOH of

48 Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

Cell of Origin of Malignant Astrocytomas

Figure 3. Stereotactic Viral cre-Mediated
Targeting of the SVZ Induces Astrocytoma
Formation, Whereas Targeting of Non-
neurogenic Regions Does Not
(A) Schema of the viral cre injection experiments
and representative X-gal staining images. Right:
cre adenovirus targeting of the SVZ in R26-lacZ
reporter mice marks neural stem/progenitors and
their progeny in the RMS (arrowheads) and OB.
Left: cre virus injection into nonneurogenic regions
such as the striatum causes localized labeling at
the site of injection, but no labeling at the RMS
or OB. Scale bar = 2 mm.
(B) SVZ-targeted mutant mice develop histologi-
cally identiﬁable high-grade astrocytomas. Cre
adenovirus was stereotactically injected into the
SVZ of tumor suppressor ﬂoxed mice (Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;
p53ﬂox/ﬂox, Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;p53ﬂox/ ,
or Nf1ﬂox/+;
p53ﬂox/ﬂox;Ptenﬂox/+). Analysis of injected mouse
brains by H&E staining shows inﬁltrative tumor
cells in SVZ-injected mutant mice (cre/SVZ),
whereas mice injected in other nonneurogenic
brain regions (cre/other) do not develop tumors.
Tumors from SVZ-targeted mutant mice show
classic histopathologic characteristics of high-
grade astrocytomas, including tumor (T) invasion
into normal (nontumor, NT) regions, nuclear atypia
and mitosis (arrowhead), microvascular prolifera-
tion (MP), and necrosis (N). Scale bars = 200 mm.
(C) Tumors from SVZ-targeted tumor suppressor
ﬂoxed mice with R26-lacZ reporter show charac-
teristic expression of the astrocytoma-associated
markers Ki67, GFAP, and nestin. Scale bars =
200 mm.

markers of subsets of differentiated cells, such as the neuronal
marker Tuj1 and the glial markers S100b and adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC), as shown in a thalamic tumor in Figure 2B.
These immunoreactive tumor cells morphologically resembled
mature neurons, astrocytes, and myelin-ensheathing oligoden-
drocytes. In contrast to normal CNS cells, which show abundant
PTEN expression (Kwon et al., 2008), these marker-positive cells
were PTEN negative (Figure S2C), conﬁrming that these ‘‘differ-
entiated’’ cells were indeed cancer cells. These data provide
formal evidence that tumor cells have the stem/progenitor
capacity to exit the cell cycle and at least partially differentiate
in situ. This may account for the heterogeneity of tumor cell types
that is classically associated with high-grade astrocytomas.

Stereotactic Viral cre-Mediated Targeting of the SVZ
Induces Astrocytoma Formation
As an independent approach for targeting cre recombinase to
the SVZ neurogenic niche, we adopted a stereotactic injection
method. Numerous studies have used stereotactic targeting to
study the function, lineage, and identity of neural stem cells by
delivery of dyes, growth factors, or viral particles directly into
the SVZ (Doetsch et al., 1999; Merkle et al., 2004, 2007; Yoon
et al., 1996). Injection of cre recombinase-expressing adenovirus
alone into the SVZ of R26-lacZ reporter mice results in labeled

neural stem cells in the SVZ and their progeny as they travel
through the RMS and into the OB (Figure 3A, right panels). In
contrast, cre adenovirus injection into nonneurogenic regions
such as the cortex or striatum causes only localized labeling in
the area of the injection and no labeling in the RMS or OB
(Figure 3A, left panels). In both cases, restricted staining can
also be found along the needle tract.

We injected cre adenovirus into the SVZ of three strains of
tumor suppressor ﬂoxed mice (Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;p53ﬂox/ﬂox, Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;
p53ﬂox/ , and Nf1ﬂox/+;p53ﬂox/ﬂox;Ptenﬂox/+) either at postnatal
day 1–2 or adult ages (4–8 weeks). We found that viral cre-medi-
ated tumor suppressor inactivation in the SVZ at both early post-
natal and adult ages induced astrocytoma formation (Figure 3;
Table 1). Injected mutant mice developed brain tumors classiﬁed
as grade III or IV astrocytomas starting at 6 months postinjection
(Figure S3A; Table S2). These tumors exhibited the histopatho-
logic hallmarks of high-grade astrocytomas, including diffuse
inﬁltration, nuclear atypia, mitoses, microvascular proliferation,
and necrosis (Figure 3B), and were indistinguishable from those
of our previous studies (Kwon et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2005a).
The tumors were immunoreactive for Ki67, GFAP, and nestin
(Figure 3C) as well as Olig2, pERK, and pAKT (Figure S3B). We
further conﬁrmed that the tumors underwent cre recombination
by b-galactosidase immunostaining (Figure 3C). An internal

Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 49

Cell of Origin of Malignant Astrocytomas

Cancer Cell

Viral cre-Mediated Targeting of Adult Nonneurogenic
Brain Regions Does Not Induce Tumor Formation
The above results demonstrate that progenitor cells in the SVZ
have the capacity to give rise to astrocytomas. However, these
studies do not rule out the possibility that additional parenchymal
cells might also harbor this capacity, or that tumors might arise
from the few cells that are infected with the cre adenovirus along
the injection track. Previous studies using other experimental
systems, which involved in vitro manipulation or oncogenic trans-
formation, have suggested that mature astrocytes can also give
rise to gliomas (Bachoo et al., 2002; Dai et al., 2001; Uhrbom
et al., 2002). In order to target tumor suppressor inactivation to
cells outside the SVZ including astrocytes in vivo, we stereotacti-
cally delivered cre adenovirus into the cortex or striatum of 4- to
8-week-old tumor suppressor ﬂoxed adult mice injected in
parallel with the previously described SVZ injections. In contrast
to the successful SVZ injections, where 100% of the mice
developed tumors, none of the animals injected in the cortex or
striatum showed evidence of tumor formation (Figure 3B; Table
1), despite clear evidence of successful cre adenovirus infection
as demonstrated by X-gal staining and PCR genotyping (Fig-
ure 4B) or b-galactosidase immunohistochemistry (Figure S4).
H&E staining showed disorganization of the cortical or striatal
architecture in the injection site (Figure 3B), while immunostaining
showed the presence of GFAP-positive but Ki67-negative cells
(Figure S4), which is indicative of ﬁbrosis and astrogliosis (Zhu
et al., 2005b). Cells near the injection site likewise stained positive
for nestin and vimentin (Figure S4), consistent with reactive astro-
cytosis (Correa-Cerro and Mandell, 2007; Sofroniew, 2005),
phenotypes that are similar to GFP adenovirus-injected control
brains (data not shown).

Non-SVZ regions were also targeted at early postnatal ages,
and the majority of these mice did not develop gliomas (Table
1). However, we did ﬁnd 1 out of 12 cases where a non-SVZ-
targeted neonatal ﬂoxed mouse developed tumors 7 months
postinjection. This is consistent with prior reports of oncogenic
transformation of early postnatal brain cells. The rarity of tumor
induction in non-SVZ-injected mutant mice is consistent with
the rare targeting of neural progenitor cells in the cortex or stria-
tum that still exist at early postnatal ages (Seaberg et al., 2005)
or, alternatively, the rare targeting of radial glia that project into
the parenchyma and are the progenitors of SVZ adult stem cells
(Merkle et al., 2007). Overall, these data indicate that while tumor
suppressor targeting of SVZ neural stem/progenitor cells readily
induces high-grade astrocytoma formation, more differentiated
cell types are less susceptible to malignant transformation by
the tumor suppressor mutations assessed in this study.

Pretumorigenic Neural Stem/Progenitor Cells in the SVZ
The above studies demonstrate that neural stem/progenitor cells
can spontaneously give rise to malignant astrocytomas in our
tumor suppressor mouse models. This allows us to follow these
cells as they evolve from normal to transformed cells, as well as
to investigate the molecular events involved in tumor initiation.
Hence, we went back to our original tumor mouse models, which
we have previously shown to exhibit hyperplastic and migration
defects in the SVZ at early stages in vivo (Kwon et al., 2008; Zhu
et al., 2005a). We examined the properties of mutant SVZ cells
as neurospheres, which is the classical assay for studying neural

Table 1. Astrocytoma Formation in Tumor Suppressor Floxed
Mice by Stereotactic Viral cre Injection

Age at
Injection
Early postnatal cre/SVZ

Experiment:
Virus/Target Area

Tumor Incidence/Mice
Targeted

10/10

Adult

1/12

cre/other regions
controlsa
cre/SVZ
12/12
cre/other regionsb 0/20
controlsa
0/9

0/8

Early postnatal (postnatal day 1–2) or adult (4- to 8-week old) mutant mice
were injected with cre adenovirus targeted to the subventricular zone
(SVZ) or nonneurogenic brain regions such as the cortex and striatum.
All adult SVZ-targeted mice developed tumors, whereas mice targeted
in the nonneurogenic regions did not.
a Controls included Ad-GFP injected into the SVZ or cortex/striatum of
tumor suppressor mutant mice and Ad-Cre injected into R26-lacZ mice
alone.
b Nine out of 20 injections were intended SVZ injections that missed and
did not result in LacZ+ SVZ-RMS-OB; 11 of 20 injections intentionally
targeted cortex or striatum.

control and validation in these studies was a posteriori veriﬁca-
tion that intended injections into the SVZ resulted in lacZ lineage
tracing of
the SVZ-RMS-OB axis. We observed that only
successful SVZ-RMS-OB targeted injections, as evidenced by
X-gal staining in the tumor bulk, SVZ, and the olfactory bulb
(Figure 4A) as well as b-galactosidase immunohistochemistry
(data not shown), generated astrocytomas. We also conﬁrmed
loss of tumor suppressor alleles in tumors by PCR genotyping
(Figure 4A).

Similar to the nestin-inducible mutant mice, tumors were
found throughout most of the brain parenchyma (Figure 4A).
Early postnatal-injected mutant mice seemed to develop more
extensive tumors compared to adult-injected mutant mice,
which developed more restricted, albeit still invasive, high-grade
astrocytomas. Clear evidence of migration is shown by the pres-
ence of tumors away from the SVZ, such as in the cortex, hippo-
campus, and thalamus. In both cases, we found intense X-gal
staining of the tumor regions, as well as in the SVZ-RMS-OB
(Figure 4A).

As described in the tamoxifen-inducible tumors, b-galactosi-
dase-positive tumor cells had morphological features of differen-
tiated CNS cells and expressed mature markers, including the
astrocytic marker GFAP, the oligodendrocytic marker myelin
basic protein (MBP), and the neuronal marker NeuN (Figure 4C).
As an independent method of conﬁrming that these marker-
positive cells were indeed tumor cells, we stained these tumors
for PTEN, which is frequently suppressed in high-grade astrocy-
tomas. We found that a number of these ‘‘differentiated’’ cells
were PTEN negative (Figure 4C). We also found a rare population
of b-galactosidase-positive tumor cells near the cortex that
expressed calbindin (Figure 4C), which is normally expressed
by a subset of OB neurons produced by the SVZ neural stem/
progenitor cells (Merkle et al., 2007). These data demonstrate
that cancer-initiating cells or their progeny have the capacity to
migrate throughout the parenchyma, seed tumors, and give rise
to differentiated cell types during tumor development.

50 Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

Cell of Origin of Malignant Astrocytomas

Figure 4. Tumors Arising from SVZ-Targeted Mutant Mice Show Inﬁltration and Spontaneous Differentiation
(A) Left: representative X-gal-stained brain sections from mutant mice targeted with cre adenovirus into the SVZ at early postnatal and adult ages show massive
tumor formation, extensive inﬁltration and migration of tumor cells within the brain parenchyma, and labeling of the SVZ-RMS-OB axis. Right: LacZ-positive tumor
(T) and lacZ-negative nontumor (NT) regions were dissected for PCR genotyping, which showed increased recombination of tumor suppressors—in this case, of
ﬂoxed Nf1 alleles in tumors. G, tail genomic DNA; F, ﬂoxed; D, recombined; +, wild-type (WT) allele.
(B) Left: X-gal-stained brain sections from mice targeted in nonneurogenic regions such as striatum show localized staining at the site of injection and along the
needle tract, but no tumor formation. Right: PCR genotyping of lacZ-positive (lacZ+) and lacZ-negative (lacZ ) regions conﬁrms successful recombination of
ﬂoxed alleles in lacZ+ samples. Scale bar = 2 mm.
(C) Tumor cells from virus-injected mutant brains exhibit multilineage differentiation. Representative immunostaining images of high-grade astrocytomas from
SVZ-targeted tumor suppressor ﬂoxed mice with R26-lacZ reporter injected at early postnatal and adult ages show expression of mature differentiation markers
in a subset of b-gal-positive tumor cells, including GFAP for astrocytes, myelin basic protein (MBP) for oligodendrocytes, and NeuN for neurons. The majority of
marker-positive cells within the tumor bulk (in this case, NeuN-positive cells) were also PTEN negative. A small number of b-gal-positive tumor cells near the
cortex were positive for calbindin, a marker of a subset of differentiated OB neurons derived from the SVZ neural stem/progenitor cells. The insets show a
b-gal/calbindin double-positive cell. Scale bar = 200 mm; inset scale bars = 10 mm.

stem/progenitor behavior in vitro (Reynolds and Weiss, 1992).
Interestingly, we found that cultured SVZ neurospheres from
tumor-prone mutant mice (Mut3: hGFAP-cre;Nf1ﬂox/+;p53 /+ or
Mut4: hGFAP-cre;Nf1ﬂox/+;p53 /+;Ptenﬂox/+) at young ages prior to
any histologic evidence of hyperplasia exhibited abnormal growth
properties (Figure 5). Compared with wild-type controls, heterozy-
gous mutant SVZ neurospheres displayed increased proliferation
as shown by increased neurosphere diameter (Figure 5A) and
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation (Figure 5B), as well as
decreased apoptosis as shown by annexin V staining (Figure 5C).
These cells likewise exhibited abnormal stem cell properties,
including increased self-renewal capacity (Figure 5D), and altered
differentiation potential with decreased astrocytic differentiation
compared to normal cells (Figure 5E; Figure S5). To determine
whether SVZ cells underwent LOH in the young mice months prior

to tumor appearance, we performed PCR genotyping of the
tumor suppressor alleles in the abnormal neurosphere cultures.
We noted the presence of wild-type alleles for all tumor suppres-
sors, indicating retention of heterozygosity (Figure 5F). These
data indicate that in the absence of gross morphologic abnormal-
ities, heterozygous tumor suppressor-deﬁcient stem/progenitor
cells already display abnormal growth and differentiation proper-
ties—processes that may serve as a prelude to tumor formation.

DISCUSSION

Neural Stem/Progenitor Cells
as Astrocytoma-Initiating Cells
In this report, we describe the spatial and temporal restriction of
in vivo gene targeting to the neurogenic niches of the brain through

Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 51

Cell of Origin of Malignant Astrocytomas

Cancer Cell

Figure 5. Pretumorigenic SVZ Neural Stem/Progenitor Cells Exhibit Growth Advantage and Altered Differentiation
(A) SVZ neurospheres from presymptomatic mutant mice exhibit hypertrophy. SVZ cells of 4-week-old mice were cultured as neurospheres. As shown in repre-
sentative images, Nf1/p53-deﬁcient (Mut3: hGFAP-cre;Nf1ﬂox/+;p53 /+) or Nf1/p53/Pten-deﬁcient (Mut4: hGFAP-cre;Nf1ﬂox/+;p53 /+;Ptenﬂox/+) neurospheres
were larger than those from WT neurospheres. Scale bar = 200 mm.
(B) Neurosphere proliferation was measured by 2 hr of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) pulsing in day 3 cultures and subsequent ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) analysis. A signiﬁcantly higher percentage of Mut3 and Mut4 cells were in S phase compared to WT cells (p < 0.05).
(C) Neurosphere cell death was measured by annexin V labeling and subsequent FACS analysis. Mut3 or Mut4 cells underwent signiﬁcantly reduced cell death
compared to WT cells. 7-aminoactinomycin (7-AAD) is a vital dye.
(D) SVZ neurospheres from presymptomatic mutant mice exhibit increased self-renewal potential compared to WT as shown by methylcellulose assay
(**p < 0.005).
(E) Quantiﬁcation of differentiated cells reveals signiﬁcant increase in Tuj1- or nestin-positive cells and signiﬁcant decrease in GFAP-positive cells in Mut3 and
Mut4 cultures compared to those of WT control (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.005). All error bars in (A)–(E) are ± standard error of the mean (SEM).
(F) Neurosphere cultures from presymptomatic mutant mice exhibit retention of heterozygosity of tumor suppressor genes. Genomic DNA from the ear (E) or
neurospheres (N) of 4-week-old Mut3 and Mut4 mice was subjected to semiquantitative PCR genotyping. Representative data for cre, Nf1, p53, and Pten status
indicate retention of WT alleles in all Mut3 and Mut4 neurospheres.

the use of a tamoxifen-inducible Nestin-cre-ERT2 transgene or by
stereotactic viral-mediated cre recombinase delivery to the SVZ.
The results were striking in that all adult mice subjected to SVZ
targeting developed astrocytomas, thus establishing that muta-
tion of these astrocytoma-relevant tumor suppressors in the
neurogenic compartment in vivo is sufﬁcient to induce tumor
formation. Importantly, all viral injections into the SVZ were vali-
dated postmortem by lacZ staining to verify effective labeling of
the RMS and OB, normal destination sites for progeny derived
from the SVZ. In contrast, viral targeting of adult parenchyma
where the vast majority of cells were differentiated did not yield

tumors but instead local astrogliosis and localized lacZ staining,
despite demonstration of recombination in glial cells. The induc-
ible tumor model, on the other hand, showed that speciﬁcally
targeting nestin-expressing neural stem and progenitor cells
induces tumor formation. These data strongly support the idea
that mutations in the stem/progenitor compartment account for
the majority of these tumors and identify neural stem/progenitor
cells as cancer-initiating cells in our fully penetrant astrocytoma
mouse models. Furthermore, astrocytoma induction occurs efﬁ-
ciently in embryonic, early postnatal, and adult mice dependent
on stem/progenitor cell targeting of the tumor suppressors.

52 Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

Cell of Origin of Malignant Astrocytomas

For all of the described tumor studies, the endpoint was
selected to ensure adequate incubation of all manipulated cells,
whether tumor suppressor-bearing or control. We ended the
studies when speciﬁc cohorts exhibited morbidity that in all
cases was veriﬁed to be the consequence of advanced astrocy-
toma. Therefore, we did not assess the natural history of tumor
development or the genetic signature of the tumors since the
present models are predicated on our previously extensively
characterized tumor suppressor-based mouse models (Kwon
et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2005a). Moreover, we cannot rigorously
distinguish between quiescent stem cells or actively dividing
progenitor cells as the cells where LOH originates in our mouse
models. Since the tumors arise months after targeting and, in the
normal course of events, transient amplifying cells reach the OB
and differentiate within two weeks (Petreanu and Alvarez-Buylla,
2002), we favor the hypothesis that the tumorigenic state preex-
ists in the stem cell population but becomes phenotypically
manifest once the cells enter the transient amplifying state.
Experimental
these distinctions will require
more reﬁned cell-type-speciﬁc promoters to drive cre-mediated
recombination. It also remains to be determined whether the
differential susceptibility of neural stem cells and astrocytes to
transformation is dependent on local microenvironment.

investigation of

Cancer Stem Cells in Malignant Astrocytomas
The concept that some or many forms of cancer may be
comprised of a subset of tumor-propagating cells and another
subset of cells that cannot propagate the tumor has recently
received increasing attention (Reya et al., 2001). Dirks and
colleagues initially showed that human GBM xenografts into
immunodeﬁcient mice have such an identiﬁable subset of
cancer-propagating cells or ‘‘cancer stem cells’’ (Singh et al.,
2004). Cancer stem cells are thus technically deﬁned in terms of
their in vivo capacity for tumor initiation in serial transplantations
and rely on retrospective isolation of these self-renewing cells
(Dalerba et al., 2007). It is logical then to suggest that these cancer
stem cells have characteristics in common with stem cells, but
whether normal stem cells are the cells of origin of these tumors
remained to be experimentally established. Our data indicate
that normal neural stem/progenitor cells are cancer-initiating cells
and can readily give rise to high-grade astrocytomas.

Tumorigenic Stem/Progenitors Migrate
and Differentiate Abnormally In Vivo
Astrocytomas are notorious for their inﬁltrative capacity, a prop-
erty that clinically confounds complete surgical resection. We
show here that in contrast to normal adult neural stem cells
that are strictly conﬁned to the SVZ or SGZ, tumors arising from
tumor suppressor-deﬁcient neural stem cells or their progeny are
not restricted to these niches and actually migrate away from
their normal
locations, thus accounting for the presence of
tumors elsewhere in the forebrain, including the cortex, striatum,
hippocampus, and thalamus. This can also explain the presence
of tumors in regions where the hGFAP-cre transgene is not
expressed in conditional mutant mouse models (Kwon et al.,
2008; Zhu et al., 2005a). Another distinct feature of human astro-
cytomas is the heterogeneity of cell types within these tumors.
Because of their inﬁltrative nature, one interpretation is that
‘‘diverse’’ nontumor cells are present and surrounded by tumor

cells. This may be the case to some degree, as genotyping of
primary tumor tissue yields a faint wild-type or nonrecombined
band (Figure 4A and data not shown), and the majority of cells
expressing mature, differentiated markers are b-galactosidase
negative (Figure 2B; Figure 4C), suggesting that normal cells
were trapped within the tumor bulk. An additional alternative is
that the tumor itself has a heterogeneous component of tumor-
derived cells. This alternative has been indirectly supported
by several
lines of evidence, including in vitro differentiation
and xenografting into immunodeﬁcient mice. However, direct
demonstration that the original tumor is heterogeneous in situ
has been lacking. The power of mouse genetics permitted neural
stem/progenitor compartment-speciﬁc tumor suppressor inacti-
vation in the context of a cre-dependent lacZ reporter transgene.
Thus, through morphologic assessment of lacZ-positive and
PTEN-negative tumor cells in conjunction with labeling with
lineage-speciﬁc markers, we found that a subset of tumor-
derived cells have properties of astrocytes, oligodendrocytes,
and neurons. We even found a rare subset of lacZ-positive
tumors cells that express calbindin, which is normally expressed
by a subset of OB neurons produced by the SVZ neural stem/
progenitors, suggesting that the differentiation capacity of these
cancer-initiating stem/progenitor cells is retained during tumor
development.

The degree of differentiation is variable among individual tumor
cells and between tumors from different individuals. However,
since these ‘‘mature’’ cells may represent a less aggressive
population of tumor cells, this observation suggests that differen-
tiation therapy may provide a plausible approach to arresting
tumor growth while avoiding killing ‘‘bystander’’ normal cells. In
sum, the clinically relevant migration and differentiation capacity
of astrocytomas ﬁts well with a neural stem/progenitor cell origin
uncovered here.

Cell of Origin in Mouse and Human Gliomas
Other astrocytoma mouse models have used combinations of
oncogenic overexpression and/or tumor suppressor inactivation
to induce tumor formation. Several reports have shown that Nes-
tin promoter-driven oncogenesis at early postnatal ages can give
rise to astrocytomas, whereas GFAP promoter-driven oncogen-
esis has reduced penetrance depending on the initiating muta-
tions (Holland et al., 2000; Uhrbom et al., 2002). The tumor cell
of origin in these previous studies was inferred but not directly
examined. Ex vivo expansion of cultured neural stem cells or
neonatal astrocytes followed by transplantation into immunode-
ﬁcient mice also gives rise to astrocytomas (Bachoo et al., 2002;
Dai et al., 2001). Thus, to date, cells targeted for transformation
have been derived from either embryonic or early postnatal brain
cells. Moreover, in vitro manipulation to establish tumorigenicity
is likewise problematic because it is well established that cell
culture signiﬁcantly alters the normal biological behavior of cells.
Studies using oncogenic mutations may also provide supraphy-
siologic levels of activated oncogenes. In light of the present
studies, we suggest that these mouse models may be targeting
embryonic precursors present
in neonatal brains, with the
distinction that our models equally target adult stem/progenitor
cells and induce high-grade astrocytomas with tumor suppressor
inactivation. On the other hand, the Cancer Genome Atlas project
has described EGFR receptor mutations as mutually exclusive

Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 53

Cell of Origin of Malignant Astrocytomas

Cancer Cell

(0, 1.4, 2.6). For early postnatal injections, postnatal day 1 or 2 pups were in-
jected with 40 nl of Ad-Cre or Ad-GFP as described previously (Merkle et al.,
2004), with some modiﬁcations. The following coordinates (in mm anterior,
lateral, and dorsal to the bregma) for a range of neonate weights were used:
1.4–1.5 g (1.5, 2.6, 1.4); 1.5–1.7 g (1.6, 2.7, 1.4); 1.7–1.9 g (1.7, 2.9, 1.5); and
>1.9 g (1.7, 2.9, 1.7). All virus- and tamoxifen-injected mice were followed for
development of neurologic abnormalities and harvested for histologic analysis.

Histology and Tumor Analysis
Mice were perfused and ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde. Five micrometer
sections were cut, and every ﬁfth slide was stained with H&E. Brain sections
were independently examined by S.A.L. and J.C. as well as D.K.B., a certiﬁed
neuropathologist, and tumor diagnosis was determined based on World
Health Organization criteria (Kleihues et al., 2002). Brains used for X-gal stain-
ing were postﬁxed in 2% PFA overnight. Half brains or 50 mm vibratome
sections were stained in X-gal solution, and sections were counterstained
with nuclear fast red as described previously (Luikart et al., 2005). In some
cases, half brains stained with X-gal were subsequently processed and used
for immunohistochemistry. For PCR genotyping, DNA extraction and PCR
were performed using tumor and nontumor tissues as described previously
(Kwon et al., 2008).

Immunohistochemistry
Parafﬁn sections were deparafﬁnized, rehydrated, and subjected to citrate-
based antigen retrieval. Primary antibodies were used against GFAP (DAKO,
1:1000; BD Biosciences, 1:200), Ki67 (Novocastra, 1:1000), nestin (BD Biosci-
ences, 1:100), Olig2 (Chemicon, 1:1000), b-gal (ICN, 1:1000), NeuN (Chemicon,
1:500), MBP (Sternberger, 1:200), calbindin (Swant, 1:1000), vimentin (Zymed,
1:200), S100b (Sigma, 1:200), pERK (Cell Signaling, 1:400), pAKT (Cell
Signaling, 1:100), PTEN (Cell Signaling, 1:100), and PDGFRa (Spring, 1:50).
We used both immunoﬂuorescence staining with Cy2, Cy3, or Cy5 (Jackson
Labs, 1:400) and biotin-streptavidin Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary anti-
bodies (Molecular Probes, 1:1000), as well as horseradish peroxidase-based
Vectastain ABC Kit (Vector Laboratories). Sections were examined using
optical, ﬂuorescence, and confocal microscopy (Olympus and Zeiss).

Neurosphere Culture and Assays
Neurosphere cultures were established and maintained as described previ-
ously (Kwon et al., 2008). To measure neurosphere size, we seeded dissociated
cells into 24-well plates and acquired all neurosphere images after 7 days of
incubation. We measured neurosphere diameter using MetaMorph software
(Universal Imaging Corporation). Proliferation and apoptosis in neurosphere
cultures were quantiﬁed by ﬂow cytometry using BrdU and annexin V analysis
kits (BD Biosciences). Self-renewal assay was performed by plating dissoci-
ated cells with methylcellulose-containing media (ﬁnal concentration 0.8%,
Sigma) as described previously (Gritti et al., 1999). For differentiation, we
seeded dissociated cells in eight-chamber slides coated with Matrigel (BD
Biosciences, 1:20) and cultured in NeuroCult with differentiation medium
(StemCell Technologies). Quantiﬁcation was performed in at least n = 3
samples from each genotype, and Student’s t test was used for statistical
analysis.

SUPPLEMENTAL DATA

The Supplemental Data include ﬁve ﬁgures and two tables and can be
found with this article online at http://www.cancercell.org/supplemental/
S1535-6108(08)00409-1.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank L. McClellan, S. McKinnon, A. Deshaw, S. Kennedy, J. Chan-
dler, and P. Leake for technical assistance and Parada laboratory members,
especially R. McKay, for helpful suggestions and discussions. Adenovirus
was provided by the University of Iowa Vector Core. This work was supported
in part by a Children’s Tumor Foundation Young Investigator Award to S.A.L.;
Basic Research Fellowships from the American Brain Tumor Association (in
memory of Daniel J. Martinelli and Geoffrey J. Cunningham) to C.-H.K.; and
NIH (5P50NS052606), US Department of Defense (W81XWH-05-1-0265), and

from NF1 mutations in gliomas. Thus, it is possible that other
mutations in neural stem/progenitors can likewise give rise to
gliomas, or that gliomas with differing genetic signatures may
originate from different cell subtypes. The ﬁnding that the SVZ
contains a diverse set of neural stem cells that can give rise to
speciﬁc progenitor subtypes (Merkle et al., 2007) provides
some clues. Whether these heterogeneous stem cell populations
are susceptible to the same mutations or give rise to different
tumor subtypes also remains to be examined. The experimental
approaches described herein will be useful in determining the
cell of origin of other models using GBM signature mutations or
pathways.

Haploinsufﬁciency and Tumor Initiation
The mechanisms involved in tumor initiation remain poorly under-
stood, and identiﬁcation of the cell of origin allows us to follow
normal SVZ cells as they undergo transformation and full-blown
tumorigenesis. We were surprised by the ﬁnding that in culture,
pretumorigenic neurosphere-forming cells from the SVZ already
show growth advantage and apoptotic resistance while retaining
heterozygosity. It is also surprising that at these early stages, the
differentiation capacity of these mutant cells is altered, suggest-
ing that the differentiation state of these immature cells is tightly
coupled to self-renewal processes. This underscores the impor-
tance of the Nf1, p53, and Pten tumor suppressor pathways in
regulating normal neural stem cell proliferation and self-renewal.
It also has implications for therapeutic approaches, should the
physiological relevance of our models continue to be validated.
These data imply that there remains a persistent and primed
source of pretumorigenic cells in the neurogenic niche that will
require further investigation and therapeutic targeting.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Mice
All mouse experiments were approved by and performed according to the
guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas. Mice with conditional Nf1,
p53, and/or Pten alleles with the R26-lacZ reporter were maintained on a mixed
129SvJ/C57BL/6/B6CBA background (Kwon et al., 2008). Mice harboring the
ﬂoxed Nf1 and p53 alleles in cis were generated by crossing the Nf1ﬂox/+ strain
to the p53ﬂox/+ strain to generate Nf1ﬂox/+;p53ﬂox/+ trans mice that were then
crossed to wild-type mice. Generation and maintenance of Mut3 and Mut4
mice as well as genotyping for the ﬂox, wild-type, and recombinant alleles
were as described previously (Kwon et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2005a).

Tamoxifen Induction
Tumor suppressor ﬂoxed mice containing the Nestin-cre-ERT2 transgene were
injected intraperitoneally with vehicle (9:1 sunﬂower oil:ethanol mixture)
(Sigma) or tamoxifen (Sigma) at a working concentration of 6.7 mg/ml. Pregnant
mothers were injected with 1 mg tamoxifen at E13.5, whereas 4-week-old mice
were injected with 83.8 mg/kg tamoxifen twice a day for 5 consecutive days
(Chen et al., 2009).

Adenovirus Injection
Tumor suppressor ﬂoxed mice at 4–8 weeks of age or postnatal day 1–2 were
injected with cre- or GFP-expressing adenovirus as described previously
(Doetsch et al., 1999; Merkle et al., 2004), with some modiﬁcations. Two
hundred nanoliters of adenovirus (Ad-Cre, 2.0 3 1012 plaque-forming units
[pfu]/ml, University of Iowa Vector Core; Ad-GFP, 1.0 3 1011 pfu/ml) was
injected using a World Precision nanoinjector apparatus, according to the
following coordinates (in mm anterior, lateral, and dorsal to the bregma): SVZ
(0, 1.4, 1.6; 0.5, 1.1, 1.7; and 1, 1, 2.3); cortex (0, 3.5, 1.0); and striatum

54 Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

Cell of Origin of Malignant Astrocytomas

American Cancer Society (RP0408401) grants to L.F.P. L.F.P. is an American
Cancer Society Research Professor.

Received: August 15, 2008
Revised: October 28, 2008
Accepted: December 10, 2008
Published: January 5, 2009

REFERENCES

Alvarez-Buylla, A., and Lim, D.A. (2004). For the long run: maintaining germinal
niches in the adult brain. Neuron 41, 683–686.

Bachoo, R.M., Maher, E.A., Ligon, K.L., Sharpless, N.E., Chan, S.S., You, M.J.,
Tang, Y., DeFrances, J., Stover, E., Weissleder, R., et al. (2002). Epidermal
growth factor receptor and Ink4a/Arf: convergent mechanisms governing
terminal differentiation and transformation along the neural stem cell to
astrocyte axis. Cancer Cell 1, 269–277.

Chen, J., Kwon, C.-H., Lin, L., Li, Y., and Parada, L.F. (2009). Inducible
site-speciﬁc recombination in neural stem/progenitor cells. Genesis, in press.
10.1002/dvg.20465.

Correa-Cerro, L.S., and Mandell, J.W. (2007). Molecular mechanisms of astro-
gliosis: new approaches with mouse genetics. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 66,
169–176.

Dai, C., Celestino, J.C., Okada, Y., Louis, D.N., Fuller, G.N., and Holland, E.C.
(2001). PDGF autocrine stimulation dedifferentiates cultured astrocytes and
induces oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas from neural progenitors
and astrocytes in vivo. Genes Dev. 15, 1913–1925.

Dalerba, P., Cho, R.W., and Clarke, M.F. (2007). Cancer stem cells: models
and concepts. Annu. Rev. Med. 58, 267–284.

Doetsch, F., Caille, I., Lim, D.A., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(1999). Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem cells in the adult
mammalian brain. Cell 97, 703–716.

Eriksson, P.S., Perﬁlieva, E., Bjork-Eriksson, T., Alborn, A.M., Nordborg, C.,
Peterson, D.A., and Gage, F.H. (1998). Neurogenesis in the adult human hippo-
campus. Nat. Med. 4, 1313–1317.

Feil, R., Brocard, J., Mascrez, B., LeMeur, M., Metzger, D., and Chambon, P.
(1996). Ligand-activated site-speciﬁc recombination in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 93, 10887–10890.

Fomchenko, E.I., and Holland, E.C. (2006). Mouse models of brain tumors and
their applications in preclinical trials. Clin. Cancer Res. 12, 5288–5297.

Furnari, F.B., Fenton, T., Bachoo, R.M., Mukasa, A., Stommel, J.M., Stegh, A.,
Hahn, W.C., Ligon, K.L., Louis, D.N., Brennan, C., et al. (2007). Malignant
astrocytic glioma: genetics, biology, and paths to treatment. Genes Dev. 21,
2683–2710.

Gage, F.H. (2000). Mammalian neural stem cells. Science 287, 1433–1438.

Kwon, C.H., Zhao, D., Chen, J., Alcantara, S., Li, Y., Burns, D.K., Mason, R.P.,
Lee, E.Y., Wu, H., and Parada, L.F. (2008). Pten haploinsufﬁciency accelerates
formation of high-grade astrocytomas. Cancer Res. 68, 3286–3294.

Lendahl, U., Zimmerman, L.B., and McKay, R.D. (1990). CNS stem cells
express a new class of intermediate ﬁlament protein. Cell 60, 585–595.

Luikart, B.W., Nef, S., Virmani, T., Lush, M.E., Liu, Y., Kavalali, E.T., and
Parada, L.F. (2005). TrkB has a cell-autonomous role in the establishment of
hippocampal Schaffer collateral synapses. J. Neurosci. 25, 3774–3786.

Maher, E.A., Furnari, F.B., Bachoo, R.M., Rowitch, D.H., Louis, D.N., Cavenee,
W.K., and DePinho, R.A. (2001). Malignant glioma: genetics and biology of
a grave matter. Genes Dev. 15, 1311–1333.

McLendon, R., Friedman, A., Bigner, D., Van Meir, E.G., Brat, D.J., Mastrogia-
nakis, M., Olson, J.J., Mikkelsen, T., Lehman, N., Aldape, K., et al. (2008).
Comprehensive genomic characterization deﬁnes human glioblastoma genes
and core pathways. Nature 455, 1061–1068.

Merkle, F.T., Tramontin, A.D., Garcia-Verdugo, J.M., and Alvarez-Buylla, A.
(2004). Radial glia give rise to adult neural stem cells in the subventricular
zone. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 17528–17532.

Merkle, F.T., Mirzadeh, Z., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2007). Mosaic organization
of neural stem cells in the adult brain. Science 317, 381–384.

Petreanu, L., and Alvarez-Buylla, A. (2002). Maturation and death of adult-born
olfactory bulb granule neurons: role of olfaction. J. Neurosci. 22, 6106–6113.

Reilly, K.M., Loisel, D.A., Bronson, R.T., McLaughlin, M.E., and Jacks, T.
(2000). Nf1;Trp53 mutant mice develop glioblastoma with evidence of strain-
speciﬁc effects. Nat. Genet. 26, 109–113.

Reya, T., Morrison, S.J., Clarke, M.F., and Weissman, I.L. (2001). Stem cells,
cancer, and cancer stem cells. Nature 414, 105–111.

Reynolds, B.A., and Weiss, S. (1992). Generation of neurons and astrocytes
from isolated cells of the adult mammalian central nervous system. Science
255, 1707–1710.

Sanai, N., Tramontin, A.D., Quinones-Hinojosa, A., Barbaro, N.M., Gupta, N.,
Kunwar, S., Lawton, M.T., McDermott, M.W., Parsa, A.T., Manuel-Garcia
Verdugo, J., et al. (2004). Unique astrocyte ribbon in adult human brain
contains neural stem cells but lacks chain migration. Nature 427, 740–744.

Sanai, N., Alvarez-Buylla, A., and Berger, M.S. (2005). Neural stem cells and
the origin of gliomas. N. Engl. J. Med. 353, 811–822.

Sauvageot, C.M., Kesari, S., and Stiles, C.D. (2007). Molecular pathogenesis
of adult brain tumors and the role of stem cells. Neurol. Clin. 25, 891–924.

Seaberg, R.M., Smukler, S.R., and van der Kooy, D. (2005). Intrinsic differ-
ences distinguish transiently neurogenic progenitors from neural stem cells
in the early postnatal brain. Dev. Biol. 278, 71–85.

Singh, S.K., Hawkins, C., Clarke, I.D., Squire, J.A., Bayani, J., Hide, T., Henkel-
man, R.M., Cusimano, M.D., and Dirks, P.B. (2004). Identiﬁcation of human
brain tumour initiating cells. Nature 432, 396–401.

Sofroniew, M.V. (2005). Reactive astrocytes in neural repair and protection.
Neuroscientist 11, 400–407.

Gould, E. (2007). How widespread is adult neurogenesis in mammals? Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 8, 481–488.

Soriano, P. (1999). Generalized lacZ expression with the ROSA26 Cre reporter
strain. Nat. Genet. 21, 70–71.

Gritti, A., Frolichsthal-Schoeller, P., Galli, R., Parati, E.A., Cova, L., Pagano,
S.F., Bjornson, C.R., and Vescovi, A.L. (1999). Epidermal and ﬁbroblast growth
factors behave as mitogenic regulators for a single multipotent stem cell-like
population from the subventricular region of the adult mouse forebrain.
J. Neurosci. 19, 3287–3297.

Gutmann, D.H., Rasmussen, S.A., Wolkenstein, P., MacCollin, M.M., Guha, A.,
Inskip, P.D., North, K.N., Poyhonen, M., Birch, P.H., and Friedman, J.M.
(2002). Gliomas presenting after age 10 in individuals with neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1 (NF1). Neurology 59, 759–761.

Holland, E.C., Celestino, J., Dai, C., Schaefer, L., Sawaya, R.E., and Fuller,
G.N. (2000). Combined activation of Ras and Akt in neural progenitors induces
glioblastoma formation in mice. Nat. Genet. 25, 55–57.

Kleihues, P., Louis, D.N., Scheithauer, B.W., Rorke, L.B., Reifenberger, G.,
Burger, P.C., and Cavenee, W.K. (2002). The WHO classiﬁcation of tumors
of the nervous system. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 61, 215–225.

Stupp, R., Mason, W.P., van den Bent, M.J., Weller, M., Fisher, B., Taphoorn,
M.J., Belanger, K., Brandes, A.A., Marosi, C., Bogdahn, U., et al. (2005). Radio-
therapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide for glioblastoma. N.
Engl. J. Med. 352, 987–996.

Uhrbom, L., Dai, C., Celestino, J.C., Rosenblum, M.K., Fuller, G.N., and
Holland, E.C.
loss cooperates with KRas activation in
astrocytes and neural progenitors to generate glioblastomas of various
morphologies depending on activated Akt. Cancer Res. 62, 5551–5558.

Ink4a-Arf

(2002).

Yoon, S.O., Lois, C., Alvirez, M., Alvarez-Buylla, A., Falck-Pedersen, E., and
Chao, M.V. (1996). Adenovirus-mediated gene delivery into neuronal precur-
sors of the adult mouse brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 11974–11979.

Zhao, C., Deng, W., and Gage, F.H. (2008). Mechanisms and functional
implications of adult neurogenesis. Cell 132, 645–660.

Zhu, Y., and Parada, L.F. (2002). The molecular and genetic basis of neurolog-
ical tumours. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2, 616–626.

Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 55

Cell of Origin of Malignant Astrocytomas

Cancer Cell

Zhu, Y., Guignard, F., Zhao, D., Liu, L., Burns, D.K., Mason, R.P., Messing, A.,
and Parada, L.F. (2005a). Early inactivation of p53 tumor suppressor gene coop-
erating with NF1 loss induces malignant astrocytoma. Cancer Cell 8, 119–130.

Zhuo, L., Theis, M., Alvarez-Maya, I., Brenner, M., Willecke, K., and Messing,
A. (2001). hGFAP-cre transgenic mice for manipulation of glial and neuronal
function in vivo. Genesis 31, 85–94.

Zhu, Y., Harada, T., Liu, L., Lush, M.E., Guignard, F., Harada, C., Burns, D.K.,
Bajenaru, M.L., Gutmann, D.H., and Parada, L.F. (2005b). Inactivation of NF1
in CNS causes increased glial progenitor proliferation and optic glioma forma-
tion. Development 132, 5577–5588.

Zimmerman, L., Parr, B., Lendahl, U., Cunningham, M., McKay, R., Gavin, B.,
Mann, J., Vassileva, G., and McMahon, A. (1994). Independent regulatory
elements in the nestin gene direct transgene expression to neural stem cells
or muscle precursors. Neuron 12, 11–24.

56 Cancer Cell 15, 45–56, January 6, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

