review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

Biomarkers of angiogenesis for the development  
of antiangiogenic therapies in oncology: tools  
or decorations?

Cristiana Sessa, Aymeric Guibal, Gianluca Del Conte and Curzio Rüegg*

SuMMarY
SuMMarY
Since 2004, four antiangiogenic drugs have been approved for clinical 
use in patients with advanced solid cancers, on the basis of their capacity 
to improve survival in phase III clinical studies. These achievements 
validated the concept introduced by Judah Folkman that the inhibition 
of tumor angiogenesis could control tumor growth. It has been suggested 
that biomarkers of angiogenesis would greatly facilitate the clinical 
development of antiangiogenic therapies. For these four drugs, the 
pharmacodynamic effects observed in early clinical studies were important 
to corroborate activities, but were not essential for the continuation of 
clinical development and approval. Furthermore, no validated biomarkers 
of angiogenesis or antiangiogenesis are available for routine clinical use. 
Thus, the quest for biomarkers of angiogenesis and their successful use 
in the development of antiangiogenic therapies are challenges in clinical 
oncology and translational cancer research. We review critical points 
resulting from the successful clinical trials, review current biomarkers, and 
discuss their potential impact on improving the clinical use of available 
antiangiogenic drugs and the development of new ones. 
KeywoRds biomarker, imaging, monitoring, therapy, tumor angiogenesis 

REvIEw CRITERIA
The information for this Review was compiled by searching the PubMed, MEDLINE 
and ASCO databases for articles published until 30 September 2007. Electronic 
early­release publications were also included. The following search terms were used: 
“tumor angiogenesis” in association with: “diagnosis”, “prognosis”, “monitoring”, 
“prediction”, “surrogate marker”, “molecular marker”, “biomarker”, “imaging”, 
“clinical study”. When possible, primary sources have been quoted. 

cMe

C Sessa is a Medical and Gynecological Oncologist at the Istituto Oncologico 
della Svizzera Italiana, Bellinzona, A Guibal is a Radiologist at the 
Department of Radiology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Faculty 
of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 
G Del Conte is a Resident Medical Oncologist in the Division of Medical 
Oncology A, National Cancer Institute, Milan, Italy, and C Rüegg is Head 
of the Division of Experimental Oncology at the Centre Pluridisciplinaire 
d’Oncologie, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, 
Lausanne and NCCR Molecular Oncology, Epalinges, Switzerland. 

Correspondence
*Division of Experimental Oncology, CePO, 155 Chemin des Boveresses, CH–1066 Epalinges, 
Switzerland 
curzio.ruegg@unil.ch

Received 5 August 2007    Accepted 6 December 2007    Published online 17 June 2008
www.nature.com/clinicalpractice
doi:10.1038/ncponc1150

 Continuing Medical Education online

Medscape, LLC is pleased to provide online continuing 
medical  education  (CME)  for  this  journal  article, 
allowing clinicians the opportunity to earn CME credit. 
Medscape,  LLC  is  accredited  by  the  Accreditation 
Council for Continuing Medical Education (ACCME) to 
provide CME for physicians. Medscape, LLC designates 
this educational activity for a maximum of 1.0 AMA PRA  
Category 1 CreditsTM. Physicians should only claim credit  
commensurate with the extent of their participation in the 
activity. All other clinicians completing this activity will 
be issued a certificate of participation. To receive credit, 
please  go  to  http://www.medscape.com/cme/ncp   
and complete the post-test.

Learning objectives
Upon completion of this activity, participants should be 
able to: 
1 

Identify 4 antiangiogenesis drugs approved since 
2004 for human use in patients with solid cancers.
List markers of clinical progression of cancer.

2 
3  Describe tumors targeted by the 4 approved anti-

angiogenesis drugs in clinical trials.

4  Discuss challenges in the development of validated 
biomarkers of antiangiogenic activity, as well as 
their potential role in cancer treatment.
Identify functional imaging techniques for assessing 
antiangiogenesis drugs.

5 

Competing interests
The authors, the Journal Editor L Hutchinson and the 
CME questions author D Lie declared no competing 
interests.

is  a 

INTRODUCTION
Tumor  angiogenesis 
tumor  micro­
environmental  process  that  promotes  tumor­
cell  survival,  growth,  invasion  and  metastasis, 
and  its  inhibition  is  emerging  as  a  new  thera­
peutic approach to control tumor progression.1,2 
Hundreds  of  molecules  with  antiangiogenic 
activity in preclinical models have been reported, 
and many of them have entered clinical testing in 
oncology.3 Initially, antiangiogenic molecules were 
discovered on the basis of their ability to inhibit 
endothelial cell proliferation in vitro and angio­
genesis in vivo. Subsequently, the identification 
of molecular mediators of angiogenesis, such as 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), opened 
the possibility of selectively targeting specific path­
ways.4 To date, four antiangiogenic drugs have 

378  nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY 

      juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7

Table 1 Phase II and III clinical trials with bevacizumab, sorafenib, sunitinib and temsirolimus in renal cell carcinoma.
drug

end point Biomarker

Target

Phase II

VEGF

Randomized, double-blind: 
HR for PFS: 2.55 at 10 mg/kg; 
P <0.00194

Randomized discontinuation:
PFS: 6 months vs 
1.2 months.17

Phase III
First line: bevacizumab + IFNα vs IFNα
PFS: bevacizumab plus IFNα 
(10.2 months; HR = 0.63; P <0.0001); 
PFS: placebo/IFNα (5.4 months)13
First line: sorafenib vs placebo:
ORR: 10 % vs 2 %
PFS: 5.5 months vs 2.8 months (HR 
0.44%, 95% CI 0.35–0.55%).18

Not randomized, single arm: 
OR: 34% (CI 25–44%),
PFS: 8.3 months (95% CI 
7.8–14.5 months).20

First line: sunitinib vs IFNα
ORR: 31% vs 6% (P <0.001)
PFS: 11 months vs 5 months (HR 
0.42, CI 0.32–0.54; P <0.001).22

Bevacizumab
(Avastin®)
(humanized 
A4.6.1) 

Sorafenib 
(Nexavar®) 
(BAY43-9006)

Sunitinib 
(Sutent®) 
(SU11248)

Temsirolimus
(Torisel®) 
(CCI-779)

VEGFRs
PDGFRα/β
c-KIT
FLT-3
Raf

VEGFRs 
PDGFRβ
FLT-3
c-KIT
c-RET

mTOR

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

PFS

None

PFS

ORR

None (Patients with 
greater PFS tended 
to have higher 
pretreatment VEGF 
levels)19

None (Responding 
patients tended to have 
low levels of sVEGFR3 
and greater decrease 
upon treatment)23

Randomized:
25, 75, or 250 mg 
PFS: 6.3 months (25 mg), 
6.7 months (75 mg), and 
5.2 months (250 mg); 
5.8 months overall.25

First line: temsirolimus vs IFNα vs 
temsirolimus plus IFNα 
OS: temsirolimus 10.9 months (HR, 
0.73; 95% CI 0.58–0.92; P = 0.008); 
IFNα, 7.3 months; temsirolimus plus 
IFNα, 8.4 months, PFS (P <0.001).26

OS
PFS

None

Abbreviations: c-KIT, stem cell factor receptor; c-RET, glial cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor receptor; FLT, Fms-like tyrosine kinase; HR, hazard ratio; IFN, 
interferon; OR, odds ratio; ORR, overall response rate; OS, overall survival; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; PFS, progression-free survival; 
VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.

been approved for human use in solid tumors: 
Avastin® (Genentech, San Francisco, CA; bevaci­
zumab),5  Nexavar®  (Bayer  Aktiengesellschaft, 
Leverkusen­Bayerwerk,  Germany;  sorafenib),6 
Sutent®  (C.P.  Pharmaceuticals  International, 
New York, NY; sunitinib),7 and Torisel® (Wyeth 
Corporation, Madison, NJ; temsirolimus).8 The 
successful clinical development of these drugs is 
in contrast to the plethora of molecules that failed 
to replicate in clinical trials the efficacy that was 
seen in preclinical models.3,9 This high failure rate 
should stimulate a critical reappraisal of the strate­
gies used to test these drugs in the clinic: what can 
we learn from these trials to avoid future failures? 
What are the critical factors in the development 
of antiangiogenic drugs? What are the end points 
we should aim at? Could biomarkers of angio­
genesis  and  drug  activity  help  in  this  process? 
We will review the design of the studies that led 
to  the  approval  of  these  antiangiogenic  drugs, 
discuss the potential value of biomarkers of angio­
genesis,  review  current  candidate  markers  and 
methodologies, and provide some rationale for  
future developments. 

CLINICAL STUDIES OF APPROvED 
ANTIANGIOGENIC DRUGS 
The efficacy of anticancer therapies is commonly 
evaluated by measuring direct effects on the tumor 

by use of the Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid 
Tumors  (RECIST)  scale,10  and  by  determining 
the  impact  of  treatment  on  disease  progres­
sion (i.e. progression­free survival [PFS] and/or 
time to progression [TTP]), survival (i.e. overall 
survival (OS) or time to death) or quality of life.11 
Bevacizumab, sorafenib, sunitinib and temsiro­
limus were approved on the basis of these conven­
tional end points, demonstrating that biomarkers 
per se were not essential for the development of 
this new class of drugs. To identify factors that 
led to these successful clinical developments, we 
will briefly review the studies that permitted the 
approval of these drugs (Table 1). 

Bevacizumab 
Bevacizumab is a humanized anti­VEGF mono­
clonal antibody that prevents VEGF from binding 
to its receptors, thereby inhibiting angiogenesis.5,12 
Evidence of antitumor activity was first observed 
in a randomized, double­blind, phase II trial that 
compared  placebo  with  bevacizumab  (3 mg/kg 
or  10 mg/kg)  in  pretreated  patients  with  renal 
cell carcinoma (RCC). Bevacizumab prolonged 
TTP in the high­dose group but not in the low­
dose group. A recent, randomized, double­blind,  
phase III study compared bevacizumab and inter­
feron (IFN)­α2a with placebo and IFN­α2a as first­
line therapy, and showed that the bevacizumab  

juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7   SESSA ET AL.       

nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY  379

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

combination improved PFS compared with IFN­α2a  
alone.13  In  patients  with  advanced  colorectal 
cancer (CRC), bevacizumab in combination with 
chemotherapy extended TTP and OS leading to 
approval for clinical use.14 Pretreatment circulating 
levels of VEGF did not predict response to bevaci­
zumab  in  CRC.15  Subsequently,  bevacizumab 
was shown to improve PFS in metastatic breast 
cancer, OS in patients with CRC who had received 
previous  treatment  and,  in  combination  with 
chemotherapy, OS in patients with non­small­cell  
lung cancer.16 

Sorafenib 
The  small­molecule­kinase  inhibitor  sorafenib 
targets wild­type and mutated B­Raf, VEGFR2, 
VEGFR3,  PDGFR­β,  c­KIT,  FLT­3  and  p38.6 
It induces growth arrest and apoptosis of endo­
thelial cells and some tumor cell types. Activity 
was  first  reported  in  a  phase  II  randomized 
discontinuation  trial  in  patients  with  RCC, 
whereby  PFS  was  prolonged  compared  with 
placebo (24 weeks versus 6 weeks). Patients were 
treated for 12 weeks (run­in treatment) and at 
the end of that period those with stable disease 
were subsequently randomized to sorafenib or 
placebo.17 In a phase III, randomized, double­
blind, first­line placebo­controlled trial, sorafenib 
prolonged PFS of patient with metastatic RCC 
and  was  approved  by  the  FDA  and  European 
Medicines  Evaluation  Agency  (EMEA)  for  the 
treatment  of  advanced  and  metastatic  RCC.18 
Retrospective  analysis  showed  that  high  basal 
VEGF levels (>131 pg/ml) correlated with a poor 
prognosis and a trend towards greater PFS benefit 
in sorafenib versus placebo­treated patients.19 

Sunitinib 
Sunitinib  is  a  tyrosine­kinase  inhibitor  (TKI) 
that  targets  VEGFR1,  VEGFR2  and  VEGFR3,  
PDGFR­α/β, FLT­3, c­KIT and c­RET.7 Sunitinib 
showed  evidence  of  activity  in  a  phase  I  trial 
in many tumors, including thyroid and neuro­
endocrine  cancers,  soft  tissue  sarcoma,  gastro­
intestinal stromal tumor and RCC.20 In a phase II 
trial in patients with cytokine­refractory RCC, the 
overall response rate was 34% and median PFS 
was 8.3 months.21 A phase III trial in patients with 
metastatic RCC showed that sunitinib improved 
PFS  and  overall  response  rate  compared  with 
IFNα as first­line therapy, and sunitinib was subse­
quently approved for the treatment of advanced 
and  metastatic  RCC.22  Retrospective  analysis 
from a phase II trial in bevacizumab­refractory  

RCC, suggests that circulating levels of VEGF and 
sVEGFR3 might be predictive of response to suni­
tinib: responding patients had lower basal levels 
of sVEGFR3 (P <0.0318) and a trend towards a 
greater decrease upon treatment levels (P <0.10) 
than nonresponding patients.23 

Temsirolimus 
Temsirolimus inhibits mTOR, an Akt­target kinase 
downstream  of  VEGFR2,  which  controls  cell 
proliferation, cellular metabolism and survival.24 
Activity was demonstrated in a phase I trial in 
patients with RCC, and was confirmed in phase II  
studies, improving outcomes when administered 
either  as  single  agent  or  in  combination  with 
IFNα.25 A three­arm, randomized, phase III trial 
compared temsirolimus, IFNα and a combination 
of the two drugs as first­line treatment in aggres­
sive  RCC.  Patients  who  received  temsirolimus 
alone had longer OS and PFS than did patients in 
either of the other two treatment arms.26 

Other studies of antiangiogenic agents 
Some  of  the  kinases  targeted  by  sunitinib  and 
sorafenib  such  as  PDGFR,  p38,  FLT­3,  c­KIT, 
c­RET,  are  active  in  cancer  cells  and  promote 
tumor­cell  proliferation,  survival  and  motility. 
mTOR,  the  temsirolimus  target,  is  often  acti­
vated in cancer and has a central role in regu­
lating  metabolic  events,  in  particular  protein 
synthesis, which is essential for tumor growth.24 
Thus, in addition to antiangiogenic effects, these 
drugs may have direct effects on cancer cells that 
contribute to their global antitumor activities. 

The  use  of  anti­VEGF  agents  in  CRC  has 
provided varied results. While bevacizumab, in 
combination with irinotecan, fluorouracil and 
leucovorin induced a significant increase in OS 
in patients with advanced, previously untreated 
CRC,14 the pan­VEGFR TKI vatalanib (PTK787), 
combined with the FOLFOX4 regimen, did not 
produce a survival benefit. In two phase I trials, 
vatalanib  decreased  vascular  permeability  and 
vascularity, as measured by dynamic contrast­
enhanced  (DCE)  MRI  in  patients  receiving 
≥750 mg/d.27 Although this effect occurred only 
in  patients  with  liver  metastases,  it  was  inter­
preted  as  validation  of  vatalanib  activity  and 
was used to support the case for further clinical 
development. The phase III trial, however, failed 
to demonstrate efficacy and survival advantage. 
The  reason  for  this  negative  result  is  unclear. 
A possible explanation might be that the dose 
and schedule determined in the early trials on 

380  nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY 

   SESSA ET AL.   juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

the  basis  of  DCE  MRI  (pharmacodynamic 
biomarker) and applied to the phase III study 
were not optimum. 

What can we learn from these studies? First, 
all four approved drugs demonstrated activity in 
RCC and target the VEGF/VEGFR pathway, albeit 
to different extents. RCC is the prototype cancer 
with VEGF­driven angiogenesis owing to frequent 
mutations  in  the  von  Hippel  Lindau  (VHL) 
tumor suppressor gene, a negative regulator of 
hypoxia­inducible­factor­1 (HIF­1) activity and 
VEGF expression.28 These findings suggest that 
the match between the targeted pathway and the 
cancer chosen may be relevant or possibly critical 
to the success of these drugs. Second, biomarkers 
are  dispensable  when  clinical  results  obtained 
in  phase  I/II  trials  are  already  convincing.  By 
contrast, when the tested agent doesn’t achieve 
tumor control during an early stage of clinical 
development,  a  pharmacodynamic  biomarker 
reporting biological activity would constitute an 
essential requirement to pursue clinical develop­
ment. The use of a putative pharmacodynamic 
biomarker that is irrelevant to the main biological 
activity of the drug or representative of activity 
in only a specific patient subpopulation, however, 
might compromise further development. 

BIOMARKERS OF ANGIOGENESIS 
Biomarkers are defined as molecular, cellular or 
functional measurable parameters indicative of a 
particular genetic, epigenetic or functional status 
of a biological system.29 In cancer, biomarkers can 
be used for diagnosis, staging, prognosis and treat­
ment selection. Biomarkers should be repeatable, 
reproducible, and measurable through minimally 
invasive procedures. A biomarker has prognostic 
value when it is indicative of the natural course 
and  outcome  of  the  disease,  regardless  of  the 
treatment,  and  acquires  predictive  value  when 
its presence correlates with the clinical response 
to  a  particular  treatment.  Pharmacodynamic 
markers reflect the effect of a given drug on the 
host or the tumor, regardless of whether the effect 
might or might not be correlated to any beneficial 
antitumor  effect. A  pharmacodynamic  marker 
becomes a surrogate marker of drug activity if 
its  presence  or  modulation  correlates  with  the 
clinical response. The potential value of different 
types of biomarkers (e.g. diagnostic, prognostic, 
predictive) should be tested and validated through 
appropriately devised studies and correlated with 
PFS and OS. Many biomarkers of angiogenesis 
have been proposed and investigated, but none 

has yet been validated for routine clinical use. A 
brief summary of the main biomarkers reported 
is provided in Table 2.30–32

Circulating angiogenic factors and related 
molecules
Pretreatment  blood  levels  of VEGF  have  been 
tested in many studies. In general, elevated levels 
are indicative of a poor prognosis, and therefore 
prognostic, but do not predict response to anti­
angiogenic drugs, including bevacizumab.15,33,34 
Rising levels of circulating factors (e.g. VEGF and 
placenta growth factor) were observed in response 
to  antiangiogenic  drugs  or  chemotherapy, 
possibly  reflecting  treatment­induced  tumor 
hypoxia.7,35–37 The practical utility of using drug­
induced increases in circulating factors as surro­
gate  biomarkers  remains  to  be  demonstrated, 
and their use might be confounded by increases  
associated with tumor resistance or escape.

Microvessel density and endothelial-
signaling events
Microvessel density (MVD) at regions of intense 
angiogenesis (i.e. ‘hot spots’) has prognostic but 
not  predictive  value  in  many  cancers.38  MVD 
does not provide information on the function­
ality  (perfusion)  of  the  tumor  vessels.  MVD 
of primary tumors in patients with metastatic 
CRC did not predict response to bevacizumab.34 
The phosphorylation statuses of ERK and AKT 
in  tumor  endothelial  cells  have  been  explored 
as  biomarkers  of  antiangiogenic  therapy. 
Phosphorylation of both kinases was observed 
in  angiogenic  vessels  and  was  attenuated  by 
treatment  with  SU6668.39  Since  tissue­based 
biomarkers provide direct information on events 
at tumor site, they are highly valuable; however, 
they  are  impractical  as  pharmacodynamic 
biomarkers for routine clinical use and might be 
applied only to selected studies. 

Circulating cells
Increased  numbers  of  circulating  endothelial 
cells  (CEC)  and  bone­marrow­derived  circu­
lating  endothelial  cell  progenitors  (CECP)  are 
observed in the blood of patients with cancer.40,41 
In  mice,  CECP—mobilized  by  tumor­derived 
factors that include VEGF—have proangiogenic 
activities.1 Their increased frequency correlates 
with  angiogenesis,  and  the  levels  of  these  cells 
return to normal following antiangiogenic treat­
ments.42 In patients with cancer, elevated CEC 
numbers returned to normal after tumor removal 

juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7   SESSA ET AL.       

nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY  381

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

Table 2 Major biomarkers and techniques for monitoring angiogenesis in preclinical and clinical studies. 
Biomarkers

Comments

Technique for monitoring 
angiogenesis

examples

Molecular

Circulating angiogenic 
factors

ELISA, WB, proteomics, 
Luminex Multiplex or 
FACS array technologies

EC-derived molecules ELISA, WB, proteomics, 

antibodies arrays

Circulating proteins or 
peptides 

ELISA, WB, proteomics, 
antibodies arrays

Signaling events 

Immunohistochemistry,
Immunofluorescence

Biological

Microvascular density
Endothelial cell 
proliferation/death

CEC or CECP

Immunohistochemistry,
Immunofluorescence

Flow cytometry, 
Veridex technology

Functional

Functional imaging

Molecular imaging

DCE-MRI
DCE-CT
PET 
Power (color) Doppler 
(ultrasound)
Contrast-enhanced 
ultrasound

Tracer coupled to mAb or 
peptide against a vascular 
target, detected by PET or 
ultrasound

VEGF; FGF-2; MMP-9; IL-8; IL-6; 
HGF

Prognostic value in many cancers

sVEGFR1, sVEGFR2, sVEGFR3; 
sTie-2, VCAM-1

Endostatin; tumstatin 

Limited to ‘known’ molecules

Promising approach to identify novel 
molecules in serum or tumor tissues

Phospho-Erk; Phospho-Akt

Limited feasibility in clinical practice

CD31+, CD34+, VEGFR2+,  
CD105+ vessels
Ki67/CD31; Tunel/CD31
EC: CD45–; CD31+, CD146+, 
CD144+; VEGFR2+
CECP: CD133 CD34+; CD144+; 
VEGFR2+

15O tracer

Gadolinium chelate tracers
Iodine-based tracers
H2
Microbubbles (Sonovue®, Bracco 
Diagnostics Inc., Plainsboro, NJ.)

Targeting EDB+-fibronectin
Targeting αVβ3 integrin

Prognostic value in many cancers
Limited feasibility in clinical practice

Promising approach. Nonstandardized 
protocols. Labor intensive

Allows measurement of MTT, rBF, rBV, pO2, 
pH, and vascular permeability. Evidence of 
modification by therapy. Used in many studies, 
but no standard protocols available yet.
Inexpensive, easy and safe techniques to 
monitor blood flow 
Allows quantitative measurement of blood flow

May improve specificity and sensitivity of 
functional vascular imaging. Complementary 
to dynamic measurements

Abbreviations: CEC, circulating endothelial cells; CECP, circulating endothelial cell precursors; DCE-CT, dynamic contrast-enhanced computed tomography; 
DCE-MRI, dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging; EC, endothelial cell; EDB, extra domain B; ELISA, enzyme linked immunosorbent assay; 
FACS, fluorescence activated cell sorting; FGF-2, fibroblast growth factor-2; HGF, hepatocyte growth factor; IL, interleukin; mAb, monoclonal antibody; MMP, 
matrix metalloproteinase; MTT, mean transit time; rBF, relative blood flow; rBV, relative blood volume; Tie-2, tyrosine kinase with Ig and EGF homology domains; 
VCAM, vascular cell adhesion molecule; VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor; WB, Western blotting.

or  following  complete  remission  after  chemo­
therapy.41,43 Bevacizumab reduced the frequency 
of viable CEC and CECP in patients with rectal 
cancer,36 while ZD6474, a VEGFR2/EGFR TKI, 
caused an increase in mature CECs but not CECP, 
possibly reflecting therapy­induced endothelial 
cell detachment from tumor vessels.44 In patients 
with metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumors, 
those demonstrating a clinical benefit had greater 
increases in CECs. Sunitinib was reported to cause 
a greater increase in CEC in patients with gastro­
intestinal  stromal  tumor,  and  was  associated  
with clinical benefits compared with patients with 
progressive disease.45 Further studies are needed 
to establish the potential clinical value of CEC and 
CECP as biomarkers of angiogenesis.40 The low 

frequency of these cells in samples, the sophisti­
cated methodology required for their detection, 
and the difficulty in standardizing protocols may 
limit the widespread application of this approach 
in clinical practice. Peripheral blood lymphocytes 
have been used to demonstrate drug effects on 
selected  signaling  pathways.  Monitoring  ERK 
phosphorylation in lymphocytes obtained from 
sorafenib­treated patients and from lymphocytes 
stimulated in vitro with a phorbol ester provided 
useful  information  on  the  dose  necessary  to 
achieve ERK inhibition in vivo.46

Functional genomics and proteomics
Approaches based on genomics and proteomics 
have  provided  insights  into  the  mechanistic 

382  nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY 

   SESSA ET AL.   juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7

processes  of  angiogenesis,  and  facilitated  the 
identification of novel candidate therapeutic targets 
and allowed the monitoring of drug activities.47 
Gene­expression  profiling  was  used  to  identify  
genes expressed in tumor endothelial cells,48,49 
determine transcripts induced by VEGF,50 define 
the  angiogenic  stage  of  endothelial  cells,51  and 
characterize CEC in patients.52,53 Specific gene­
expression signatures have been reported in endo­
thelial cells and blood lymphocytes in response to 
antiangiogenic drugs, such as the VEGFR2 inhibi­
 tor SU5416, endostatin, and brivanib alaninate, a 
VEGFR2/FGFR­1 inhibitor.54–56 This approach 
should  be  further  explored  for  its  potential  to 
monitor tumor angiogenesis and antiangiogenic 
drug  activity  in  the  clinic.  Proteomics­based 
approaches, although still in their infancy, have 
been used to identify angiogenesis­related proteins 
that are expressed in tumor vessels,57 tumor inter­
stitial fluid,58 and cultured endothelial cells,59 and 
to  profile  the  secretome  of  endothelial  cells.60 
Proteomic techniques have been applied to profile 
the substrate selectivity of antiangiogenic drugs, 
such as SU6668,61 and to study therapy­induced 
effects on endothelial cells.62 Proteomic analysis 
of  serum  proteins  is  considered  a  promising 
approach to identify angiogenesis biomarkers.63,64 
While  promising,  these  approaches  still  face 
many challenges before entering routine clinical 
consideration, including the need to obtain high­
quality material and the requirement of costly and 
sophisticated technologies. 

IMAGING TECHNIQUES
Functional  imaging  approaches  have  been 
included in several antiangiogenesis studies.65–67  
In general, imaging approaches rely on the intra­
venous injection of a contrast agent that enhances 
the vascular and tumoral structures and on the 
acquisition of sequential images before, during 
and after injection. The time­concentration curve 
of the tracer allows the semi­quantitative deduc­
tion of several parameters: the mean transit time 
(MTT) of the contrast passing from the arterial 
to  the  venous  circulation;68  the  relative  blood 
volume in the tissue studied (rBV); and the rela­
tive blood flow (rBF), which corresponds to the 
maximal slope of the curve at the arterial phase 
(calculated  as  rBV/MTT).  When  the  contrast 
agent diffuses from the intravascular into the extra­
vascular space, a plateau phase is observed, which 
can  be  used  to  estimate  vascular  permeability, 
Ktrans (Figure 1A). Quantitative parameters can 
be calculated by fitting a time concentration curve 

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

A

B

Raw images

Parametric images

n

o

e
g

ctio
nt inje
st a
ntra
After c

e (s)
Tim

Mean transit time

Time-intensity

curves

Computer
processing

Blood flow

e
r
o
f
e
B

Sequential acquisition

of images

Blood volume

Figure 1 Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI and dynamic contrast-enhanced 
CT of a hypervascular tumor. (A) Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI of a 
hypervascular tumor, located in the right hand. The left panel represents the 
raw data image with the regions of interest for determining the time-intensity 
curves. The right panel shows the time-intensity curves: the green curve 
represents tumor perfusion, with a strong enhancement of the arterial phase, a 
plateau due to extravascular diffusion of the contrast agent, and slight increase 
due to the recirculation of the contrast agent (second pass); the red curve and 
the white curve represent the arterial and venous references, respectively. 
Ktrans can be estimated after recirculation of the contrast agent and represents 
vascular permeability. (B) Dynamic contrast-enhanced CT. After sequential 
acquisition of the raw images over time (left panels), the time-intensity curves 
of the different perfusion parameters can be obtained for each pixel of the 
images or any regions of interest. Parametric images representing time-
intensity values for each pixel over time will be calculated from these curves 
(right panels). (Images courtesy of Dr J-Y. Meuwly, CHUV, Lausanne).

by use of recognized pharmacokinetic models69 
adapted to each imaging modality. Calculation 
of the parameters of the curves for each pixel in 
the region of interest allows parametric images of  

ncponc_2007_034f1.eps

juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7   SESSA ET AL.       

nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY  383

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

the tissue to be created for each variable studied. 
In  addition,  imaging­based  techniques  can  be 
used to monitor tissue hypoxia and acidosis.67 

Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI
This  technique  uses  gadolinium­chelate­based 
agents  that  cause  a  decrease  of  T1  (time  of 
realignment of hydrogen nuclei in the magnetic 
field)  at  low  concentration  and  a  decrease  of 
T2  (time  of  loss  of  transverse  magnetism)  at 
high concentration.70 T2 imaging is used early 
during the arterial input to calculate MTT, rBV 
and rBF, while T1 imaging is used at later time 
points to estimate Ktrans (Figure 1A). DCE­MRI 
has been used in multiple studies to monitor the 
effects of antiangiogenic drugs.71 The area under 
the curve and Ktrans have been used to monitor 
treatment­induced  changes  in  vascularity  and 
permeability.65,72  While  Ktrans  has  been  used 
to measure biological activity (i.e. a pharmaco­
dynamic  marker)  its  value  in  predicting  clin­
ical response (i.e. a surrogate marker) remains 
to  be  demonstrated.  The  main  limitations  of 
DCE­MRI include quantification and reproduci­
bility. Quantification by use of pharmacokinetic 
modeling necessitates calibration to determine 
the  relationship  between  concentration  of  the 
contrast agent and signal intensity;73 however, 
there is no simple relationship between contrast 
concentration  and  signal­intensity,  especially 
at  high  contrast  concentration.  The  nonlinear 
signal­intensity correlation is probably respon­
sible for much of the variability in measurements 
observed with this technique. In addition, data 
acquisition is highly dependent on the machine 
characteristics,  making  comparisons  across 
different platforms difficult. 

Dynamic contrast-enhanced CT
This imaging technique uses iodine­based contrast 
agents to generate a linear relationship between 
contrast concentration and measured signal. It 
allows calculation of MTT, rBV, rBF and Ktrans 
(Figure 1B). DCE­CT has not yet been systemati­
cally included in clinical studies, in part because 
of the lack of common protocols and methodo­
logies for data acquisition, standardization and 
analysis.74,75 There are some reports, however, 
that  suggest  the  feasibility  of  this  approach.76 
DCE­CT was used to assess tumor vascularity in 
rectal cancer and measure perfusion changes after 
chemoradiotherapy.  The  results  revealed  that 
tumors with high pretherapy rBF values tended 
to have a poor response to therapy.77 The routine 

use  of  DCE­CT  might  be  limited  by  the  high  
X­ray exposure required.

Positron-emission tomography
15O PET is considered the reference technique 
H2
for quantification of rBF and vascular perme­
ability.70,78 Injected radioactive water can freely 
diffuse in the tissue, and a time­concentration 
curve reflecting radioactive oxygen accumula­
tion can be determined by PET scanning. The 
requirement  for  a  nearby  cyclotron  for  probe 
preparation,  owing  to  the  short  half­life  of 
radioactive  oxygen,  is  a  major  obstacle  to  the 
widespread clinical use of this technique. PET 
scanning  by  use  of  11C­methionine  uptake 
coupled with DCE­MRI revealed a correlation 
between vascularity and methionine uptake in 
brain gliomas.79 Combining imaging techniques 
could  allow  studies  to  concomitantly  monitor 
the  direct  effects  of  antiangiogenic  drugs  on 
tumor  vasculature  and  their  secondary  effects  
on tumor metabolism. In addition, PET can be 
applied to measure tumor hypoxia.80

Contrast-enhanced ultrasound 
Contrast­enhanced ultrasound is an attractive 
technique  to  measure  perfusion.  The  contrast 
agent  consists  of  phospholipid­based  micro­
bubbles  that  encapsulate  an  inert  gas,  which 
when exposed to an ultrasound pulse, generate 
nonlinear resonances that allow enhanced repre­
sentation of the vasculature.81 Semiquantitative 
perfusion  measurements  can  be  derived  from 
the  time­concentration  curve,  while  quantita­
tive  measurements  can  be  obtained  by  local 
destruction  of  the  microbubbles  with  a  high­
pressure  acoustic  pulse  and  measurement  of 
the  following  signal  recovery  by  low  pressure 
acoustic pulses82 (Figure 2). The time­intensity 
curve  in  each  region  of  interest  depends  on 
perfusion  and  is  fitted  to  a  kinetic  model  to 
determine volume flow rate.82 The accuracy of 
contrast­enhanced ultrasound for microvascular 
perfusion measurement and perfusion changes 
following therapy has been documented both in 
experimental models83,84 and in patients with 
cancer.85–87 Contrast­enhanced ultrasound has 
several advantages over DCE­MRI and DCE­CT: 
measured values strictly refer to the intravascular 
compartment and are not confounded by extra­
vascular diffusion; repeat measurements can be 
taken with equipment that is easily accessible and 
has limited costs; and patients are not exposed to 
ionizing radiation. 

384  nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY 

   SESSA ET AL.   juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

In  conclusion,  imaging  techniques  allow 
measurement of tumor vascular parameters and 
have been employed in many clinical studies, but 
their impact on decisions during drug develop­
ment has remained modest. This outcome might 
change if imaging analyses can be associated with 
analyses of molecular and biological biomarkers 
and compared with PFS and OS to test their value 
as surrogate markers. Future developments will 
include  molecular­imaging­based  approaches 
that allow expression levels or activity of specific 
molecular  targets,  such  as  vascular  integrins, 
VEGFRs  or  matrix  metalloproteinases,  to  be 
monitored.88  Since  the  number  of  targets  on 
angiogenic endothelial cells is small, only PET 
and single­photon­emission CT techniques have 
sufficient sensitivity for targeted imaging.65

BIOMARKERS OF ANGIOGENESIS: TOOLS, 
NOT DECORATIONS
In  spite  of  the  many  candidate  biomarkers  of 
angiogenesis  tested  in  preclinical  and  clinical 
studies,  there  are  no  established  methods  in 
routine clinical use to monitor angiogenesis or 
predict response to antiangiogenic drugs. Since 
the  four  antiangiogenic  drugs  were  developed 
without  the  aid  of  biomarkers,  one  wonders 
whether biomarkers are needed at all. The ideal 
match  between  RCC,  a  tumor  dependent  on 
VEGF­driven angiogenesis, and drugs targeting 
the VEGF pathway, was key to the success of these 
trials and such success stories might be hard to 
repeat  in  the  future.  Indeed,  many  drugs  with 
demonstrated  potent  antiangiogenic  activity 
in preclinical studies failed to show efficacy in  
clinical  trials  and  were  abandoned.3  Most 
importantly, many basic questions related to the 
assessment of tumor angiogenesis and monitor­
 ing  antiangiogenesis  therapies  have  remained 
unanswered. Thus, in spite of the initial success 
in  the  field,  biomarkers  of  angiogenesis  are 
desperately required (Box 1). Validated surrogate 
markers for monitoring angiogenesis, and drug 
activity, predicting response, defining optimum 
biological dose, designing combination therapies, 
and  identifying  resistance  to  antiangiogenesis 
therapies would be of great benefit and would, in 
addition, facilitate translational research.

Monitoring angiogenesis
While many parameters reflecting specific aspects 
of angiogenesis can be measured in patients, none 
has been unambiguously validated. It might be 
necessary  to  combine  different  approaches  in 

order to obtain robust quantification of angio­
genesis. Thus, future studies should be designed 
to test multiple surrogate biomarkers in parallel. 

Monitoring drug activity
Biomarkers of efficacy are less relevant in phase III  
studies aimed at validating treatments, because 
improved TTP or OS are the critical end points 
at this stage of development. Biomarkers will be 
most useful as surrogate end points in phase I  
and phase II studies to facilitate the identifica­
tion of active versus inactive drugs, and make the 
transition to phase III clinical studies more rapid 
(Figure 3). If a drug does not provide evidence of 
antitumor activity on the basis of standard criteria 
at an early stage of development, there are three 
possibilities: first, the drug has no effect on the 
target; second, the drug modulates the target, but 
does not elicit the desired biological activity; third, 
the drug exerts a biological activity, but this does 
not translate into a therapeutic effect. Nowadays, 
biological  activity  is  considered  the  minimal 
requirement to proceed with drug development 
when  clinical  responses  are  not  measurable. 
Therefore,  monitoring  drug  effects  through  a 
pharmacodynamic biomarker, is the only way to 
obtain valuable information for ‘go/no–go’ deci­
sions  in  phase  I/II  trials.  This  approach  might 
possibly  ensure  that  biologically  active  drugs 
reach large, phase III trials, while preventing the 
progression of biologically inactive drugs. 

Predicting response
Not every patient responds equally well to anti­
angiogenic drugs, which is not surprising consider­
 ing the multiplicity of angiogenic mechanisms 
and the intrinsic heterogeneity of tumor biology. 
In clinical practice, a biomarker able to predict 
response to therapy would be extremely valuable. 
Such a biomarker could act as a surrogate marker 
of  clinical  outcome  and  would  be  useful  for 
identifying those patients responding to therapy. 

Definition of optimum biological dose
The activity and toxicity profiles associated with 
antiangiogenic  drugs  are  different  from  those 
associated with chemotherapy. Antiangiogenic 
drugs are expected to cause cytostasis, rather that 
cytotoxicity and tumor regression. The optimum 
biological dose for these drugs might be lower 
than  the  maximal­tolerated  doses.  Moreover, 
standard criteria used to define doses for cyto­
toxic drugs do not apply to this class of drugs. 
Pharmacodynamic  biomarkers  could  provide 

juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7   SESSA ET AL.       

nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY  385

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

(cid:47)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:91)(cid:79)(cid:96)(cid:3)(cid:91)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:92)(cid:76)

(cid:59)(cid:92)(cid:84)(cid:86)(cid:89)(cid:3)(cid:91)(cid:80)(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:92)(cid:76)

Figure 2 Measurement of perfusion index in a hepatocellular carcinoma by 
contrast-enhanced ultrasound-based imaging. Microbubbles are injected 
intravenously and after reaching a steady-state they are destroyed by a high-
pressure acoustic pulse (white arrow). A low acoustic pressure is applied to 
obtain a time-concentration curve in a region of interest determined by the user 
(red circle, region of interest in tumor tissue; yellow circle, region of interest in 
healthy liver tissue; the blue region indicates the areas of the image processed 
to compensate for respiration-induced liver movements to obtain a still image). 
Perfusion parameters may be automatically calculated by software or by 
postprocessing on a stand-alone work station, as in this example (software 
supplied by Bracco Research SA, Geneva).91 A perfusion index representing 
relative blood flow (rBF) can be computed from the raw data. Upper left image—
raw image. Upper right image—, parametric-map showing he perfusion index 
within the yellow region, which is indicated by the solid white arrow. 

important  information  for  the  definition  of  a 
minimally active dose or a range of doses, which, 
in conjunction with clinical data, could define 
the dose escalation process and determine the 
optimum biological dose.

Design of combination therapies
Antiangiogenic  drugs  enhance  the  activity  of 
standard  chemotherapy,  while  combinations  
of  drugs  targeting  complementary  angiogenic 
pathways  are  expected  to  enhance  responses. 
Early  biological  data  may  provide  informa­
tion that is useful to the selection of drugs and 
combination strategy. In the case of available anti­
angiogenic  drugs,  surrogate  biomarkers  could 
help to improve their use and to design novel 
combinatorial regimens. 

Resistance to antiangiogenesis therapies 
Patients treated with antiangiogenic drugs who 
show  an  initial  antitumor  response  eventu­
ally  show  disease  progression,  suggesting  that 

(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:70)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:30)(cid:70)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:77)(cid:25)(cid:21)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:90)

386  nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY 

Box 1 Relevance of biomarkers of angiogenesis 
to clinical oncology.

Biomarkers are molecular, cellular or functional 
parameters that are indicative of a particular 
genetic, epigenetic or functional status of a 
biological system. Biomarkers can be used for 
diagnosis, staging, prognosis and treatment 
selection, but these parameters should be 
reproducible, measurable and easy to repeat by 
use of minimally invasive procedures. A biomarker 
that is indicative of prognosis regardless of whether 
the treatment is of prognostic value. A prognostic 
marker acquires predictive value when its presence 
correlates with a response to a particular treatment. 
Pharmacodynamic markers reflect the effect of 
a given drug on the host or the tumor regardless 
of the antitumor effect. Such markers become a 
surrogate marker of drug activity if their presence 
(or modulation) correlates with the clinical response. 
No biomarker of angiogenesis has yet been 
validated for routine clinical use.

detection and monitoring angiogenesis
A still unmet need in the field is the ability to 
detect and reliably monitor angiogenesis and 
antiangiogenic drug activities in patients. Such a 
test would greatly facilitate the clinical testing and 
development of new drugs and improve the use 
of available antiangiogenic drugs (e.g. optimize 
dosing, scheduling, and combination therapies). 

Prognosis
Elevated parameters of angiogenesis are of 
prognostic value in certain cancers. Different 
parameters studied under the same conditions 
often give divergent results, thereby complicating 
the interpretation of their prognostic value. 

Prediction of response
From a therapeutic point of view, the most valuable 
contribution of biomarkers of angiogenesis to 
clinical oncology is the determination of whether a 
patient is responding to a given antiangiogenic drug 
early in the course of treatment. Predictive markers 
are likely to differ depending on the biology of the 
tumor and of the drug used. Such biomarkers may 
allow the design of ‘customized’ therapies that 
maximize benefits and minimize costs. 

Translational research
The possibility of measuring molecular, biological 
or functional parameters of tumor angiogenesis 
and monitoring the changes in these parameters 
in patients during tumor progression or therapy 
is instrumental to both the clinical validation of 
mechanisms originally described in experimental 
models and to the generation of novel mechanistic 
hypotheses to be pursued in experimental models. 
Thus, surrogate biomarkers of angiogenesis 
contribute to ‘bench-to-bedside’ and ‘back-to-
bench’ translational research. 

   SESSA ET AL.   juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7

tumors develop resistance to this class of drugs.14 
Resistance under anti­VEGF therapy was demon­
strated experimentally.89 It will be important to 
detect resistance during treatment so patients can 
be given the most appropriate second­line treat­
ment. The mechanisms responsible for resistance 
to antiangiogenic drugs are likely to be complex 
and are yet to be defined.1 

Translational research
Our understanding of the mechanisms of angio­
genesis and their modification by antiangiogenic 
treatments in human cancer are still rudimen­
tary. Analysis is mostly focused in understanding 
the  role  of  individual  molecules  or  pathways, 
while  we  lack  an  integrated  view  and  under­
standing of the functional association between 
apparently distinct events and their modifica­
tion during angiogenesis and antiangiogenesis 
therapy.  For  example,  a  growing  amount  of 
evidence indicates that tumors react to therapy 
by upregulating angiogenic factors and mobiliz­
 ing  bone­marrow­derived  CECP.7,35–37,90  In 
spite of the obvious clinical relevance of these 
observations,  we  still  have  little  knowledge  of 
how tumors adapt to, and possibly escape from, 
angiogenesis  inhibition.  To  address  these  and 
many  other  outstanding  questions,  it  will  be 
important to associate clinical studies not only 
with pharmacodynamic measurements, but also 
with relevant preclinical experimental models. 

In short, biomarkers of angiogenesis should 
still be considered essential elements of clinical 
drug development. In phase I/II trials they are 
needed as pharmacodynamic biomarkers to vali­
date the supposed biological effect of the drug, 
and  define  the  optimum  biological  dose  and 
schedule. At late stages of development (phase III)  
or in clinical practice, biomarkers are needed to 
identify responding patients early in the course 
of treatment (predictive biomarkers), to detect 
patients developing resistance and to guide the 
development of novel combination therapies. 

The  natural  intra­patient  and  inter­patient 
variability  of  candidate  biomarkers  currently 
under investigation should be taken into account 
during future studies. Data collection and analy­
 sis  should  help  to  identify  and  quantify  these 
variabilities  and  other  putative  confounding 
factors.  In  the  case  of  simple  biomarkers  (e.g. 
serum  measurements,  blood  pressure),  the 
natural  variability  can  be  easily  determined 
by  taking  multiple  measurements.  In  the  case 
of more complex analyses, such as DCE­MRI, 

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

Tumor

Test drug

P

P

Activity          Effect

Parameter

Molecular

Biological

Functional

Survival

Event

Signaling

gene

expression

CECP

mobilization
EC death

Vascular
function

Patient
survival

Tumor growth

Quality of life

Biomarker

Phosphorylation
Gene expression

CEP/CECP
EC apoptosis

Blood flow
permeability

TTP
OS

Method
(examples)

Clinical phase

RT-PCR/MA
proteomics

IHC

I/II

RT-PCR
FACS
IHC

I/II

DCE-MRI/CT

PET
US

II/III

End points

Biomarkers

Clinical

observation

statistics

III

Outcome

Figure 3 Rationale for the use of biomarkers in the development of 
antiangiogenic therapies. Abbreviations: EC, endothelial cell; CEC, 
circulating endothelial cells; CECP, circulating endothelial cell progenitors; 
CT, computed tomography; DCE-MRI, dynamic contrast-enhanced 
magnetic resonance imaging; FACS, fluorescence activated cell sorting; IHC, 
immunohistochemistry; OS, overall survival; RT-PCR, reverse transcription-
polymerase chain reaction; PET, positron emission tomography; TTP, time to 
progression; US, ultrasound.

multiple assessments could be very burdensome 
and financially prohibitive.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE 
DEvELOPMENTS
Currently, the use and the understanding of anti­
angiogenic therapies in oncology are at different 
stages of development: on the one hand, four drugs 
extending patient survival in some cancers are  
available for clinical use, while on the other we 
are not able to sufficiently monitor the activity of 
these drugs, identify those patients responding to 
them or predict therapy outcome. Improved clin­
ical use of these drugs and the successful develop­
ment  of  new  ones  will  depend  heavily  on  our 
ability to monitor angiogenesis and drug activity 
in patients. How can we move on from here? 

First, we should take advantage of the avail­
ability of these drugs to study how individual 
ncponc_2007_034f3.eps
biomarkers  behave  in  patients  in  response  to 
treatment,  how  changes  in  these  parameters 

juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7   SESSA ET AL.       

nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY  387

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

Box 2 Rationale for the use of biomarkers in the development of 
antiangiogenic therapies (also refer to Table 2 and Figure 3). 

Quantification of tumor angiogenesis and the measurement of antiangiogenic 
drug activities in patients remain unresolved issues. Many approaches have been 
tested in experimental models and clinical studies, but to date none has been 
validated for routine use in patients. It is not clear which biomarker best represents 
angiogenesis and, as a matter of fact, whether there is an optimum biomarker of 
angiogenesis. The intrinsic complexity of tumor angiogenesis, and the multiple 
regulatory mechanisms of and adaptations to angiogenesis during therapy, 
suggest that, in fact, multiple and different biomarkers will be necessary to obtain 
a comprehensive representation of angiogenesis and its therapeutic modulation, 
with different markers being required depending on the tumor of interest, its 
stage, the drug being tested, the question being asked and the clinical stage of 
development (phase I/II/III). One can distinguish three kinds of biomarkers:

i) Molecular biomarkers
These markers consist of molecules such as growth factors (e.g. VEGF, FGF), cell 
surface receptors (e.g. VEGFR2, integrins), downstream signaling molecules (e.g. ERK, 
Akt) and their modifications (e.g. activation, phosphorylation), or transcripts of single 
or multiple genes (e.g. signatures) and their modifications. Molecular biomarkers are 
indicative of the molecular events associated with angiogenesis or drug activity; 

ii) Biological biomarkers
In order to obtain initial information on the effects of these molecular events on 
angiogenesis, it will be necessary to monitor basic characteristics of endothelial cell 
function, such as cell proliferation and death. Angiogenesis-associated cells (e.g. 
circulating endothelial cells and circulating endothelial cell progenitors) in blood 
may reflect these changes and serve as easily accessible biomarkers of biological 
effects. Molecular and cellular biomarkers are important in phase I/II studies, where 
demonstration of target modification and drug activity is the main goal. 

iii) Functional biomarkers
Modification of tumor perfusion is likely to reflect significant changes in physical 
or functional state of the tumor vasculature. However, acquisition and meaningful 
interpretation of vascular perfusion and permeability data is challenging, since 
changes may be only transient, occur late after drug administration, or may not 
necessarily be representative of drug effects (e.g. some tyrosine-kinase inhibitors 
concomitantly target tumor and stromal cells). Measurement of perfusion-related 
parameters (rBV, MTT, rBF, Ktrans) by imaging technique is more useful at late 
phases of drug development (phase III studies) when evidence of antivascular 
activity is for the aim. In addition, imaging techniques can be used to monitor the 
effects on tumor biology (tumor regression, metabolism).

Clinical end points (e.g. overall survival and progression-free survival) are 
used to validate the impact of the tested drug on disease progression and 
patient survival. Data generated by different classes of biomarkers should be 
compared with data available on their relative value and suitability for monitoring 
angiogenesis or dissecting mechanisms of drug action. For example, vascular 
disrupting agents cause a transient shut down of the tumor vasculature in both 
experimental models92 and patients,93 while they concomitantly cause acute 
mobilization of circulating endothelial cell progenitors from the bone marrow and 
recruitment to the viable tumor rim remaining after therapy, thereby contributing 
to tumor regrowth.90 This positive-feed back loop suggests that a combination of 
antivascular and antiangiogenic drugs may result in better therapeutic response. 

relate to each other, and how they correlate with 
treatment  outcome.  Improved  knowledge  of 
biomarker biology will be essential for selecting 

biomarkers  useful  for  monitoring  treatments 
in  the  clinic  and  dissecting  mechanisms  in  
translational studies. 

Second, a range of biomarkers will be neces­
sary, since a single approach will not be suffi­
cient to comprehensively monitor angiogenesis 
or  antiangiogenic  activities  at  different  stages 
of  drug  development.  Analyses  performed  on 
tumor  biopsies  or  blood­circulating  cells  will 
demonstrate  the  biochemical  or  biological 
activities of biomarkers (i.e. pharmacodynamic 
biomarkers) that can then be used in phase I and 
phase II studies to provide the evidence of drug 
activity that is essential for further development. 
More  demanding  imaging­based  techniques 
will be relevant in phase II and III studies, where 
demonstration of antitumor activity is needed 
(Box 2). Molecular or cellular biomarkers could 
also be useful in phase III trials or in clinical prac­
tice to identify patients responding or developing 
resistance to treatment. 

Third, biomarkers should be chosen by consid­
ering the biology of the tumor and the putative 
mechanism of action of the tested drug. Molecular 
biomarkers may comprise molecules belonging 
to  pathways  known  to  be  deregulated  in  the 
analyzed cancer and be ‘downstream’ of the drug 
target (or possibly be the target itself). The time  
course  of  the  drug  and  dose  dependence  of 
response to the drug, or possible feedback mech­
anisms should also be considered. Thus, clinical 
trials need to be designed in such a way that the 
choice  of  the  surrogate  biomarkers  and  their 
analyses are coordinated with the tumor type, the 
drug, the schedule of treatment, and any addi­
tional  pharmacodynamic  or  pharmacokinetic 
data generated during the study process. 

In  conclusion,  in  spite  of  the  indisputable 
success  of  angiogenesis  and  antiangiogenesis 
research  in  deciphering  mechanisms,  deliver­
 ing new drugs and introducing a new therapy 
paradigm in clinical oncology, many important 
questions  remain  unanswered.  New  questions 
are emerging, such as how tumors adapt to and 
escape from antiangiogenic therapy. To accelerate 
the validation of available biomarkers and the 
discovery of new ones, and to address questions 
emerging from clinical studies, it will be impor­
tant to associate relevant preclinical models to 
clinical studies. The development of biomarkers 
of angiogenesis represents a unique opportunity 
for clinical oncologists and laboratory scientists 
to join forces to address relevant questions and 
design meaningful studies. 

388  nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY 

   SESSA ET AL.   juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

KEY POINTS
■ 

Four antiangiogenic drugs, bevacizumab, 
sorafenib, sunitinib and temsirolimus, have been 
approved for clinical use on the basis of results 
from randomized phase III clinical trials without 
significant contributions from biomarkers

■  No validated biomarkers of angiogenesis 

or antiangiogeneic activity are available for 
routine clinical use

■  Biomarkers of angiogenesis might be useful 
for monitoring angiogenesis, assessing drug 
activity and distinguishing between active and 
inactive drugs, predicting clinical outcome  
and response to therapy, defining the optimum 
biological dose, facilitating development of 
combination therapies, and rapidly identifying 
resistance to treatment

■  Biomarkers under consideration for clinical use 

include circulating cells, proteins (e.g. angiogenic 
factors, angiogenesis-associated molecules; 
protein expression profiles), nucleic acids 
(e.g. gene-expression patterns) and functional 
parameters (e.g. tumor perfusion, metabolism)

■ 

The association of laboratory investigations 
with clinical trials will be instrumental for the 
validation of biomarkers of angiogenesis and 
for improving the design, monitoring and 
evaluation of antiangiogenic treatments

References 
1  Carmeliet P (2005) Angiogenesis in life, disease and 

medicine. Nature 438: 932–936

2  Ferrara N and Kerbel RS (2005) Angiogenesis as a 

therapeutic target. Nature 438: 967–974

3  Kerbel R and Folkman J (2002) Clinical translation  

of angiogenesis inhibitors. Nat Rev Cancer 2: 727–739

4  Ferrara N (2004) Vascular endothelial growth factor: 
basic science and clinical progress. Endocr Rev 25: 
581–611

5  Ferrara N et al. (2005) Bevacizumab (Avastin), a 

humanized anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody for cancer 
therapy. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 333: 328–335
6  Rini BI (2006) Sorafenib. Expert Opin Pharmacother 7: 

453–461

7  Motzer RJ et al. (2006) Activity of SU11248, a 
multitargeted inhibitor of vascular endothelial 
growth factor receptor and platelet-derived growth 
factor receptor, in patients with metastatic renal cell 
carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 24: 16–24

bevacizumab/interferon-alpha2a vs placebo/
interferon-alpha2a as first-line therapy in metastatic 
renal cell carcinoma [abstract #3]. J Clin Oncol  
25 (suppl) s18

14  Hurwitz H et al. (2004) Bevacizumab plus irinotecan, 
fluorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal 
cancer. N Engl J Med 350: 2335–2342

15  Mass RD et al. (2005) Clinical benefit from 

bevacizumab (BV) in responding (R) and non-
responding (NR) patients (pts) with metastatic 
colorectal cancer (mCRC). J Clin Oncol 23: S249–S249
16  Panares RL and Garcia AA (2007) Bevacizumab in the 

management of solid tumors. Expert Rev Anticancer 
Ther 7: 433–445

17  Ratain MJ et al. (2006) Phase II placebo-controlled 

randomized discontinuation trial of sorafenib in 
patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. J Clin 
Oncol 24: 2505–2512

18  Escudier B et al. (2007) Sorafenib in advanced clear-
cell renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 356: 125–134

19  Bukowski RM et al. (2007) Final results of the 

randomized phase III trial of sorafenib in advanced 
renal cell carcinoma: survival and biomarker analysis 
[abstract #5023]. J Clin Oncol 25 (suppl): s18 

20  Chow LQ and Eckhardt SG (2007) Sunitinib: from 
rational design to clinical efficacy. J Clin Oncol 25: 
884–896

21  Motzer RJ et al. (2006) Sunitinib in patients  

with metastatic renal cell carcinoma. JAMA 295: 
2516–2524

22  Motzer RJ et al. (2007) Sunitinib versus interferon alfa 
in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 356: 
115–124

23  George DJ et al. (2007) Phase II trial of sunitinib 
in bevacizumab-refractory metastatic renal cell 
carcinoma (mRCC): updated results and analysis of 
circulating biomarkers [abstract #5053]. J Clin Oncol 
25 (suppl): s18

24  Bjornsti MA and Houghton PJ (2004) The TOR 

pathway: a target for cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer 
4: 335–348

25  Atkins MB et al. (2004) Randomized phase II study of 
multiple dose levels of CCI-779, a novel mammalian 
target of rapamycin kinase inhibitor, in patients with 
advanced refractory renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 
22: 909–918

26  Hudes G et al. (2007) Temsirolimus, interferon alfa, or 
both for advanced renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med 
356: 2271–2281

27  Morgan B et al. (2003) Dynamic contrast-enhanced 
magnetic resonance imaging as a biomarker for the 
pharmacological response of PTK787/ZK 222584, 
an inhibitor of the vascular endothelial growth factor 
receptor tyrosine kinases, in patients with advanced 
colorectal cancer and liver metastases: results from 
two phase I studies. J Clin Oncol 21: 3955–3964

28  Kim WY and Kaelin WG Jr (2006) Molecular pathways 

in renal cell carcinoma—rationale for targeted 
treatment. Semin Oncol 33: 588–595

8  Dancey JE (2005) Inhibitors of the mammalian target of 

29  Ludwig JA and Weinstein JN (2005) Biomarkers in 

rapamycin. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 14: 313–328
9  Jain RK et al. (2006) Lessons from phase III clinical 

trials on anti-VEGF therapy for cancer. Nat Clin Pract 
Oncol 3: 24–40

10  Therasse P (2002) Measuring the clinical response—

what does it mean? Eur J Cancer 38: 1817–1823

11  Schilsky RL (2002) End points in cancer clinical trials and 

the drug approval process. Clin Cancer Res 8: 935–938
12  Willett CG et al. (2004) Direct evidence that the VEGF-

specific antibody bevacizumab has antivascular effects 
in human rectal cancer. Nat Med 10: 145–147

13  Escudier B et al. (2007) Randomized, controlled, 

double-blind phase III study (AVOREN) of 

cancer staging, prognosis and treatment selection.  
Nat Rev Cancer 5: 845–856

30  Rüegg C et al. (2003) The quest for surrogate markers 
of angiogenesis: a paradigm for translational research 
in tumor angiogenesis and anti-angiogenesis trials. 
Curr Mol Med 3: 673–691

31  Davis DW et al. (2003) Surrogate markers in 

antiangiogenesis clinical trials. Br J Cancer 89: 8–14

32  Bhatt RS et al. (2007) Biomarkers for monitoring 

antiangiogenic therapy. Clin Cancer Res 13: S777–S780
33  Poon RT et al. (2001) Clinical implications of circulating 
angiogenic factors in cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 19: 
1207–1225

juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7   SESSA ET AL.       

nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY  389

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

34  Jubb AM et al. (2006) Impact of vascular endothelial 

53  Rabascio C et al. (2004) Assessing tumor 

growth factor-A expression, thrombospondin-2 
expression, and microvessel density on the treatment 
effect of bevacizumab in metastatic colorectal cancer. 
J Clin Oncol 24: 217–227

35  Bocci G et al. (2004) Increased plasma vascular 

endothelial growth factor (VEGF) as a surrogate marker 
for optimal therapeutic dosing of VEGF receptor-2 
monoclonal antibodies. Cancer Res 64: 6616–6625

36  Willett CG et al. (2005) Surrogate markers for 

antiangiogenic therapy and dose-limiting toxicities 
for bevacizumab with radiation and chemotherapy: 
continued experience of a phase I trial in rectal cancer 
patients. J Clin Oncol 23: 8136–8139

37  Zaman K et al. (2006) Monitoring multiple angiogenesis-
related molecules in the blood of cancer patients shows 
a correlation between VEGF-A and MMP-9 levels 
before treatment and divergent changes after surgical 
vs conservative therapy. Int J Cancer 118: 755–764

38  Hlatky L et al. (2002) Clinical application of 

antiangiogenic therapy: microvessel density, what it 
does and doesn’t tell us. J Natl Cancer Inst 94: 883–893
39  Solorzano CC et al. (2001) In vivo intracellular signaling 
as a marker of antiangiogenic activity. Cancer Res 61: 
7048–7051

40  Bertolini F et al. (2006) The multifaceted circulating 

endothelial cell in cancer: towards marker and target 
identification. Nat Rev Cancer 6: 835–845

41  Mancuso P et al. (2001) Resting and activated 

endothelial cells are increased in the peripheral blood 
of cancer patients. Blood 97: 3658–3661

42  Shaked Y et al. (2005) Optimal biologic dose of 

metronomic chemotherapy regimens is associated 
with maximum antiangiogenic activity. Blood 106: 
3058–3061

43  Mancuso P et al. (2006) Circulating endothelial-cell 

kinetics and viability predict survival in breast cancer 
patients receiving metronomic chemotherapy. Blood 
108: 452–459

44  Beaudry P et al. (2005) Differential effects of vascular 
endothelial growth factor receptor-2 inhibitor ZD6474 
on circulating endothelial progenitors and mature 
circulating endothelial cells: implications for use as 
a surrogate marker of antiangiogenic activity. Clin 
Cancer Res 11: 3514–3522

45  Norden-Zfoni A et al. (2007) Blood-based biomarkers 
of SU11248 activity and clinical outcome in patients 
with metastatic imatinib-resistant gastrointestinal 
stromal tumor. Clin Cancer Res 13: 2643–2650
46  Strumberg D et al. (2005) Phase I clinical and 

pharmacokinetic study of the novel Raf kinase and 
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor inhibitor 
BAY 43-9006 in patients with advanced refractory solid 
tumors. J Clin Oncol 23: 965–972

47  Mittal V and Nolan DJ (2007) Genomics and 

proteomics approaches in understanding tumor 
angiogenesis. Expert Rev Mol Diagn 7: 133–147

48  St Croix B et al. (2000) Genes expressed in human 

tumor endothelium. Science 289: 1197–1202

49  Hardwick JS et al. (2005) Identification of biomarkers 

for tumor endothelial cell proliferation through gene 
expression profiling. Mol Cancer Ther 4: 413–425

50  Abe M and Sato Y (2001) cDNA microarray analysis  

of the gene expression profile of VEGF-activated 
human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Angiogenesis 
4: 289–298

51  van Beijnum JR and Griffioen AW (2005) In silico 

analysis of angiogenesis associated gene expression 
identifies angiogenic stage related profiles. Biochim 
Biophys Acta 1755: 121–134

52  Smirnov DA et al. (2006) Global gene expression 

profiling of circulating endothelial cells in patients with 
metastatic carcinomas. Cancer Res 66: 2918–2922

angiogenesis: increased circulating VE-cadherin RNA 
in patients with cancer indicates viability of circulating 
endothelial cells. Cancer Res 64: 4373–4377

54  DePrimo SE et al. (2003) Expression profiling of 

blood samples from an SU5416 phase III metastatic 
colorectal cancer clinical trial: a novel strategy for 
biomarker identification. BMC Cancer 3: 3

55  Abdollahi A et al. (2004) Endostatin’s antiangiogenic 

signaling network. Mol Cell 13: 649–663

56  Ayers M et al. (2007) Discovery and validation of 

biomarkers that respond to treatment with brivanib 
alaninate, a small-molecule VEGFR-2/FGFR-1 
antagonist. Cancer Res 6: 6899–6906

57  Mustafa DA et al. (2007) Identification of glioma 

neovascularization-related proteins by using MALDI-
FTMS and nano-LC fractionation to microdissected 
tumor vessels. Mol Cell Proteomics 6: 1147–1157
58  Celis JE et al. (2004) Proteomic characterization 
of the interstitial fluid perfusing the breast tumor 
microenvironment: a novel resource for biomarker and 
therapeutic target discovery. Mol Cell Proteomics 3: 
327–344

59  Bruneel A et al. (2003) Proteomic study of human 

umbilical vein endothelial cells in culture. Proteomics 
3: 714–723

60  Pellitteri-Hahn MC et al. (2006) Improved mass 

spectrometric proteomic profiling of the secretome 
of rat vascular endothelial cells. J Proteome Res 5: 
2861–2864

61  Godl K et al. (2005) Proteomic characterization of 

the angiogenesis inhibitor SU6668 reveals multiple 
impacts on cellular kinase signaling. Cancer Res 65: 
6919–6926

62  Campostrini N et al. (2006) Proteomic analysis of 

anti-angiogenic effects by a combined treatment with 
vinblastine and rapamycin in an endothelial cell line. 
Proteomics 6: 4420–4431

63  Alessandro R et al. (2005) Proteomic approaches in 

colon cancer: promising tools for new cancer markers 
and drug target discovery. Clin Colorectal Cancer 4: 
396–402

64  Pan S et al. (2005) High throughput proteome 

screening for biomarker detection. Mol Cell 
Proteomics 4: 182–190

65  Ocak I et al. (2007) The biologic basis of in vivo 

angiogenesis imaging. Front Biosci 12: 3601–3616

66  Provenzale JM (2007) Imaging of angiogenesis: clinical 

techniques and novel imaging methods. AJR Am J 
Roentgenol 188: 11–23

67  Cai W et al. (2006) How molecular imaging is speeding 
up antiangiogenic drug development. Mol Cancer Ther 
5: 2624–2633

68  Wintermark M et al. (2001) Quantitative assessment of 
regional cerebral blood flows by perfusion CT studies 
at low injection rates: a critical review of the underlying 
theoretical models. Eur Radiol 11: 1220–1230

69  Atri M (2006) New technologies and directed agents 
for applications of cancer imaging. J Clin Oncol 24: 
3299–3308

70  Miller JC et al. (2005) Imaging angiogenesis: 

applications and potential for drug development.  
J Natl Cancer Inst 97: 172–187

71  Rosen MA and Schnall MD (2007) Dynamic contrast-
enhanced magnetic resonance imaging for assessing 
tumor vascularity and vascular effects of targeted 
therapies in renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 13: 
S770–S776

72  Leach MO et al. (2005) The assessment of 

antiangiogenic and antivascular therapies in early-
stage clinical trials using magnetic resonance imaging: 
issues and recommendations. Br J Cancer 92:  
1599–1610

390  nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY 

   SESSA ET AL.   juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7

review

www.nature.com/clinicalpractice/onc

73  Tofts PS (1997) Modeling tracer kinetics in dynamic 

Gd-DTPA MR imaging. J Magn Reson Imaging 7: 
91–101

74  Miles KA (2003) Perfusion CT for the assessment of 
tumour vascularity: which protocol? Br J Radiol 76: 
S36–S42

75  Goh V et al. (2007) Quantitative tumor perfusion 

assessment with multidetector CT: are measurements 
from two commercial software packages 
interchangeable? Radiology 242: 777–782

76  Roberts HC et al. (2002) Dynamic, contrast-enhanced 

CT of human brain tumors: quantitative assessment 
of blood volume, blood flow, and microvascular 
permeability: report of two cases. AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol 23: 828–832

77  Sahani DV et al. (2005) Assessing tumor perfusion and 
treatment response in rectal cancer with multisection 
CT: initial observations. Radiology 234: 785–792

78  Raichle ME et al. (1983) Brain blood flow measured 

with intravenous H2(15)O. II. Implementation and 
validation. J Nucl Med 24: 790–798

79  Sadeghi N et al. (2006) Correlation between dynamic 
susceptibility contrast perfusion MRI and methionine 
metabolism in brain gliomas: preliminary results.  
J Magn Reson Imaging 24: 989–994

80  Padhani A (2006) PET imaging of tumour hypoxia. 

Cancer Imaging 6: S117–S121

81  Phillips P and Gardner E (2004) Contrast-agent 

detection and quantification. Eur Radiol 14 (suppl 8): 
S4–S10

82  Wei K et al. (1998) Quantification of myocardial 

blood flow with ultrasound-induced destruction of 
microbubbles administered as a constant venous 
infusion. Circulation 97: 473–483

83  Broillet A et al. (2005) Assessment of microvascular 
perfusion changes in a rat breast tumor model using 
SonoVue to monitor the effects of different anti-
angiogenic therapies. Acad Radiol 12 (suppl 1): 
S28–S33

84  Lucidarme O et al. (2006) Angiogenesis: noninvasive 

quantitative assessment with contrast-enhanced 

functional US in murine model. Radiology 239:  
730–739

85  Lassau N et al. (2006) Prognostic value of angiogenesis 

evaluated with high-frequency and colour Doppler 
sonography for preoperative assessment of primary 
cutaneous melanomas: correlation with recurrence 
after a 5-year follow-up period. Cancer Imaging 6: 
24–29

86  Lamuraglia M et al. (2006) To predict progression-free 
survival and overall survival in metastatic renal cancer 
treated with sorafenib: pilot study using dynamic 
contrast-enhanced Doppler ultrasound. Eur J Cancer 
42: 2472–2479

87  Fury MG et al. (2007) A Phase II study of SU5416 in 
patients with advanced or recurrent head and neck 
cancers. Invest New Drugs 25: 165–172

88  Schirner M et al. (2004) Molecular imaging of tumor 

angiogenesis. Ann NY Acad Sci 1014: 67–75

89  Casanovas O et al. (2005) Drug resistance by evasion 

of antiangiogenic targeting of VEGF signaling in late-
stage pancreatic islet tumors. Cancer Cell 8: 299–309

90  Shaked Y et al. (2006) Therapy-induced acute 

recruitment of circulating endothelial progenitor cells 
to tumors. Science 313: 1785–1787

91  Arditi M et al. (2006) A new formalism for the 

quantification of tissue perfusion by the destruction-
replenishment method in contrast ultrasound imaging. 
IEEE Trans Ultrason Ferroelectr Freq Control 53:  
1118–1129

92  Dark GG et al. (1997) Combretastatin A-4, an agent 

that displays potent and selective toxicity toward 
tumor vasculature. Cancer Res 57: 1829–1834

93  Stevenson JP et al. (2003) Phase I trial of the 

antivascular agent combretastatin A4 phosphate on 
a 5-day schedule to patients with cancer: magnetic 
resonance imaging evidence for altered tumor blood 
flow. J Clin Oncol 21: 4428–4438

94  Yang JC et al. (2003) A randomized trial of 

bevacizumab, an anti-vascular endothelial growth 
factor antibody, for metastatic renal cancer. N Engl J 
Med 349: 427–434

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs F Bosman,  
A Mariotti, M Arditi and  
R Meuli for helpful 
comments and discussions, 
Dr JY Mewly for providing 
radiological images and  
R Driscoll for proofreading 
the manuscript. We 
apologize to those 
colleagues whose work 
could not be cited owing 
to space limitations. 
Our research activities 
are supported by grants 
from the Swiss National 
Science Foundation (SNF), 
Oncosuisse, the National 
Center for Competence in 
Research (NCCR, molecular 
Oncology, a research 
instrument of the SNF), the 
Medic Foundation and  
the Southern European New 
Drugs Organization (SENDO) 
Foundation. Désirée Lie, 
University of California, 
Irvine, CA, is the author of 
and is solely responsible for 
the content of the learning 
objectives, questions and 
answers of the Medscape-
accredited continuing 
medical education activity 
associated with this article.

Competing interests
The authors declared no 
competing interests. 

juLY 2008  vOL 5  NO 7   SESSA ET AL.       

nature clinical practice  ONCOLOGY  391

