UCLA
UCLA Previously Published Works

Title
The path forward: 2015 International Children's Tumor Foundation conference on 
neurofibromatosis type 1, type 2, and schwannomatosis
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/32t721k9
Journal
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A, 173(6)
ISSN
1552-4825
Authors
Blakeley, JO
Bakker, A
Barker, A
et al.
Publication Date
2017-06-01
DOI
10.1002/ajmg.a.38239
 
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Received: 5 December 2016 | Accepted: 22 February 2017
DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38239

CONFERENCE REPORT

The path forward: 2015 International Children’s Tumor
Foundation conference on neurofibromatosis type 1, type 2,
and schwannomatosis

| Annette Bakker2

| Anne Barker3
| Marco Giovannini7

| Michael J. Fisher6

|

| Wade Clapp4
| David H. Gutmann8
| Alison C. Lloyd12

|

|

Jaishri O. Blakeley1
Rosalie Ferner5
Matthias A. Karajannis9
Roger J. Packer13
David A. Stevenson16
Anat Stemmer-Rachamimov19

|

Joseph L. Kissil10

| Eric Legius11

| Vijaya Ramesh14

| Vincent M. Riccardi15

|

| Nicole J. Ullrich17

| Meena Upadhyaya18

|

1 Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
2 Children’s Tumor Foundation, New York, New York

3 Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona

4 Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana
5 Guy’s Hospital and St. Thomas’ Hospital, London, United Kingdom
6 Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

7 University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California

8 Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri

9 New York University Medical Center, New York, New York

10 Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida

11 Center for Human Genetics-University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium

12 MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College, London, United Kingdom
13 Children’s National Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia

14 Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts

15 The Neurofibromatosis Institute, La Crescenta, California
16 Lucille Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford, Palo Alto, California
17 Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts

18 Institute of Cancer Genetics, Cardiff University, Wales, United Kingdom

19 Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts

Correspondence
Jaishri O. Blakeley, M.D., Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine,
Neurofibromatosis Therapeutic Acceleration
Program, 600 N. Wolfe Street, Meyer 100,
Baltimore, MD 21287.
Email: jblakel3@jhmi.edu

Funding information
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, Grant number: 2R13NS084619-03; The
Children’s Tumor Foundation

The Annual Children’s Tumor Foundation International Neurofibromatosis Meeting is the
premier venue for connecting discovery, translational and clinical scientists who are focused on
neurofibromatosis types 1 and 2 (NF1 and NF2) and schwannomatosis (SWN). The meeting also
features rare tumors such as glioma, meningioma, sarcoma, and neuroblastoma that occur both
within these syndromes and spontaneously; associated with somatic mutations in NF1, NF2,
and SWN. The meeting addresses both state of the field for current clinical care as well as
emerging preclinical models fueling discovery of new therapeutic targets and discovery science
initiatives investigating mechanisms of tumorigenesis. Importantly, this conference is a forum
for presenting work in progress and bringing together all stakeholders in the scientific
community. A highlight of the conference was the involvement of scientists from the
pharmaceutical
industry who presented growing efforts for rare disease therapeutic

Am J Med Genet. 2017;9999:1–8.

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/ajmga

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

| 1

2 |

BLAKELEY ET AL.

development in general and specifically, in pediatric patients with rare tumor syndromes.
Another highlight was the focus on new investigators who presented new data about biomarker
discovery, tumor pathogenesis, and diagnostic tools for NF1, NF2, and SWN. This report
summarizes the themes of the meeting and a synthesis of the scientific discoveries presented at
the conference in order to make the larger research community aware of progress in the
neurofibromatoses.

K E Y W O R D S
neurofibromatosis type 1, neurofibromatosis type 2, pediatric tumors, rare disease,
schwannomatosis, therapeutic discovery

1 |

INTRODUCTION

2 | A STRONG FOUNDATION

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2),
and schwannomatosis (SWN) are distinct neurogenetic syndromes
caused by mutations in tumor suppressor genes that manifest with
multiple tumors throughout the central and peripheral nervous
system (CNS and PNS). There is a risk for malignancy in all three
syndromes, but most pronounced in NF1 where there is risk for
brain and optic pathway tumors, malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor (MPNST), and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML)
(Evans et al., 2002; Fisher et al., 2012; Korf, 2000; Lauchle, Braun,
Loh, & Shannon, 2006; Listernick, Charrow, Greenwald, & Mets,
1994; Pourtsidis et al., 2014). There are also multiple other
manifestations, particularly in NF1,
including vascular and bone
malformations, altered neurocognitive development, and endocrine
system tumors. All three syndromes are rare with NF2 and SWN
estimated to effect between 1/25,000 and 1/40,000 births (Evans
et al., 2005, 2010) and NF1 being the most common, with an
estimated incidence of 1/2,500–1/3,000 births (Evans et al., 2010;
Huson, Harper, & Compston, 1988).

Because of

the inherent complexity of

these syndromes,
involvement of multiple specialties, including neuroscience, molecular
genetics, chemistry, biology, pediatrics, genetics, oncology, neurology,
psychology, pathology, surgery, radiology, pain management, radiation
oncology, and internal medicine, is necessary for the optimal clinical
care and therapeutic advancement for people with NF1, NF2, and
SWN. A major tool for bringing these critical specialists together and
advancing the discoveries that improve treatments for people with
NF1, NF2, and SWN is the annual International Children’s Tumor
Foundation meeting. The 2015 annual meeting was held in Monterey,
California with a novel agenda designed to address all of the major
nodes in the therapeutic pathway from basic discovery, through key
translational studies (including systems and computational biology), to
emerging results of current clinical trials. In addition, the meeting
provided education about the current standard of care for NF1, NF2,
and SWN with an overall effort to synergize efforts between clinicians
and basic scientists. This report provides highlights of the 2015
Children’s Tumor Foundation Meeting inclusive of the major advances
in NF1, NF2, and SWN.

Recognizing that NF1, NF2, and SWN have many shared challenges in
all spheres of science and clinical management, the 2015 Children’s
Tumor Foundation Meeting was configured to focus on shared
challenges and opportunities for breakthrough discoveries across all
three syndromes. Exemplifying this theme, the first key note address
was given by Anne Barker, PhD, Professor at Arizona State University
and Director of the National Biomarker Development Alliance.
Dr. Barker drew on her experiences as prior Deputy Director, National
Cancer Institute (NCI) and her current work in developing a new
systems-based clinical trial for glioblastoma to address the oppor-
tunities to radically change the approach to medical discovery in her
talk, “The Myths and Realities of Transformative Healthcare.” She
challenged the NF research community to seize the opportunities to
apply broad scientific principles and systematic discipline to enable
development of individualized, molecularly based therapies for the
various manifestations of NF1, NF2, and SWN. The first session
following this inspirational opening talk was chaired by Drs. David
Gutmann and Nicole Ullrich and focused on core concepts of diagnosis
and management of NF1, NF2, and SWN. Dr. Bruce Korf reviewed the
current status of clinically available genetic testing for NF1, NF2, and
SWN. Presently, the sensitivity of testing differs for the three
disorders and is typically performed to resolve a diagnostic uncertainty
rather than to provide predictive or prognostic data. However, an
argument was made that universal genetic testing would advance the
discovery of predictive genotype–phenotype correlations moving
forward. In addition, NF1 is now included on many cancer molecular
panels since it is a frequent somatic mutation in common cancers such
as lung adenocarcinoma, breast cancer, and melanoma. This develop-
ing somatic NF1 mutation dataset paired with germline testing of
individuals who have the NF1 syndrome presents an exciting
opportunity to explore the phenotypic spectrum of NF1 genomic
variants, ultimately increasing the prognostic value of NF1 testing
within and outside of the syndrome.
Indeed, Dr. Gareth Evans
presented a compelling example of the use of genotyping for
molecular predictors of mortality in people with NF2. He and his
team identified 1,192 people with NF2 through the United Kingdom
National NF2 Registry and showed that early age at diagnosis and the

BLAKELEY ET AL.

| 3

presence of intracranial meningiomas as well as germline truncating
mutations have the worst prognosis. Interestingly, this study also
showed that the mortality rate for patients with NF2 diagnosed in
more recent decades was lower than for people diagnosed previously,
suggesting that recent efforts to advance management of people with
NF2 in specialist centers is having impact.

Dr. Christine Chiasson-MacKenzie presented data that the NF2
tumor suppressor protein, merlin, dynamically modulates mitogenic
signaling upon the establishment of cell contact (Chiasson-MacKenzie
et al., 2015) reinforcing therapeutic strategies that modulate this
activity. Dr. Anat Stemmer Rachamimov discussed the importance of
autopsies for the study of the evolution and progression of disease in
NF1, NF2, and SWN and for enhancing the understanding of the
clinical and radiologic observations in complex disease processes.
Recent examples highlighting the power of autopsies for discovery are
the finding that gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are part of the
spectrum of lesions encountered in NF1 and that NF1-associated
GISTs have clinical and molecular characteristics that are distinct from
their sporadic counterparts. Similarly, autopsy studies in people with
NF2 revealed the presence of precursor schwannoma lesions,
“tumorlets,” and showed that schwannomas are
Schwann cell
polyclonal and may in fact represent collision tumors composed of
multiple tumorlets (Dewan et al., 2015; Stivaros et al., 2015). The study
of surgical pathology specimens can also lead to the discovery of
diagnostic and prognostic markers, for example the use of immuno-
histochemical markers (S100, glut1, claudin1, sox10, p16, and Ki67) to
help differentiate the various types of nerve sheath tumors. Dr. Chetan
Bettegowda presented exciting new data about the use of circulating
tumor DNA (cDNA) as a “liquid biopsy” for NF1-associated tumors. He
shared their early experiences using cDNA to monitor for cancer
recurrence in the course of therapy for MPNST. As this is further
developed and validated, this may serve as a new clinical tool for
monitoring MPNST clinical status. Dr. Miriam Bredella then presented
the state of the art imaging techniques used to assess tumor burden in
patients across NF1, NF2, and SWN and the validation of imaging
techniques for clinical trial endpoints for the tumors of these
syndromes. Importantly, several studies have shown that volumetric
tumor assessment is more accurate than 2D techniques such as
RECIST for tumors such as plexiform neurofibroma (pNF) in NF1 and
vestibular schwannoma (VS) in NF2 (Cai et al., 2009; Dombi et al.,
2007; Harris et al., 2008; Solomon, Warren, Dombi, Patronas, &
Widemann, 2004). Dr. Eva Dombi presented the preliminary results of
a comparison of the MRI analysis methods used at the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) and Massachusetts General Hospital to
assess two volumetric analysis approaches for assessing tumor size for
complex pNF. They used a dataset of 15 pNF at three different time
points and showed similar accuracy of the assessment techniques for
detecting tumor volume and changes over time. These results establish
volumetric analysis as a sensitive and reliable method to detect small
changes in pNF size; a critical step for applying this technology to both
standard clinical care and as an endpoint in clinical trials. Dr. Karin
Walsh then presented the approaches for evaluating cognitive
function in individuals with NF1, both for clinical care and
clinical trials, to allow assessment of therapies addressing cognitive

performance in people with NF1. The session closed with the much
anticipated results of
the Department of Defense sponsored
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to
assess the efficacy of lovastatin for the treatment of deficits in
visuospatial learning and attention in children with NF1 presented by
Dr. Kathryn North. Children with NF1 (n = 146) who demonstrated
deficits in the primary cognitive outcome measures at baseline were
randomly assigned to lovastatin (n = 74; 40 mg/day) or placebo
(n = 70). Although lovastatin administered for 16 weeks was well
tolerated,
it did not improve cognitive or behavioral outcomes in
children with NF1.

2.1 | Advancing discovery to improve therapeutics
for NF1, NF2, and SWN

Dr. Barbara Slusher launched the second day of the meeting with the
keynote “The Changing Ecosystem of Drug Discovery: Rise in
Academic-Industry Partnerships.” She discussed the evolving land-
scape of therapeutic discovery and the associated opportunities for
basic science discoveries to be translated to clinic via multi-disciplinary
public–private partnerships. These opportunities for collaboration are
particularly rich for rare diseases like NF and are increasingly valued in
the pharmacology industry. Drs. Marco Giovannini and Wade Clapp
then led the session: “Optimizing Tools for Discovery” addressing cell
systems,
inducible pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), and new murine
models. One clearly emerging opportunity to both understand disease
pathogenesis and identify targeted therapies is the use of iPSCs. In his
keynote presentation, Dr. Evan Snyder reviewed the basic biology of
neuronal stem cells, emphasizing that these primordial cells have the
capacity to differentiate into cells of many neuronal lineages, display a
capacity for self-renewal and can migrate to target areas guided by
microenvironmental cues. Utilizing these cells can both provide
insights into disease pathogenesis and when induced to differentiate,
create populations of neuronal cells that can potentially be used
therapeutically. The two subsequent discussions focused on the use of
iPSCs in the context of NF1 specific malignancies. Dr. David Gutmann
utilized a panel of NF1 patient-derived iPSCs to identify genotype–
phenotype differences relevant to improved modeling of Nf1 optic
gliomas (OPG) in mice, while Dr. Eduard Serra generated human iPSCs
from pNF. Dr. Gutmann discussed approaches his laboratory is taking
to define the individual contributions of the germline NF1 gene
mutation and patient sex to NF1 clinical heterogeneity, focusing on
optic glioma and hippocampal-based learning. Dr. Serra characterized
the germline and somatic mutations from human pNF and then
reprogrammed the schwann cells to iPSCs to create a renewable
biologically relevant assay for discovery. These model systems allow
investigation of key events in tumorigenesis and serve as drug
therapeutic models with increased representation of the diversity of
the genetic background of both OPG and pNF. Dr. Robert Kesterson
then reviewed the current murine models for NF1. These are
predominantly based on the absence of Nf1, which is of limited
genetic diversity. He presented recent efforts to create murine models
with splice site mutations to increase model diversity more closely
modeling the human condition. Dr. Shuning followed with a

4 |

BLAKELEY ET AL.

presentation about the pathways activated by loss of function in Nf1 in
a mutant zebrafish model. The Nf1 zebrafish models provide novel
systems for drug testing for NF1 deficient high-grade gliomas,
MPNSTs, and neuroblastomast. Notably, a tight genetic link between
Nf1 loss and MYC-N driven neuroblastoma tumorigenesis was
demonstrated in this model. Dr. Peacock in the Steensma laboratory
presented work using genetically engineered mice with disruption of
Nf1 and overexpression of c-met leading to development of MPNST,
implicating c-met as a therapeutic target for MPNST. The session was
closed by Drs. Anna Barker and Joshua Stewart presenting the current
and developing bioinformatics infrastructure tools available to support
computational analysis of complex datasets generated from both pre-
clinical and clinical studies. These data approaches enhance the ability
to predict patterns of tumor behavior and response to therapies as well
as support biomarker discovery. Recognizing that we are in the midst
of the era of “omics” and the need to make rational decisions about
treatments based on a variety of complex data sources, these two talks
were timely and instructive for the NF research community.

Drs. Alison Lloyd and Vincent Riccardi led the session, “Biology
and Discovery” in which novel work toward understanding the basic
pathogenesis of the tumors associated with NF1, NF2, and SWN
was presented. Mario Suva, MD, PhD reviewed the methodologies
of chromatin analysis and the use of this technique for investigating
tumor heterogeneity and identification of
therapeutic targets
through chromatin immunoprecipitation and high-throughput
sequencing to map protein-DNA interactions (ChIP-seq). This
approach allows identification of the epigenome of a given cell
type. The signature chromatin structures can then be used to
identify promoters, transcripts, enhancers, silencers, and repressive
chromatin domains that can be manipulated for therapeutic gain
(Suva, Riggi, & Bernstein, 2013). Dr. Karen Cichowski presented her
lab’s work in identifying ways to overcome therapeutic resistance in
MPNSTs. Through focusing on cancer cell-specific metabolic
and epigenetic vulnerabilities in combination with targets in the
Ras pathway, they have developed new combination approaches
for MPNST, some already currently evaluated in clinical trials
(Malone et al., 2014)
(www.clinicaltrials.gov, NCT01661283;
NCT02008877). Dr. Helen Morrison discussed how microenviron-
ment
interactions contribute to tumorigenesis in NF2 driven
schwannomas. Her lab identified a severe re-myelination defect in
combination with sustained macrophage infiltration as an underlying
pathogenic process in the setting of a crush injury model in mice
with Nf2 deletions in Schwann cells and axons. These provocative
results suggest that interactions between axons and their adjacent
Schwann cells are important for schwannoma development beyond
the biallelic Nf2 loss in Schwann cells. Finally, Dr. Luis Parada
presented data about
the interaction between Nf1 mutation,
cerebral development, and the associated phenotypical intellectual
deficits in murine models as well as the association between Nf1,
Trp53, and Pten inactivation in adult progenitor cells and develop-
ment of malignant gliomas. His lab has shown that neurofibromin is
required for appropriate development of cerebellar folia and ERK
inhibitors can reverse the effect, implying that Nf1 is a key element
of normal brain development.

Drs. Eric Legius and Meena Upadhyaya led the session “Along the
Pathway” about the signaling transduction pathways and systems that
influence NF1, NF2, and SWN pathogenesis. Dr. Jianqiang Wu
presented data supporting the role of an Nf1-Egfr-Stat3-Arid1b/β-
catenin pathway in the initiation of Nf1 neurofibroma, using unbiased
insertional mutagenesis screening, mouse models, and molecular
analyses. Genetic deletion of Stat3 in Nf1 deficient Schwann cells
progenitors (SCPs) and Schwann cells (SCs) prevents neurofibroma
formation. Genetic gain- and loss-of-function mutations identify EGFR
as a major upstream regulator of P-Stat3 in SCP; and Stat3 represses
Arid1b through histone modification indicating that epigenetic
modification plays a role in neurofibroma tumorigenesis. These data
support testing JAK/STAT or Wnt/β-catenin pathway inhibitors in
neurofibroma therapeutic trials. Signaling pathways are usually
presented as a linear cascade of protein interactions inducing post-
transcriptional modifications and ending with the activation/inhibition
of a transcription factor. However, the epigenetic state of a cell
determines how these signals are received and translated into an
actual change in transcriptional output. Further, transcription factors
can only influence transcription if they physically bind to enhancers or
promoters that are active or poised for activation and this status is
determined by the histone/DNA modifications present. Hence,
epigenetic factors are important considerations when therapeutically
targeting signal transduction pathways. Dr. Thomas De Raedt outlined
the role of PRC2 loss in MPNSTs. Loss of the PRC2 complex removes
the repressive H3K27me3 mark and induces an epigenetic switch that
allows for acetylation of H3K27. This H3K27Ac mark opens the
chromatin structure allowing for transcriptional activation to occur.
Moreover, the loss of PRC2 causes an upregulation of the RAS
transcriptional output in murine MPNSTs (De Raedt et al., 2014).

Dr. Nancy Ratner discussed the cell autonomous and non-cell
autonomous effects of loss of NF1 and H-RasG12V in oligoden-
drocytes, based on data from mouse models (Mayes et al., 2013).
New findings confirm that the decompaction of oligodendrocyte
myelin and diminished integrity of the blood brain barrier in these
models are controlled, at least in part, by nitric oxide and MEK
signaling. The findings suggest that oligodendrocytes, in addition to
astrocytes and neurons, contribute to NF1 brain pathology. Shifting
focus to NF2, Dr. Filippo Giancotti and coworkers shared evidence
that Merlin’s entry into the nucleus and inhibition of the E3 ubiquitin
ligase CRL4-DCAF1 is necessary for tumor suppression (Li &
Giancotti, 2010) and that CRL4-DCAF1 inhibits Lats thus activating
the Hippo-YAP pathway (Li et al., 2014). There is now genetic and
pharmacological evidence that CRL4-DCAF1 drives tumorigenesis in
mouse models of schwannoma and mesothelioma. Dr. Matthew
Karolak then presented new data about pseudoarthosis pathophysi-
ology in NF1. They found that FGFR1 signaling in hypertrophic
growth plate chondrocytes is attenuated by neurofibromin to
regulate growth plate catabolism and hypertrophic zone length.
He emphasized that FGFR1 and FGFR3 signaling is likely to be
attenuated by neurofibromin in the prehypertrophic zone to control
proliferation zone length/organization and overall body length. It
may be possible to translate these findings to treat NF1 associated
pseudarthrosis by inhibiting FGFR.

BLAKELEY ET AL.

| 5

improves

These pre-clinical discoveries and their critical role in developing
clinically impactful interventions were further expounded upon in
the session: “Therapeutics: From Target to Clinic” led by Drs. Vijaya
Ramesh and Joe Kissil. Dr. Douglas Stewart discussed the use of
genomic approaches to identify new therapeutic targets in NF1 and
NF2. Although promising, as with many other solid tumors, whole-
exome and whole-genome sequencing studies face challenges such
as tissue procurement and annotation, the calling of insertion–
deletion variants and complex arrangements, the assigning of
significance to non-coding sequence, bioinformatics and issues
with informed consent, patient confidentiality and sharing of large
datasets. In addition, NF studies in particular are hampered by issues
related to tumor heterogeneity,
illustrated recently in NF2-
associated VS, where different NF2 mutations were found in an
apparently single lesion (Stivaros et al., 2015). Dr. Lei Xu discussed
the use of anti-VEGF treatment to enhance responses to radiation
therapy in NF2 schwannomas in xenograft mouse models. Their
that anti-angiogenic treatment
results
the
suggest
effectiveness of
radiation treatment of VS in NF2 patients.
Dr. William Guerrant from the Scripps Research Institute then
discussed efforts to characterize the role the transcriptional
activator YAP plays in NF2 null schwannoma. They demonstrated
that YAP is required for proliferation and survival of NF2-null
Schwann cells in culture and for tumor formation in vivo again
supporting the Hippo-YAP pathway as a therapeutic target in
schwannomas. Dr. Dominique Lallemand discussed results using
proteomic approaches, a combination of reverse phase protein array
(RPPA), receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) array, and immunohis-
tochemistry to identify frequently activated signaling pathways in
human schwannomas. His group identified a number of RTKs
including Her2/3, PDGFRß, and Axl as promising targets. In addition,
the RPPA analysis showed that Ki67 expression correlates to the
levels of the Hippo pathway effector Yap and that in cell models
tumor cell proliferation is linked to a signaling network driven by a
small set of RTKs under the control of Yap. Dr. David Deyle from
Mayo clinic presented the effects of measles virus Edmonston
(MVEdm) vaccine strain engineered to express the human sodium
iodide symporter (MV-NIS) on MPNST. MPNST cell lines were found
to highly express CD46, a cellular receptor required for measles viral
entry on their cell surface. After in vitro MV-NIS infection, MPNST
cell lines showed significant cytopathic effect and local administra-
tion of MV-NIS into MPNST-derived tumors resulted in significant
regression of tumor and improved survival. Based on these results,
they have launched a phase I clinical trial using oncolytic measles
virus therapy to treat people with MPNST. Dr. Marc Ferrer from the
National Center
for Advancing Translational Science (NCATS)
discussed the approach for a large scale high-throughput screening
(HTS) to identify agents active against human immortalized NF1
deficient Schwann cells in collaboration with Neurofibromatosis
Therapeutic Acceleration Program (NTAP) investigators. Six cell lines
derived from human pNF created by Dr. Margaret Wallace were
screened with roughly 2,000 compounds. The top 40 compounds
were chosen after a single drug screen, which was followed by a
combination screen to identify synergy among the drugs. Although

no clustering of pharmacological response by NF1 status was noted,
this is a new tool that makes HTS feasible for single and combination
agents.

The focus then shifted to “Clinical Therapeutics: Ongoing Efforts
and Future Directions” led by Drs. Rosalie Ferner and Michael Fisher.
Dr. Peter de Blank opened the session reviewing long-term vision,
psychological and socio-economic outcomes from the Childhood
Cancer Survivor Study in adult survivors of childhood glioma that
included patients with NF1. Adults with bilateral severe sight
impairment were more likely to be unemployed, unmarried, and live
dependently. However, unilateral visual loss had very limited impact
on adult socio-economic and psychological outcomes. Dr. Robert
Avery then reported that in 46 participants (55 affected eyes) with
OPG followed longitudinally; new vision loss was associated with a
decline in retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) (≥10%); however, there was
no relationship between MRI progression and RNFL change indicating
that RNFL thickness may be a valuable biomarker in children with
OPG. Dr. Juha Peltonen then presented long-term outcome data using
population databases from the Finnish Cancer Registry and the NF1
registry. The age of death and 5 year survival was significantly lower in
NF1 patients (particularly in females) compared with matched
controls. Cancer was the main cause of death in people with NF1
with the greatest risk of malignancy in childhood and women with
most common cancers in NF1 being MPNST, gliomas, breast cancer,
and GIST. Regarding clinical therapeutics, Dr. Scott Plotkin discussed
emerging data on use of bevacizumab for patients with NF2. Results
from a prospective multi-center phase 2 study (NCT01207687)
revealed hearing improvement in 36% (5/14) of subjects and imaging
responses in 6/14 (43%) of target VS that were durable for up to
3 months after stopping drug. However, some patients experienced
hearing decline and tumor growth by 6 months showing that long-term
treatment with bevacizumab is necessary to maintain clinical
improvement. Imaging responses have also been reported in NF2
patients with symptomatic spinal schwannoma and ependymoma
(Farschtschi et al., 2016).
In contrast, response of NF2-related
meningiomas to bevacizumab was less frequent and transient (Nunes
et al., 2013). Finally, Dr. Brigitte Widemann presented the preliminary
results of a phase I trial of the oral MEK inhibitor selumetinib for
children with inoperable plexiform neurofibromas. The maximum
tolerated dose was defined as 25 mg/m2/dose administered twice
daily on a continuous schedule. Partial responses (≥20% reduction in
tumor volume) were noted in 71% of patients. Dose limiting toxicities
included infection, asymptomatic creatinine kinase elevation, and
asymptomatic left ventricular function decline; all resolved (Dombi
et al., 2016). A phase II study is ongoing (NCT01362803). The clinical
session was closed by Dr. David Bennet who gave the final key note
speech on the Neuropathic Pain and Peripheral Nerve Repair. He
presented the state of the art in nerve pathophysiology and the
opportunities for therapeutic strategies that enhance nerve repair. The
applications to NF1, NF2, and SWN are broad ranging from managing
the associated painful neuropathy to preventing new tumor formation.
Drs. Karajannis and Packer led the session “Pathway to Approval”
focused on strategies on moving therapies into the clinical develop-
ment space including business strategy, identification of biomarkers

6 |

BLAKELEY ET AL.

that will allow therapeutic personalization and patient-focused
outcomes. In this session, basic science researchers, clinical research-
ers, and industry partners discussed their various perspectives on
opportunities and obstacles to drug approval for rare diseases like
NF1, NF2, and SWN with special focus on bringing novel therapies to
children. On the therapeutic front, Kairong Li, presented his research
on drugs that suppress premature translation termination in treatment
of NF1 patients with NF1 nonsense mutations. One-fifth of NF1
patients carry nonsense mutations in the NF1 gene. Dr. Li has created a
novel NF1 mouse model (Nf1st18-CKO) carrying a recurrent nonsense
mutation found in NF1 patients and showed preclinical in vivo data
using Nf1st18/st18 embryonic fibroblasts to screen candidate drugs
for their ability to restore neurofibromin activity. Gentamicin, which
enables reading through premature translation codons, coupled with
amlexanox (an anti-inflammatory immunomodulator with nonsense-
mediated mRNA inhibitor activity) partially restored neurofibromin
function as measured by a significant reduction in downstream
phospho-ERK activation. Further in vivo studies are planned to
validate these findings. Dr. Stankovic presented gene expression
analysis data pointing to overexpression of genes related to
inflammation in human VS, as well as retrospective clinical data
suggesting an association between aspirin intake and decreased
growth rates of VS. She showed preclinical data indicating that
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) and prostaglandins are overexpressed in VS,
and that salicylates and a COX-2 inhibitor decreased the proliferation
of cultured human VS cells with no effect on normal Schwann cells,
setting a path for translation to clinical trials for NF2 associated VS.
Dr. Mitchel Springer presented data on the identification of
differentially expressed genes in responsive (shrinking) and non-
responsive (growing) tumors from an NF1 plexiform neurofibroma
mouse model treated with inhibitors of MEK, ErbB, PI3K, or Stat3. He
identified a set of a candidate genes that may drive therapy resistance,
including CXCL13. Based on these results, the Ratner laboratory is
currently investigating the efficacy of a CXCL13 neutralizing antibody
in a mouse model of NF1 plexiform neurofibromas to overcome this
potential resistance mechanism.

Dr. Aileen Healy, Vice President, Preclinical Development of
Cydan Development Inc. provided an overview of drug development
for rare diseases from the perspective of a company with a mission of
de-risking studies to bridge the preclinical to clinical development
process, and enable human proof-of-concept studies to promote later
stage investment and development. Dr. Stephen Simko, Associate
Medical Director, Innovative Pediatric Oncology Drug Development
for Genetech Inc. then described the evolving regulatory requirements
and incentives for increasing the involvement of pharmaceutical
companies in pediatric oncology drug development. He discussed
factors internal
influence
investigation of new agents in children, including the prioritization
of molecule expertise over pediatric disease-specific expertise,
inconsistency in pediatric development strategy across different
molecule programs, and regulatory requirements.
to
maximize therapeutic opportunities for children with cancer, a
mechanism-of-action based approach has been adopted within
Genentech,
including robust preclinical assessments, on-target

to the pharmaceutical

industry that

In order

molecule sensitivity in vitro and in vivo, biomarker validation, resistance
mechanisms, and potential therapeutic combinations early in the
development process. The information shared in this session demon-
strates the tremendous opportunities that are now available to move
agents from the preclinical state to clinical trials in the hopes of developing
a menu of approved drugs for pediatric tumors. The pharmaceutical
industry is clearly committed to developing drugs for rare diseases and
Drs. Healy and Simko presented the case for strong business models
that should be established to support such development.

3 | THE PATH FORWARD

The meeting concluded with sessions focused on the active programs in
NF1, NF2, and SWN. During the session “Report Card” leaders of
influential programs focused on specific aspects of NF1, NF2, and SWN
research presented the current activities of each group. Dr. Roger
Packer presented the activities of the Department of Defense
Neurofibromatosis Clinical Trials Consortium (NFCTC) including the
ongoing clinical trials for pNF (NCT02101736, NCT02096471) and
MPNST (NCT01661283, NCT02008877) and upcoming studies for
pseudarthroses and low grade gliomas (http://cdmrp.army.mil/nfrp/
consortium/nfrpctc.shtml). The accomplishments of the Response
Evaluation in Neurofibromatosis and Schwannomatosis (REiNS) Con-
sortium was presented by Drs. Scott Plotkin and Brigitte Widemann.
This consortium is dedicated to identifying or developing validated
endpoints to be incorporated into clinical trials for NF1, NF2, and SWN
(http://www.reinscollaboration.org/). The Neurofibromatosis Thera-
peutic Consortium is a collaborative of for veteran NF research
laboratories (Drs. Cichowski, Clapp, Ratner, and Shannon) focused on
pre-clinical efficacy studies for NF1 associated JMML, pNF, and
MPNST. The most current iteration of the consortium (initiated in 2012)
has completed >50 pre-clinical studies and several of these have
informed subsequent clinical trials. Dr. Ophelia Maertens presented the
work by this consortium over the last year and the efforts they have
made to collaborate with the clinical trials consortium to advance
promising pre-clinical findings to clinical trials. Dr. Oliver Hanneman and
Pamela Knight presented the progress through the NF biobank and the
bioregistry initiative. Through these remarkable efforts, hundreds of
cutaneous neurofibromas have been collated and are in the process of
being fully analyzed with the data to be made public and minimal clinical
datasets have been created for each tumor type. CTF has also
collaborated with NDRI to allow people with NF1, NF2, and SWN
who wish to donate their body to expand scientific understating of NF.
Dr. Michael Fisher presented updates on the newly formed Optic
Pathway Glioma Consortium. This consortium is working to define the
treatment indications and factors predictive of visual decline and
tumor progression for OPGs via a prospective natural history study of
NF1-OPG with standardized visual assessment methods and clear
definitions of visual outcomes and data acquisition time points.
Dr. Wade Clapp presented the updates about the work of Synodos for
NF2 (http://www.ctf.org/Research/Synodos.html) a team-science
initiative sponsored by CTF to create better models and find new
therapies for NF2 associated schwannomas and meningiomas.

BLAKELEY ET AL.

| 7

Dr. Allan Belzberg provided updates about the progress of the
International Schwannomatosis Database which connects people
living with schwannomatosis and researchers with one another to
enhance collaborations focused on this rarest of the neurofibroma-
toses (http://sid2011.squarespace.com/). Finally, Dr. Jaishri Blakeley
presented the activities of
the Neurofibromatosis Therapeutic
Acceleration Program (NTAP), a program focused on therapeutics
for plexiform neurofibromas (http://www.n-tap.org/).

The “Path Forward Panel Discussion – A Reflection and Synthesis
of Successes and Limitations in Neurofibromatosis Research” with Drs.
Allan Belzberg and Larry Sherman representing SWN; Drs. Elizabeth
Schorry and David Gutmann representing NF1; and Drs. James Gusella
and Gareth Evans representing NF2 followed. The session was
moderated by Drs. Jaishri Blakeley and David Stevenson who opened
the session with data from a survey completed by people enrolled in
the CTF NF registry in advance of the meeting asking what their
greatest clinical and research priorities were. These data were
presented relative to the published literature for each syndrome,
the CDMRP NF areas of emphasis and the abstracts and presentations
from the 2015 conference in order to provide a synthesis of the
successes and limitations in the field to date. The review of the 2015
NF Conference poster abstracts showed that roughly 79% focused on
NF1, 20% on NF2, and 1% on SWN. Poster abstracts covered basic
research topics 43% of the time versus 57% addressing clinical
research topics. Within the NF1 posters the most common topics were
MPNST, development/cognition, and neurofibromas. Areas of success
identified included the number of clinical trials now available, the
growing collaborations across basic science and clinical scientists
specializing in NF, and the creation of new resources for research
including the CTF biobank and registry. Areas with opportunities for
growth include enhanced sharing of data and open access resources,
the need to invest in all forms of biomarker discovery to improve the
precision of therapeutics across heterogeneous tumors, the need for
investment for hearing restoration strategies that may help people
with NF2 and the need to advance research in all forms for SWN.

An exciting development in the 2015 CTF meeting was a focus on
the high number of exceptional posters. These were highlighted each
day with a “posters of the day” session in which the authors of the top
ranked posters were invited to give a “micro-talk” highlighting their work.
The winners of the poster of the day (Drs. Robert Avery, Kwangmin Choi,
Peter deBlank, Alexander Schultz, Brian Stansfield, Elina Uusitalo, and
Adrienne L. Watson) presented topics ranging from microRNA-mediated
gene regulatory network in MPNST to the development of a swine
model of NF1 to the effect of carboplatin-based chemotherapy on NF1
white matter tracts associated with cognition. These exciting and
scientifically rigorous reports were presented by young investigators
from around the world invested in neurofibromatosis research.

4 | CONCLUSIONS

The Path Forward: 2015 International Children’s Tumor Foundation
Conference on Neurofibromatosis Type 1, Type 2 and Schwannomatosis

successfully integrated basic, translational, and clinical science in a single
track that addressed shared scientific questions across NF1, NF2, and
SWN. In addition, a major focus was placed on integration of academic
and pharmaceutical scientific efforts, systems based and computational
biology approaches to leverage, and expand the multiple discovery efforts
ongoing for NF1, NF2, and SWN and there was a focus on the excellent
science presented in posters. New, critical clinical data about lovastatin for
NF1 cognitive function, selumetinib for plexiform neurofibromas, and
natural history studies for NF1 and NF2 were presented. Finally, there
were many compelling new discovery programs in both NF1 and NF2
presented as described above. The conference succeeded in highlighting
the ways in which investigators within and outside of the NF field can
work together to speed and expand discovery to benefit people
living with these syndromes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The conference is sponsored by The Children’s Tumor Foundation and
specifically, the authors thank Patrice Pancza for her extraordinary
efforts in coordinating the conference and to Rhonda Jackson
for her administrative assistance. Web Resources include: www.ctf.
org; www.clinicaltrials.gov; http://cdmrp.army.mil/nfrp/; http://
sid2011.squarespace.com; www.n-tap.org

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

None.

REFERENCES

Cai, W., Kassarjian, A., Bredella, M. A., Harris, G. J., Yoshida, H., Mautner,
V. F.,
(2009). Tumor burden in patients with
neurofibromatosis types 1 and 2 and schwannomatosis: Determination
on whole-body MR images. Radiology, 250, 665–673.

. . . Plotkin, S. R.

Chiasson-MacKenzie, C., Morris, Z. S., Baca, Q., Morris, B., Coker, J. K.,
Mirchev, R., . . . McClatchey, A. I. (2015). NF2/Merlin mediates contact-
dependent inhibition of EGFR mobility and internalization via cortical
actomyosin. The Journal of Cell Biology, 211, 391–405.

De Raedt, T., Beert, E., Pasmant, E., Luscan, A., Brems, H., Ortonne, N., . . .
Cichowski, K. (2014). PRC2 loss amplifies Ras-driven transcription and
confers sensitivity to BRD4-based therapies. Nature, 514, 247–251.

Dewan, R., Pemov, A., Kim, H. J., Morgan, K. L., Vasquez, R. A., Chittiboina,
P., . . . Asthagiri, A. R. (2015). Evidence of polyclonality in neurofibro-
matosis type 2-associated multilobulated vestibular schwannomas.
Neuro-Oncology, 17, 566–573.

Dombi, E., Baldwin, A., Marcus, L. J., Fisher, M. J., Weiss, B., Kim, A., . . .
Widemann, B. C. (2016). Activity of selumetinib in neurofibromatosis
type 1-related plexiform neurofibromas. N Engl
J Med, 375,
2550–2560.

Dombi, E., Solomon, J., Gillespie, A. J., Fox, E., Balis, F. M., Patronas, N., . . .
Widemann, B. C. (2007). NF1 plexiform neurofibroma growth rate by
volumetric MRI: Relationship to age and body weight. Neurology, 68,
643–647.

Evans, D. G., Baser, M. E., McGaughran, J., Sharif, S., Howard, E., & Moran,
A. (2002). Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours in neurofibro-
matosis 1. Journal of Medical Genetics, 39, 311–314.

Evans, D. G., Baser, M. E., O’Reilly, B., Rowe, J., Gleeson, M., Saeed, S., . . .
(2005). Management of the patient and family with
Ramsden, R.
neurofibromatosis 2: A consensus conference statement. British Journal
of Neurosurgery, 19, 5–12.

8 |

BLAKELEY ET AL.

Evans, D. G., Howard, E., Giblin, C., Clancy, T., Spencer, H., Huson, S. M., &
Lalloo, F.
(2010). Birth incidence and prevalence of tumor-prone
syndromes: Estimates from a UK family genetic register service.
American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A, 152A, 327–332.

Malone, C. F., Fromm, J. A., Maertens, O., DeRaedt, T., Ingraham, R., &
Cichowski, K. (2014). Defining key signaling nodes and therapeutic
biomarkers
4,
1062–1073.

cancers. Cancer Discovery,

in NF1-mutant

Farschtschi, S., Merker, V. L., Wolf, D., Schuhmann, M., Blakeley, J., Plotkin,
S. R., . . . Mautner, V. F. (2016). Bevacizumab treatment for symptomatic
spinal ependymomas in neurofibromatosis type 2. Acta Neurologica
Scandinavica, 133, 475–480.

Mayes, D. A., Rizvi, T. A., Titus-Mitchell, H., Oberst, R., Ciraolo, G. M.,
Vorhees, C. V., . . . Ratner, N. (2013). Nf1 loss and Ras hyperactivation in
oligodendrocytes induce NOS-driven defects in myelin and vascula-
ture. Cell Reports, 4, 1197–1212.

Fisher, M. J., Loguidice, M., Gutmann, D. H., Listernick, R., Ferner, R. E.,
Ullrich, N. J., . . . Liu, G. T. (2012). Visual outcomes in children with
neurofibromatosis type 1-associated optic pathway glioma following
chemotherapy: A multicenter retrospective analysis. Neuro-Oncology,
14, 790–797.

Harris, G. J., Plotkin, S. R., Maccollin, M., Bhat, S., Urban, T., Lev, M. H., &
Slattery, W. H. (2008). Three-dimensional volumetrics for tracking
vestibular schwannoma growth in neurofibromatosis type II. Neurosur-
gery, 62, 1314–1319.

Huson, S. M., Harper, P. S., & Compston, D. A. (1988). Von Recklinghausen
neurofibromatosis. A clinical and population study in south-east Wales.
Brain, 111(Pt 6), 1355–1381.

Korf, B. R. (2000). Malignancy in neurofibromatosis type 1. The Oncologist,

5, 477–485.

Lauchle, J. O., Braun, B. S., Loh, M. L., & Shannon, K. (2006). Inherited
predispositions and hyperactive Ras in myeloid leukemogenesis.
Pediatric Blood and Cancer, 46, 579–585.

Li, W., Cooper, J., Zhou, L., Yang, C., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Zagzag, D., . . .
Giancotti, F. G. (2014). Merlin/NF2 loss-driven tumorigenesis linked to
CRL4(DCAF1)-mediated inhibition of the hippo pathway kinases Lats1
and 2 in the nucleus. Cancer Cell, 26, 48–60.

Li, W., & Giancotti, F. G. (2010). Merlin’s tumor suppression linked to
inhibition of the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4 (DCAF1). Cell Cycle, 9,
4433–4436.

Listernick, R., Charrow, J., Greenwald, M., & Mets, M. (1994). Natural
history of optic pathway tumors in children with neurofibromatosis
type 1: A longitudinal study. Jornal de Pediatria, 125, 63–66.

Nunes, F. P., Merker, V. L., Jennings, D., Caruso, P. A., di Tomaso, E.,
Muzikansky, A., . . . Plotkin, S. R. (2013). Bevacizumab treatment for
meningiomas in NF2: A retrospective analysis of 15 patients. PLoS ONE,
8, e59941.

Pourtsidis, A., Doganis, D., Baka, M., Bouhoutsou, D., Varvoutsi, M.,
Synodinou, M., . . . Kosmidis, H. (2014). Malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors in children with neurofibromatosis type 1. Case Reports
in Oncological Medicine, 2014, 843749.

Solomon, J., Warren, K., Dombi, E., Patronas, N., & Widemann, B. (2004).
Automated detection and volume measurement of plexiform neuro-
fibromas in neurofibromatosis 1 using magnetic resonance imaging.
Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics, 28, 257–265.

Stivaros, S. M., Stemmer-Rachamimov, A. O., Alston, R., Plotkin, S. R., Nadol,
J. B., Quesnel, A., . . . Evans, D. G. (2015). Multiple synchronous sites of
origin of vestibular schwannomas in neurofibromatosis type 2. Journal
of Medical Genetics, 52, 557–562.

Suva, M. L., Riggi, N., & Bernstein, B. E. (2013). Epigenetic reprogramming in

cancer. Science, 339, 1567–1570.

How to cite this article: Blakeley JO, Bakker A, Barker A,
et al. The path forward: 2015 International Children’s Tumor
Foundation conference on neurofibromatosis type 1, type 2,
and schwannomatosis. Am J Med Genet Part A.
2017;9999:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38239

