Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307
DOI 10.1007/s00401-016-1583-8

ORIGINAL PAPER

The importance of nerve microenvironment for schwannoma 
development

Alexander Schulz1 · Robert Büttner1 · Christian Hagel2 · Stephan L. Baader3 · 
Lan Kluwe4,5 · Johannes Salamon6 · Victor‑Felix Mautner4 · Thomas Mindos7 · 
David B. Parkinson7 · Jeffrey R. Gehlhausen8 · D. Wade Clapp8 · Helen Morrison1 

Received: 17 November 2015 / Revised: 18 May 2016 / Accepted: 21 May 2016 / Published online: 28 May 2016 
© The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract  Schwannomas  are  predominantly  benign  nerve 
sheath  neoplasms  caused  by  Nf2  gene  inactivation.  Pres-
ently,  treatment  options  are  mainly  limited  to  surgical 
tumor resection due to the lack of effective pharmacologi-
cal drugs. Although the mechanistic understanding of Nf2 
gene  function  has  advanced,  it  has  so  far  been  primar-
ily  restricted  to  Schwann  cell-intrinsic  events.  Extracel-
lular cues determining Schwann cell behavior with regard 
to  schwannoma  development  remain  unknown.  Here  we 
show  pro-tumourigenic  microenvironmental  effects  on 
Schwann  cells  where  an  altered  axonal  microenvironment 
in cooperation with injury signals contribute to a persistent 
regenerative  Schwann  cell  response  promoting  schwan-
noma  development.  Specifically  in  genetically  engineered 
mice  following  crush  injuries  on  sciatic  nerves,  we  found 
macroscopic  nerve  swellings  in  mice  with  homozygous 
nf2  gene  deletion  in  Schwann  cells  and  in  animals  with 
heterozygous  nf2  knockout  in  both  Schwann  cells  and 
axons.  However,  patient-mimicking  schwannomas  could 
only be provoked in animals with combined heterozygous 

Electronic supplementary material  The online version of this 
article (doi:10.1007/s00401-016-1583-8) contains supplementary 
material, which is available to authorized users.

 *  Helen Morrison 
 

helen.morrison@leibniz-fli.de

1  Leibniz Institute on Aging, Fritz Lipmann Institute, 

Beutenbergstrasse 11, 07745 Jena, Germany

2 

3 

Institute of Neuropathology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany

Institute of Anatomy, Anatomy and Cell Biology, University 
of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany

4  Department of Neurology, University Medical Center 

Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany

nf2 knockout in Schwann cells and axons. We identified a 
severe  re-myelination  defect  and  sustained  macrophage 
presence in the tumor tissue as major abnormalities. Strik-
ingly, treatment of tumor-developing mice after nerve crush 
injury  with  medium-dose  aspirin  significantly  decreased 
schwannoma progression in this disease model. Our results 
suggest  a  multifactorial  concept  for  schwannoma  forma-
tion—emphasizing  axonal  factors  and  mechanical  nerve 
irritation as predilection site for schwannoma development. 
Furthermore,  we  provide  evidence  supporting  the  poten-
tial efficacy of anti-inflammatory drugs in the treatment of 
schwannomas.

Keywords  Schwannoma · Neurofibromatosis type 2 · 
NF2 · Tumor induction · Microenvironment · Sciatic 
nerve · Crush injury, tissue inflammation

Introduction

Schwannomas  are  benign  Schwann  cell-derived  nerve 
sheath tumors that can occur either sporadically—in asso-
ciation  with  genetic  syndromes  such  as  schwannomatosis 

5  Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University 

Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, 
Germany

6  Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, 

University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
20246 Hamburg, Germany

7  Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of Medicine 

and Dentistry, Plymouth, Devon PL6 8BU, UK

8  Department of Pediatrics, Herman B Wells Center 

for Pediatric Research Department of Biochemistry, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA

1 3290 

Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307

or neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2)—or as a result of thera-
peutic  irradiation.  The  annual  incidence  of  all  schwanno-
mas has been estimated at 2.1 per 100,000 people [2]. Fur-
thermore, autopsy studies suggest a prevalence of 4.5 % for 
sporadic schwannomas in older individuals [44].

In virtually all sporadic schwannomas, as well as in NF2 
disease,  schwannoma  development  is  genetically  caused 
by mutations in the Nf2 gene [55], which encodes for the 
merlin  tumor  suppressor  protein.  Although  schwannomas 
are predominantly benign tumors, they can cause a signifi-
cant decline in life quality of afflicted individuals. Patients 
may present with pain, loss of sensation, paraesthesia and/
or  weakness  of  extremities,  depending  on  the  position  of 
the schwannoma and the nerve involved. NF2 disease can 
often  mean  lifelong  deafness,  as  schwannomas  predomi-
nantly  appear  at  the  vestibulocochlear  nerves  (vestibular 
schwannoma).

Current pharmacological treatment options for schwan-
nomas,  e.g.,  bevacizumab  treatment  applying  anti-VEGF 
monoclonal  antibodies  [40],  are  limited  to  disease  stabili-
zation  and  can  present  severe  side  effects  with  long-term 
use [29]. Thus, therapeutic possibilities are often limited to 
surgical resection or radiosurgery of tumor tissue, with the 
additional  risk  of  iatrogenic  nerve  damage.  The  multifo-
cality of tumors in patients with tumor predisposition syn-
dromes  such  as  NF2,  further  challenges  the  practicability 
of  surgical  intervention.  Hence,  an  urgent  need  exists  for 
novel therapeutic approaches and a better understanding of 
the molecular and cellular mechanisms leading to schwan-
noma development.

The  first  animal  model  in  the  field  bearing  a  Schwann 
cell-specific  ablation  of  the  tumor  suppressor  produced 
NF2-related tumor formation in mice [14]. However, only 
24 % of these genetically engineered animals (P0-Cre;Nf2fl/
fl) spontaneously developed schwannomas after 24 months. 
In  another  disease  model,  conditional  nf2  gene  deletion 
using the Periostin-Cre driver line (Postn-Cre;Nf2fl/fl) leads 
to  the  appearance  of  spinal,  peripheral  and  cranial  nerve 
schwannomas in all animals by the age of 10 months [13].

Loss of the merlin tumor suppressor protein, responsible 
for NF2 disease, has been intensively studied with respect 
to its ability to act on proliferation, migration, differentia-
tion and tumorigenesis. As a result, merlin has been dem-
onstrated  to  interact  with  a  variety  of  different  signaling 
pathways  [8].  However,  ongoing  research  mainly  focuses 
on  Schwann  cell-intrinsic  events.  Recently,  a  neuronal 
function of merlin has been explored in more detail in our 
laboratory, emphasizing an implication in NF2-related neu-
ropathy [45] as well as in the bi-directional communication 
of  axons  and  Schwann  cells  [47].  Specifically,  we  could 
show that merlin in neurons has a relevant impact on recep-
tor expression and intracellular signaling events of adjacent 
Schwann cells, by involving the Nrg1-ErbB pathway [36].

Tumor formation from Schwann cells into schwannomas 
is mainly thought to be dependent on bi-allelic inactivation 
of the Nf2 tumor suppressor gene, in line with Knudson’s 
two-hit  hypothesis  [22].  However,  loss  of  heterozygosity 
(LOH) has reportedly been detected in only 67 % of NF2-
related  and  56/57  %  of  sporadic  schwannomas  [15,  24]. 
Consistently, 40 % of all schwannomas were found to have 
at least one intact wild-type copy of the Nf2 gene remaining 
[51]. Intronic or promoter-region mutations within the Nf2 
gene, or mutations in genes other than Nf2, might lead to an 
overestimation  of  these  numbers.  Nonetheless,  it  appears 
unresolved  whether  inactivation  of  both  the  Nf2  alleles  in 
Schwann  cells  is  a  prerequisite  for  schwannoma  develop-
ment.  Mechanistic  and  experimental  studies  resolving 
this issue are not currently available. In addition, it is not 
understood whether LOH occurs as early as in microscopic 
schwannoma precursors, referred to as tumorlets [49].

Where  and  why  schwannomas  ultimately  appear  also 
remains  to  be  fully  understood.  Throughout  life,  most 
peripheral nerves are likely to be injured repetitively, due to 
compressive events and mechanical irritations. During the 
course of physiological nerve regeneration in the peripheral 
nervous  system,  Schwann  cells  lose  contact  with  injured 
axons—thereby allowing them to de-differentiate and pro-
liferate again. However, in cases of pathological cell-to-cell 
communication,  Schwann  cells  cannot  properly  align  to 
axons and remain de-differentiated with continuous prolif-
eration [35, 39]. Axons are therefore thought to be essential 
for maintaining Schwann cells in a differentiated state dur-
ing adulthood.

Based  on  our  previous  findings  indicating  the  impor-
tance  of  merlin  in  axon–Schwann  cell  signaling  events 
[47],  we  hypothesized  that  genetically  defined  alterations 
of the nerve microenvironment could contribute to the ini-
tial events of schwannoma development [48]. Specifically, 
we aimed to investigate in mice whether the loss of just one 
merlin allele in both the axonal and Schwann cell compart-
ment  of  peripheral  nerves,  is  sufficient  to  provoke  long-
lasting  regenerative  abnormalities  when  challenged  by  an 
injury  of  the  sciatic  nerve. Another  aim  of  this  study  was 
to improve the understanding of schwannoma biology with 
respect  to  minimal  nerve  trauma,  which  might  predispose 
the lesion sites to enhanced Schwann cell proliferation.

Materials and methods

Experimental animals

All mice used in this study were handled in strict adherence 
to local governmental and institutional animal care regula-
tions. Animals had free access to food and water and were 
housed under constant temperature and humidity conditions 

1 3Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307 

291

on  a  12/12-h  light/dark  cycle.  The  following  transgenic 
mouse  strains  were  used  for  the  study:  Nf2flox  animals 
(RIKEN  BioResource  Centre)  were  used  to  obtain  con-
ditional  Schwann  cell-specific  merlin  knockout  by  cross-
ing  with  the  P0-Cre  line  (The  Jackson  Laboratory,  USA, 
stock  017928).  In  order  to  achieve  neuron-specific  loss  of 
merlin, we mated Nf2flox animals with a mouse strain that 
expresses  Cre  recombinase  under  the  neurofilament  heavy 
class  promoter  (Nefh-Cre)  (The  Jackson  Laboratory,  stock 
009102). Furthermore, we generated animals showing dou-
ble  Cre  expression  by  breeding  Nf2flox;P0-Cre  mice  with 
Nf2flox;  Nefh-Cre  animals  (Nf2flox;P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre). 
Cre recombinase-specific genotyping was performed using 
the following primers: 5′-CCA CCA CCT CTC CAT TGC 
AC-3′  (forward)  and  5′-ATG  TTT AGC  TGG  CCC AAA 
TG-3′  (reverse)  for  P0-Cre  [12],  as  well  as  5′-GGG  CCA 
CCG  CGG ATA  TAA AA-3′  (forward)  and  5′-TGC  GAA 
CCT CAT CAC TCG TT-3′ (reverse) for Nefh-Cre recom-
binase [17]. Mice bearing a complete heterozygous merlin 
knockout were generated by crossing Nf2flox animals with 
Amh-Cre mouse line (The Jackson Laboratory, USA, stock 
007915). This line expresses Cre recombinase driven by the 
Sertoli cell-specific promoter of the anti-Mullerian hormone 
(Amh) gene. Offsprings carry nf2 gene knockout in the ger-
mline  (Nf2Δ/+)  and  spontaneously  develop  hepatocellular 
carcinoma, amongst other previously described tumor enti-
ties  [30].  All  animals  and  corresponding  wild-type  litter-
mates were on a mixed C57BL/6-FVB/N background. Both 
genders were used in equal numbers in this study.

Sciatic nerve crush injury

Unilateral  injuries  of  sciatic  nerves  were  accomplished 
according  to  a  previously  described  method  [4].  Briefly, 
8-  to  10-week-old  mice  were  anesthetized  using  2  %  iso-
flurane in 100 % oxygen. Fur was then removed from one 
hind limb. After an appropriate incision of the skin, the glu-
teal musculature was separated in order to reveal the right 
sciatic  nerve.  Using  hemostatic  forceps  (Ultra  Fine  Hae-
mostat, #13021-12, tip width 0.6 mm, Fine Science Tools, 
Germany), the nerve was crushed once by the application 
of a defined pressure for 20 s. The locking mechanism of 
the  hemostatic  forceps  with  a  series  of  interlocking  teeth 
ensured reproducibility and standardization of crush injury. 
Finally,  both  the  gluteal  musculature  and  skin  incision 
were sutured using non-absorbable surgical suture material 
(Polyethylene  terephthalate;  USP  4/0,  #17218113,  Catgut 
GmbH, Germany).

In vivo magnetic resonance imaging

Magnetic  resonance  imaging  was  performed  with  a  dedi-
cated small animal MR scanner at 7.0 T (ClinScan 70/30, 

Bruker,  Germany).  The  scanner  is  equipped  with  a  high-
performance  gradient  system  allowing  maximal  gra-
dient  amplitude  of  630  mT  m−1  and  a  slew  rate  of  up  to 
6300 T m−1 s−1. The data were acquired using a birdcage 
polarized  transmit/receive  coil  with  an  inner  diameter  of 
40 mm.

The MR sequence protocol consisted of a T1-weighted 
localizer  sequence  in  three  orthogonal  planes,  followed 
by  a  high-resolution  fat-saturated  T2-weighted  2D  turbo 
spin-echo (TSE) sequence in coronal, sagittal and axial ori-
entation.  Image  parameters  of  the  coronal  and  sagittal T2 
TSE  sequence  were  as  follows:  time  of  repetition  (TR)/
time  of  echo  (TE)/flip  angle  (FA) =  4000  ms/47  ms/90°; 
field-of-view (FOV) = 90 × 36 mm2; matrix = 512 × 208; 
thickness  (ST)  =  0.8  mm,  number  of  slices 
slice 
(NS)  =  16;  number  of  acquisitions  (NA)  =  4;  spa-
tial  resolution  =  0.17  ×  0.17  ×  0.8  mm;  acquisition 
time  =  3  min  57  s.  Image  parameters  of  the  fat-sat-
urated  axial  T2  TSE  sequence  were  as  follows:  TR/
TE/FA  =  2362  ms/90  ms/90°;  FOV  =  32  ×  32  mm2; 
matrix = 256 × 256; ST = 0.6 mm, NS = 19; NA = 3; 
spatial  resolution  =  0.12  ×  0.12  ×  0.6  mm;  acquisition 
time = 9 min 26 s.
Neuropathological assessment and evaluation

For the histological workup, paraformaldehyde-fixed nerve 
samples  were  embedded  in  paraffin,  cut  at  the  site  of  the 
largest diameter and mounted as a tissue microarray. Four-
micrometer thick cross sections were used for H&E stain-
ing  and  immunohistochemical  labeling  of  S100  (1:8000, 
Dako,  Germany),  myelin  protein  zero  (P0)  (1:300,  Bioss 
Antibodies,  USA),  phospho-c-Jun  (Ser73,  1:500,  Cell 
Signaling, USA, 8752), ErbB2 (1:500, Cell Signaling), p75 
(1:200,  Millipore,  USA, AB1554),  Sox10  (1:200, Abcam, 
UK,  ab155279),  MMR/CD206  (1:200;  R&D  Systems; 
AF2535) and Arginase-1 (1:200, Santa Cruz, USA, H-52) 
in an automated Ventana stainer (Ventana Medical Systems, 
USA) using standard antigen retrieval protocols (CC1st, no 
pre-treatment for S100 protein). Onion bulbs and schwan-
noma-like structures were assessed in H&E-stained slides.

Human schwannoma samples

The  investigation  of  human  schwannomas  was  per-
formed using a tissue microarray comprising 30 sporadic 
schwannomas,  10  NF2-associated  schwannomas  and 
four  schwannomatosis-associated  schwannomas. The  tis-
sue  microarray  was  built  from  larger  paraffin-embedded 
tumor  specimens  that  were  first  reviewed  by  a  neuro-
pathologist.  Appropriate  tumor  areas  were  chosen  and 
two  tissue  cylinders  1  mm  in  diameter  were  punched 
out  and  arranged  in  a  new  paraffin  block.  Labeling  of 

1 3292 

Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307

CD68  (1:100,  Dako,  #M0876,  no  pre-treatment),  MMR/
CD206 (1:200; R&D Systems; AF2535) and Iba-1 (1:200, 
Wako,  Japan)  was  carried  out  in  an  automated  Ventana 
stainer. Bound antibodies were detected by the peroxidase 
method,  using  diaminobenzidine  as  chromogen  (Ventana 
Medical  Systems,  #760-500).  Labeling  intensities  were 
evaluated semi-quantitatively.

Immunohistochemistry and cell quantification

Immunohistochemistry  was  performed  as  described  in 
[46].  Briefly,  paraffin-embedded  longitudinal  sections  of 
sciatic  nerves  were  rehydrated,  boiled  in  10  mM  sodium 
citrate buffer (pH 9) for 30 min in a microwave and subse-
quently treated with 0.5 % Triton X-100 for 10 min. Sec-
tions  were  then  incubated  in  0.2  %  gelatin  and  2  %  goat 
serum diluted in PBS for at least 2 h, followed by submer-
sion  in  the  primary  antibody  solution  overnight  at  4  °C. 
The  following  primary  antibodies  were  used:  P0  (1:200, 
Abcam,  UK,  ab39375),  neurofilament  (1:200,  BioLegend, 
USA,  SMI312),  myelin  basic  protein  (MBP)  (1:500,  Mil-
lipore, USA, MAB384), Ki-67 (1:200, eBioscience, USA, 
clone SolA15), Iba-1 (1:200, Wako, Japan) and p75 (1:200, 
Millipore,  USA, AB1554). After  vigorous  washings,  sec-
tions  were  incubated  with  the  secondary  antibody  solu-
tion  (Alexa488-,  Alexa546-  or  Alexa647-conjugated  anti-
mouse, -rat, -chicken and -rabbit antibodies (1:500 in PBS, 
Invitrogen,  USA)  at  room  temperature  for  2  h.  Finally, 
specimens  were  washed  in  PBS,  counterstained  using 
DAPI  (1  µg/ml  PBS,  10  min),  dehydrated  and  embed-
ded.  DAPI-stained  cell  nuclei  or  Iba-1-positive  cells  were 
counted  using  ImageJ  plug-in  ‘Particle  Analysis’,  from 
images acquired with 10× magnification after standardized 
background reduction and threshold setting.

Morphometric analysis of nerve sections

Analysis of axon caliber, myelination thickness and solid-
ity  factor  was  conducted  on  semi-thin  sections  of  sciatic 
nerves  removed  from  transcardially  perfused  mice.  Mice 
were perfused with a solution containing 3 % paraformal-
dehyde and 3 % glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer 
(pH  7.4).  Sections  obtained  from  the  distal  part  of  the 
sciatic  nerve  were  post-fixed  for  1  h  and  kept  in  fixative 
including  3  %  sucrose.  Images  of  toluidine  blue-stained 
semi-thin  cross  sections  were  taken  using  an Axioskop  2 
MOT (Carl Zeiss, Germany) equipped with a 100× immer-
sion  oil  objective  and  an  Olympus  XC50  digital  camera 
(Olympus,  Germany).  Standardized  settings  for  camera 
sensitivity,  resolution  (2576  ×  1932  pixels)  and  bright-
ness of illumination were used for all micrographs. Image 
analysis  was  conducted  with  ImageJ  version  1.48u.  RGB 
color  images  obtained  from  semi-thin  sections  were  split 
into single channels and the green channel was chosen for 
measurements.  The  image  was  contrasted  using  the  auto-
function.  Axon  and  myelin  were  circumscribed  manually 
by  the  freehand  selection  tool.  Based  on  the  measured 
areas, the thicknesses of the axons and myelin sheaths were 
calculated. The solidity factor is a parameter for quantify-
ing the roundness of axons [45] and describes the area cov-
ered by a given structure in relation to the smallest convex 
area,  which  covers  this  structure;  that  is,  the  solidity  fac-
tor of a round circle or ellipse would be 1, whereas a cir-
cle  with  an  invagination  would  give  a  factor  smaller  than 
1.  This  solidity  factor  is  superior  to  the  circularity  factor 
often used for measuring changes in surface structures, as it 
provides a factor to measure changes in surface curvatures 
independent  of  the  plane  of  section.  All  calculations  and 
statistics were done in R (http://www.r-project.org/).

Immunoblotting

Electron microscopic evaluation of nerves

Immunoblotting was performed as described in [32]. Sepa-
rate pooled protein lysates were prepared from both intact 
and crushed sciatic nerves. The following primary antibod-
ies were used: phospho-c-Jun (Ser73, 1:1000, Cell Signal-
ing,  USA,  8752),  Neuregulin  1  (1:250,  Santa  Cruz,  USA, 
clone  C-20),  Erk  (1:500,  Cell  Signaling,  USA),  phospho-
Erk  (T202/Y204,  1:500,  Cell  Signaling,  USA),  ErbB2 
(1:500,  Cell  Signaling,  USA),  GAPDH  (1:1000,  Santa 
Cruz,  USA,  6C5)  and  merlin  (1:500,  Santa  Cruz,  USA 
A19).  Results  were  quantified  using  gel  analysis  software 
by  ImageJ.  Density  values  were  normalized  to  GAPDH 
and  appropriate  controls  of  transfection  or  wild-type  tis-
sue, respectively. In the case of phospho-specific detection 
of proteins, their acquired densities were referred to signals 
derived from related pan-antibodies that served as loading 
control (e.g., phospho-Erk to Erk signals).

For the preparation of ultra-thin sections of sciatic nerves, 
mice  were  perfused  with  a  solution  containing  2  %  para-
formaldehyde and 2.5 % glutaraldehyde (vol/vol) in 0.1 M 
cacodylate  buffer  (pH  7.2).  Tissue  was  post-fixed  for  6  h 
and  then  kept  in  fixative  that  included  3  %  sucrose  (vol/
vol).  Sections  were  cut  from  the  mid  part  of  the  sciatic 
nerve close to the crushed area and stained with gadolinium 
acetate  and  lead  citrate.  Images  were  taken  with  a  Zeiss 
Libra 120.

LOH analysis of nerve specimens

Simple  repeats  were  identified  by  screening  the  sequence 
of  the  genomic  nf2  region  on  mouse  chromosome  11 
(4765845 to 4849536 in GRCM38) using a web tool [28]. 
Flanking primers were designed in intron 5 of the nf2 gene. 

1 3Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307 

293

One primer was labeled with FAM at the 5′-end. The poly-
morphic marker was amplified from three pooled nerves of 
wild  type  and  P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+  mice,  respectively, 
by means of polymerase chain reaction (PCR), for a total of 
30 cycles at an annealing temperature of 60 °C. The ampli-
fied marker was analyzed on a sequencer ABI310. As the 
amplification  of  polymorphic  markers  is  PCR-based,  the 
resolution of this standard method is naturally limited. Our 
unpublished data demonstrate that if an LOH is present in 
less than 25 % of cells in a sample, it will not be reliably 
detected (Kluwe 2016, manuscript submitted).

ASS treatment

Acetylsalicylic  acid  (ASS;  aspirin)  was  purchased  from 
Sigma-Aldrich  (A5376;  USA),  firstly  resolved  in  DMSO 
and  further  diluted  in  phosphate-buffered  saline  (PBS)  to 
reach  target  concentration.  For  systemic  administration, 
5  mg  aspirin  per  kg  body  weight  was  intraperitoneally 
injected  into  mice  every  other  day  (5  mg  aspirin  per  kg 
body weight in mice equates to approximately 375 mg dos-
age for humans). PBS solution without ASS served as vehi-
cle control.

In situ tumor size quantification

The right sciatic nerve of anesthetized animals was exposed 
surgically  in  order  to  assess  sciatic  nerve  diameter  as 
indicator  for  tumor  size.  Documentation  was  performed 
by  video-assisted  microscopy  for  each  animal.  Selected 
frames from the video files (using VirtualDub 1.6.19 soft-
ware) were used to determine maximal sciatic nerve diam-
eter using ImageJ.

Mouse cytokine detection in nerve lysates

For  the  unbiased  detection  of  40  different  cytokines  from 
nerve tissue, a commercially available kit was used accord-
ing  to  the  manufacturer’s  instructions  (Mouse  Cytokine 
Array  Panel A,  R&D  Systems,  USA).  Pooled  total  nerve 
lysates  (150  μg  each),  taken  8  months  after  crush  injury 
from four animals per genotype, were used for this ELISA-
based  method.  The  chemiluminescence  of  the  membrane 
was analyzed by pixel density quantification using ImageJ. 
The  relative  changes  of  cytokine  levels  between  samples 
were subsequently calculated.

Statistical analysis

Comparisons  between  groups  were  done  using  unpaired 
t  test  or  one-way  analysis  of  variance  (one-way ANOVA) 
with  subsequent  Tukey’s  multiple  comparisons 
test 
(TMCT)  for  the  comparison  of  multiple  groups  (SPSS 

software,  Statistical  Package  for  the  Social  Sciences, 
USA). For each experiment, we calculated the p value (P). 
Differences were considered significant when P < 0.05. All 
values are presented as means and the corresponding stand-
ard errors.

Results

Nerve crush injury induces macroscopic nerve swelling

Based on our previous findings on the importance of mer-
lin  for  axon-to-Schwann  cell  signaling  events  [47],  we 
hypothesized  that  genetically  defined  alterations  of  the 
nerve  microenvironment  would  also  contribute  to  the  ini-
tial  events  of  schwannoma  development.  To  that  end,  we 
generated  conditional  knockout  mouse  lines  bearing  cell 
type-specific deletion of merlin in neurons and/or Schwann 
cells  (Supplementary  Fig.  1).  However,  neither  spontane-
ous  schwannoma  development  nor  obvious  nerve  swell-
ings  were  observed  in  any  of  the  mouse  lines  within  the 
first 10 months of lifespan (data not shown). Nevertheless, 
examination  of  semi-thin  cross  sections  of  sciatic  nerves 
from  10-month-old  mice  (Supplementary  Fig.  2)  and 
subsequent  morphometric  analysis  of  nerve  parameters, 
revealed  a  significant  axon  diameter  decrease  in  nerves 
taken  from  P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl  and  P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ 
mice (Supplementary Fig. 3); as well as reduced roundness 
of axons (solidity factor) in animals bearing a neuron- and/
or Schwann cell-specific loss of the nf2 gene (Supplemen-
tary  Fig.  4).  Furthermore,  we  could  detect  differences  in 
myelin  thickness  and  the  g-ratio  (Supplementary  Fig.  5 
and 6). In sum—despite remarkable changes in nerve fine 
structure—spontaneous  schwannoma  growth  could  not  be 
observed in the investigated mouse lines. In particular, the 
nerve structure of P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice was found 
to be significantly disrupted (Supplementary Fig. 2).

We therefore decided to challenge the pre-existing nerve 
alterations  due  to  conditional  merlin  knockout  (Supple-
mentary Fig. 1), by performing a unilateral crush injury to 
the  right  sciatic  nerve  of  2-month-old  mice  (Fig.  1a). We 
hypothesized  that  a  combination  of  genetically  defined 
conditions of the nerve microenvironment and regenerative 
processes  could  provoke  schwannoma  formation  in  vivo. 
In  fact,  cell  proliferation  following  tissue  injury  normally 
subsides after the assaulting factor is removed, or the repair 
completed.  But  proliferating  cells  that  have  pre-existing 
mutations [43], or acquire DNA damage, continue to prolif-
erate in microenvironments rich in inflammatory cells [10].
Crush  injuries  were  chosen  in  favor  of  cut  injuries, 
because  crushes  better  mimic  a  condition  of  mild  nerve 
traumas that can occur during the lifetime of human indi-
viduals. All  mice  were  examined  regularly  for  behavioral 

1 3Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307

294 

Fig. 1   Macroscopic analysis 
of nerve morphology 8 months 
after crush injury. a Schematic 
representation of the study 
protocol. b, c Representative 
images of one mouse 8 months 
after crush injury, indicating a 
relieving posture of the right 
hind limb (arrow) bearing the 
injured sciatic nerve when 
gently lifted at its tail. d–f 
T2-weighted coronal (d) and 
sagittal (e, f) MR images from a 
P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ mouse 
7 months after sciatic nerve 
crush. d Asterisks show the 
position of the left (uninjured) 
and right (crushed) sciatic 
nerve. Arrowhead indicates 
the spinal cord and hash marks 
the urine-filled bladder. Arrow 
in e, f depicts the anatomical 
course of the sciatic nerve close 
to the femur. The injured right 
sciatic nerve shows enlargement 
compared to the non-injured 
sciatic nerve on the left side. g–l 
Dissected sciatic nerves from 
10-month-old mice of indicated 
genotypes are shown. Crushed 
nerves (8 months post-injury) 
are shown at the top; intact 
nerves are depicted at the 
bottom of each representative 
image. Proximal nerve parts are 
on the right side of the images; 
distal parts on the left side. 
Scale bars represent 3 mm. m 
Quantification of macroscopic 
nerve swellings following nerve 
crush injury. A nerve swelling 
was counted when the nerve 
radius was at least doubled

1 3Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307 

295

abnormalities  during  the  months  that  followed  the  sciatic 
nerve injury. In this respect, none of the animals displayed 
obvious  walking  difficulties  or  a  compromised  general 
state  of  health.  However,  upon  closer  inspection—when 
gently  lifted  at  their  tail—animals  with  the  homozy-
gous  merlin  deletion  in  Schwann  cells  (P0-Cre;  Nf2fl/
fl)  and  the  combined  heterozygous  knockout  in  Schwann 
cells  and  neurons  (P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+),  presented 
with a relieving posture of the right hind limb bearing the 
injured sciatic nerve (Fig. 1b, c). Seven months after crush 
injury,  a  subset  of  mice  was  analyzed  for  nerve  swellings 
using in vivo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In axial 
T2-weighted images, both P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl and P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+  animals  showed  remarkable  volume  gain  of 
the injured right sciatic nerve when compared to the unaf-
fected  left  sciatic  nerve  (Fig.  1d).  Sagittal  T2-weighted 
images depicting the nerve anatomy in more detail, further 
revealed long-segment unilateral swelling of the right sci-
atic nerve (Fig. 1e, f). Eight months after the crush injury, 
sciatic  nerve  tissue  from  all  animals  were  dissected  and 
collected.  In  order  to  assess  macroscopic  swelling,  previ-
ously  injured  sciatic  nerves  were  compared  to  unaffected 
nerves  of  the  contralateral  side  (Fig.  1g–l).  In  summary, 
over  90  %  of  animals  with  the  homozygous  merlin  dele-
tion  in  Schwann  cells  (P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl)  and  the  combined 
heterozygous  knockout  in  Schwann  cells  and  neurons 
(P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+)  presented  with  marked  nerve 
swelling  8  months  after  nerve  crush  injury  (Fig.  1m).  In 
contrast,  the  other  genotypes  showed  no  comparable  gain 
in nerve thickness.

Neuropathological assessment of crush‑induced sciatic 
nerve tumors

Focusing  on  the  two  genotypes  that  did  develop  macro-
scopic  nerve  swelling  (P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl  and  P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+),  nerve  cross  sections  were  analyzed  neu-
ropathologically  8  months  after  crush  injury.  Wild-type 
animals showed normal nerve composition after regenera-
tion (Fig. 2a, d), as well as regular expression of Schwann 
cell marker S100 (Fig. 2g) and P0 as indicator for Schwann 
cell differentiation in the myelin sheath (Fig. 2j). Both the 
neural  crest  lineage  marker  Sox10  (Fig.  2m)  and  the  p75 
neurotrophin receptor (marker for immature non-myelinat-
ing  Schwann  cells)  showed  an  expected  staining  pattern 
(Fig. 2m) [19, 21].

In  contrast,  injured  nerves  of  P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl  animals 
bearing the homozygous merlin deletion in Schwann cells 
demonstrated imperfect regeneration, with large concentric 
multilayered  onion  bulbs  indicative  of  for  repetitive  de- 
and re-myelination processes (Fig. 2b), as well as sporadic 
small  disordered  Schwann  cell  clusters  (Fig.  2e).  S100 
protein  expression  (Fig.  2h)  and  P0  expression  (Fig.  2k) 

appeared to be decreased, in comparison to wild-type mice. 
While Sox10 immunoreactivity was normal (Fig. 2n), p75 
stainings suggest the presence of more immature non-mye-
linating Schwann cells (Fig. 2q).

In P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ animals, regeneration of sci-
atic nerves 8 months after crush injury was found to be even 
more disturbed, but onion bulbs appeared smaller and less 
structured  (Fig.  2c)  than  in  P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl  mice.  Instead, 
larger  clusters  of  unordered  Schwann  cells  were  detected, 
resembling tumorlets (microscopic neoplastic Schwann cell 
proliferations) observed in nerves of NF2 patients (Fig. 2f 
and  Supplementary  Fig.  7).  Like  tumorlets  in  sural  nerve 
biopsies  of  NF2  patients  [16],  the  disordered  cell  clusters 
presented an Antoni A growth pattern, the primary growth 
pattern  of  schwannoma  in  mice  [50].  Focally  increased 
S100  protein  expression  was  observed  within  Schwann 
cell clusters (Fig. 2i), whereas P0 as a marker of differen-
tiation  was  not  detectable  in  several  regions  of  the  tissue 
(Fig.  2l).  Sox10  expression,  however,  indicates  the  pres-
ence of neural crest-derived cells (Fig. 2o), in combination 
with  increased  cell  immaturity,  as  suggested  by  increased 
p75 immunoreactivity (Fig. 2r).

In summary, both genotypes that developed sciatic nerve 
swelling  8  months  after  crush  injury  showed  neuropatho-
logical  abnormalities,  with  the  pattern  more  disordered  in 
animals with the combined heterozygous nf2 gene deletion 
in Schwann cells and the neuronal compartment of periph-
eral nerves (P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+). It was only in these 
haploinsufficient  animals  with  reduced  nf2  gene  dosage, 
that Schwann cell clusters resembling NF2 patient tumor-
lets  were  observed.  Furthermore,  as  in  human  schwanno-
mas,  S100  protein  expression  was  up-regulated  while  P0 
expression was lost [18].

Further  ultrastructural  analysis  of  sciatic  nerve  tis-
sue  from  10-month-old  P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+  mice 
confirmed  multiple  signs  of  degeneration  in  intact  (non-
crushed)  nerves  (Fig.  3a,  b;  Supplementary  Fig.  2).  But 
even  more  prominently, 
tumorlet-containing  nerves 
appear  structurally  disordered  exhibit  concentric  layers  of 
Schwann cell processes and collagen around axons (onion 
bulbs) 8 months after crush injury (Fig. 3c–f).

Nerve regeneration defect in mice with nerve swellings 
after crush injury

In  order  to  further  explore  detailed  nerve  anatomy 
8  months  after  crush  injury,  we  performed  immunohis-
tochemistry  on  longitudinal  nerve  sections  covering  the 
lesion  site  as  well  as  the  adjacent  proximal  and  distal 
parts. We used fluorescent labeling of P0 as a marker for 
Schwann  cell  differentiation  and  myelin  basic  protein 
(MBP)  as  indicator  for  myelination  as  well  as  of  neuro-
filaments for axonal tracing. By this means we found that 

1 3296 

Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307

Fig. 2     Appearance  of  schwannoma-like  structures  and  tumor-
lets  in  nerves  from  P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+  mice.  a–l  Sciatic  nerve 
cross  sections  of  indicated  genotypes  8  months  after  crush  injury 
were  either  HE  stained  (a–f),  or  immunolabeled  (brown  color),  for 

Schwann cell markers S100 (g–i) and P0 (j–l), as well as neural-crest 
marker  Sox10  (m–o)  and  p75  as  indicator  for  immature  non-myeli-
nating Schwann cells (p–r). Cell nuclei are visualized in blue. Scale 
bar represents 20 μm

both  axon  integrity  and  myelination  continuity  were  pre-
served  in  nerves  from  P0-Cre;Nf2fl/+  (Fig.  4c,  d),  Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+  (Fig.  4e,  f)  and  Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/fl  (Fig.  4g,  h) 
animals, as well as in their wild-type littermates (Fig. 4a, 

b). Immunostaining for Ki-67—a well-established indica-
tor  of  cell  proliferation—shows  a  patchy  distribution  in 
these  nerves  (Fig.  4b,  d,  f,  g)  without  an  obvious  focus 
with regard to the crush site.

1 3Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307 

297

Fig. 3   Electron microscopy reveals multiple signs of degeneration in 
crushed and uncrushed nerves of P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice. Rep-
resentative electron microscopic images of intact (a, b) and crushed 
(c–f) sciatic nerves (8 months post-injury) taken from P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+  mice.  While  myelinated  axons  and  Remak  bundles  of 
various size (arrows in a, b) are frequent in intact nerves, myelinated 
axons  and  Remak  bundles  appear  rarely  in  crushed  nerves  (c,  d). 
Non-myelinated  axons  were  mostly  seen  as  single  axons  (arrows  in 

d, f). Signs of degeneration such as collagen pockets (arrowhead in 
d, e), abnormally thin myelin sheath and layers of Schwann cell pro-
cesses enwrapping axons (c), bands of Bungner and axons with irreg-
ular myelin sheaths (hash in b) were mostly present in crushed, but, 
to a minor extent, also in intact nerves. In addition, accumulations of 
Schwann cells could be observed (asterisks in c). Scale bars in a, b, 
d represent 1  μm. Scale bar in c 5  μm. Scale bars in e, f represent 
0.2 μm

In  P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl  animals,  the  macroscopically  swol-
len  nerves  showed  distinct  areas  of  pathological  regen-
eration,  as  indicated  by  missing  Schwann  cell  differen-
tiation  (Fig.  4i).  Overall  Schwann  cell  differentiation 
and  axon  continuity,  however,  were  preserved  in  crushed 
P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl  nerves  (Fig.  4i, 
j).  Ki-67  expression 
appeared  locally  restricted  to  the  proximal,  but  not  distal, 
part of the crushed nerve in relation to the wound site.

Strikingly,  crushed  nerves  taken  from  P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+  animals  displayed  a  severe  re-myelination 
defect, beginning at the position of the experimental crush, 
with  an  overall  disorganized  pattern  of  remaining  MBP-
positive,  myelinated  axons  and  the  appearance  of  axons 
devoid  of  myelination  (Fig.  4k).  As  regular  myelination 
stopped  at  the  crush  site,  a  prominent  increase  in  pro-
liferating  cells  (Ki-67  staining)  was  present  at  the  border 
between  preserved  myelination  and  insufficient  re-myeli-
nation (Fig. 4l). Furthermore, p75-positive cells indicating 

immature  non-myelinating  Schwann  cells  [43]  were 
most  abundantly  expressed  in  sciatic  nerve  sections  from 
P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice (Supplementary Fig. 8).

Signaling and protein expression changes in sciatic 
nerve lysates

We  next  aimed  to  decipher  characteristic  signaling  path-
ways  relevant  to  Schwann  cell  biology  in  our  mouse 
model  for  schwannoma  development.  Using  protein 
lysates  from  crushed  and  contralateral  intact  nerves  of 
conditional  knockout  animals,  we  found  that  the  expres-
sion  of  ErbB2,  one  of  the  most  abundantly  expressed 
receptor tyrosine kinases in human schwannomas [5], was 
up-regulated in P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl mice and even more promi-
nently  so  in  P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+  animals  (Fig.  5a 
and  Supplementary  Fig.  9).  In  line  with  previous  obser-
vations  from  our  group  on  intact  mouse  nerves  [47],  the 

1 3298 

Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307

Fig. 4   Severe re-myelination defect in P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice 
following  nerve  crush.  a–l  Immunohistochemical  stainings  of  lon-
gitudinal  sciatic  nerve  sections  prepared  from  indicated  genotypes 
8  months  after  crush  injury.  Immunolabeling  of  P0,  neurofilaments, 
MBP and Ki-67 indicates Schwann cell differentiation, axonal fibres, 
myelination and cell proliferation, respectively. Arrow in each image 

shows the position of the nerve crush. Orientation of nerves is stated 
as ‘distal’ and ‘proximal’. Asterisk in i emphasizes an area of defec-
tive  re-myelination.  Arrowheads  in  k  indicate  axons  devoid  of  any 
myelin  sheath.  Asterisk  in  l  marks  concentration  of  Ki-67-positive 
cells at the edge of intact myelination. Scale bars represent 200 μm

post-cleavage product [56] of the axonal surface molecule 
Neuregulin1  type  III  (Nrg1  type  III)  showed  reduced 
expression  in  nerves  with  a  reduced  amount  of  merlin 
protein  in  the  neuronal  nerve  compartment  (Fig.  5a  and 

Supplementary Fig. 9). In essence, we observed a persis-
tent  de-regulation  of  the  Neuregulin1-ErbB  pathway  in 
both mouse lines that developed macroscopic nerve swell-
ings after nerve injury.

1 3Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307 

299

Fig. 5   Signaling and protein 
expression changes in sciatic 
nerve lysates. a, b Immunoblot 
of sciatic nerve lysates (pooled 
tissue from at least three dif-
ferent animals per indicated 
genotype was prepared from 
crushed and intact sciatic nerves 
8 months after crush injury). a 
Immunoblot for receptor tyros-
ine kinase ErbB2, Neuregulin 
1 type III (Nrg1 type III), 
phospho-c-Jun and GAPDH 
as loading control (n = 3). For 
full-length blot see Supple-
mentary Fig. 9. b Immunoblot 
for phospho-Erk1/2 (pErk1/2). 
Total protein amount of Erk1/2 
served as loading control. 
Densitometric quantification 
of pErk1/2: Erk1/2 ratio was 
normalized to intact nerve tis-
sue for each genotype (n = 3). 
The observed increase in total 
Erk after crush injury in some 
genotypes (see also Sup-
plementary Fig. 10) remains 
unexplained but does not effect 
the ratio between phospho-Erk 
and overall Erk. For full-length 
blot see Supplementary Fig. 10. 
c–k Sciatic nerve cross sections 
of indicated genotypes 8 months 
after crush injury were immu-
nolabeled (brown color) for 
phospho-c-Jun, as a marker of 
cellular de-differentiation (c–e), 
ErbB2 (f–h) and Neuregulin 1 
(i–k). Cell nuclei are visualized 
in blue. Scale bars represent 
20 μm. l–q Human tissue 
sections taken from healthy 
sural nerve biopsies, as well as 
sporadic and NF2-associated 
schwannomas, were immu-
nolabeled (brown color) for 
Neuregulin 1 (l–n) and ErbB2 
(o–q). Cell nuclei are visualized 
in blue. Scale bars represent 
20 μm

Downstream  of  receptor  tyrosine  kinase  signaling  fine-
tuning  of  the  Ras-MAPK  pathway  is  pivotal  to  resident 
Schwann cells in preventing tumorigenic transformation [33]. 
We therefore assessed the phosphorylation-dependent activa-
tion of the signaling component Erk1/2, as proxy for the Ras-
MAPK pathway in nerve lysates of 10-month-old mice. By 
relating phospho-specific immunoblot signals to total protein 

amounts,  phosphorylation  of  Erk1/2  in  sciatic  nerve  lysates 
was found to be enhanced upon crush in P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl ani-
mals  and  even  more  markedly  in  P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ 
mice,  compared  to  intact  control  nerves  of  each  genotype 
(Fig. 5b and Supplementary Fig. 10).

Phospho-c-Jun  expression,  indicating  Schwann  cell 
immaturity  [38],  was  also  slightly  increased  in  crushed 

1 3300 

Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307

nerves  from  mice  with  the  homozygous  nf2  knockout 
in  Schwann  cells  (P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl)  and  in  P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2  fl/+  mice  (Fig.  5a  and  Supplementary  Fig.  9). 
Consistently,  phospho-c-Jun  immunolabeling  on  sciatic 
nerve  cross  sections  could  be  detected  as  a  rare  event  in 
P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl (Fig. 5d) and P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice 
(Fig.  4e),  when  compared  to  wild-type  animals  (Fig.  5c). 
Furthermore,  the  receptor  tyrosine  kinase  ErbB2  showed 
highest  expression  after  crush  injury  in  P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice (Fig. 5f–h). Nrg1 immunolabeling on sci-
atic nerve cross sections also appeared similar to the immu-
noblot results, although the applied Neuregulin 1 antibody 
cannot  distinguish  the  different  types  of  Nrg1  protein  in 
immunohistochemistry  (Fig.  5i–k).  In  human  schwanno-
mas,  ErbB2  (Fig.  5l–n)  and  Nrg1  (Fig.  5o–q)  expression 
was found to be similarly changed compared to sural nerve 
biopsies from healthy human individuals.

In summary, we could detect clear signaling and protein 
expression changes as a consequence of both merlin knock-
out and crush injury. The most dramatic changes in terms 
of  ErbB2  receptor  upregulation  and  Ras-MAPK  pathway 
activation  were  found  in  nerve  tissue  of  P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2 fl/+ mice, correlating with the appearance of mac-
roscopic  nerve  swelling  and  schwannoma-like  structures 
following nerve injury.

Tumor development in P0‑Cre;Nefh‑Cre;Nf2 fl/+ mice 
occurs without detectable LOH

Because  neuropathologically  validated  schwannoma-like 
growth  only  occurred  in  crushed  nerves  of  mice  bearing 
deletion  of  one  nf2  allele  in  both  glial  and  neuronal  com-
partments  of  peripheral  nerves  (P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+), 
we  hypothesized  that  LOH  of  the  nf2  gene  is  dispensable 
for  tumor  initiation.  Furthermore,  we  also  aimed  to  deter-
mine whether LOH might occur during later stages of tumor 
progression. Using a polymorphic marker in intron 5 of the 
genomic  nf2  sequence,  we  could  detect  two  alleles—illus-
trated by two peak groups in nerve tissue from 2-month-old 
wild-type animals without crush injury (Fig. 6a). Strikingly, 
a  similar  pattern  was  also  seen  for  the  marker  amplified 
from genomic DNA of nerve tissue taken from 2-month-old 
P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ animals without crush (Fig. 6b), as 
well as either 1 month (Fig. 6c) or 8 months (Fig. 6d) after 
crush  injury.  In  stark  contrast,  hepatocellular  carcinoma 
tissue  derived  from  mice  bearing  a  complete  heterozy-
gous knockout of merlin, revealed a clear and total loss of 
the  second  nf2  allele  using  the  same  method  (Fig.  6e).  In 
line with our findings, at the protein level, merlin could be 
detected  in  nerve  lysates  of  all  tested  genotypes  8  months 
after crush injury (Supplementary Fig. 11).

In summary, relevant LOH of the nf2 gene could not be 
detected in our schwannoma induction model. Considering 

Fig. 6   LOH  of  nf2  gene  is  dispensable  for  schwannoma  formation. 
a–e  Microsatellite  analysis  of  genomic  DNA  using  a  polymorphic 
marker in intron 5 of the murine nf2 gene. Pooled DNA from at least 
three sciatic nerves per indicated genotype was used to detect loss of 
heterozygosity. Tissue from hepatocellular carcinoma of Nf2Δ/+ mice 
was used as positive control for LOH. Grey highlighted peaks repre-
sent the two gene alleles

the inherent resolution-limitation of microsatellite analysis 
as the standard technique for LOH detection, nf2 LOH can-
not be excluded in a minor subset of cells.

Macrophage presence in P0‑Cre;Nefh‑Cre;Nf2 fl/+ 
animals

In  addition  to  dissecting  the  molecular  signaling  pathways 
leading to schwannoma development in our mouse models, 
we analyzed the sciatic nerve tissue for an unresolved inflam-
matory  response  at  8  months  after  crush  injury.  In  fact,  in 
many tumor entities, cells of the innate immunity, especially 
macrophages, have a strong impact on tumorigenic develop-
ment [1]. Furthermore, the essential role of macrophages dur-
ing peripheral nerve regeneration and Wallerian degeneration 

1 3Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307 

301

is  well  known  [34].  In  sciatic  nerves  from  P0-Cre;Nf2fl/+, 
Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+  and  Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/fl  animals,  as  well  as 
their wild-type littermates, Iba-1 immunoreactivity indicative 

of macrophages was not detectable beyond unspecific back-
ground staining (Fig. 7a–d). However, in nerves taken from 
P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl animals (Fig. 7e) and even more prominently 

Fig. 7 
   Sustained  inflammatory  response  after  nerve  crush  in 
P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+  mice.  a–f  Longitudinal  sciatic  nerve  sec-
tions  were  prepared  from  indicated  genotypes  8  months  after  crush 
injury  and  immunohistochemically  stained  for  the  macrophage 
marker Iba-1 (red). DAPI counterstaining indicates cell nuclei (blue). 
Arrow in each image shows the position of the nerve crush. Orienta-
tion of nerves is stated as ‘distal’ and ‘proximal’. Scale bars represent 
200 μm. g Quantification of cellular density in nerve tissue 8 months 

after crush injury, as measured by the number of DAPI-positive cell 
nuclei  per  area  of  tissue  (one-way ANOVA  analysis:  ***P  <  0.001; 
TMCT comparisons are depicted in the graph: *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; 
n.s.  not  significant;  n  =  3  nerves  per  genotype;  mean  ±  SD).  h 
Quantification  of  Iba-1-positive  cells  in  nerve  tissue  8  months  after 
crush injury (one-way ANOVA analysis: ***P < 0.001; TMCT com-
parisons are depicted in the graph: **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; n = 3 
nerves per genotype; mean ± SD)

1 3302 

Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307

from  P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+  mice  (Fig.  7f),  macrophages 
were  present  in  relevant  numbers.  Cell  number  quantifica-
tion revealed not only a total increase of cellular density in 
nerve  sections  of  these  two  genotypes  (Fig.  7g),  but  also  a 
significantly  enhanced  and  long-lasting  presence  of  mac-
rophages  8  months  after  crush  injury  (Fig.  7h).  Based  on 
these  quantifications,  macrophages  account  for  19  ±  6  % 
(P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl)  and  36  ±  5  %  (P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+) 
of  the  total  increase  in  cell  number  compared  to  wild-type 
nerve  tissue.  Strikingly,  tumorlet-developing  nerves  from 
P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ animals contained the largest num-
ber  of  macrophages  (Fig.  7h).  Likewise,  the  occurrence  of 
macrophages  in  schwannoma  tissue  could  be  confirmed  in 
another established schwannoma mouse model (Supplemen-
tary  Fig.  12),  wherein  all  Postn-Cre;Nf2flox  animals  spon-
taneously develop schwannomas by 10 months of age [13].

The relevance and significance of chronic inflammation 
for  the  development  and  progression  of  schwannomas  are 
not  fully  understood.  However,  intratumoral  inflamma-
tion in schwannomas positively correlated with tumor size 
and growth in a retrospective study [11]. Macrophages are 
functionally  plastic  cells  with  distinct  polarization  states. 
While M1-type macrophages are thought to inhibit cell pro-
liferation, M2-type macrophages promote cell proliferation 
with  high  tissue-remodeling  activity  [31].  Hence,  tumor-
associated macrophages primarily consist of M2-type mac-
rophage populations with little cytotoxicity towards tumor 
cells, because of their clearly defined cytokine armamentar-
ium [26]. Therefore, we tested for the presence of M2-type 
macrophages  in  sciatic  nerve  sections  of  P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+  mice,  using  an  antibody  raised  against  Argi-
nase-1  [27].  Indeed,  Arginase-1  immunoreactivity  was 
strongly  present  in  nerve  cross  sections  of  P0-Cre;Nf2fl/
fl  and  P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+  animals  compared  to  wild-
type  mice  (Fig.  8a);  suggesting  the  presence  of  M2-type 
macrophages  in  experimentally  induced  Schwann  cell 
tumors. Importantly, M2-type macrophage immunolabeling 
of  sciatic  nerve  samples  showed  a  strong  correlation  with 
ErbB2  expression  (P  <  0.001).  Ultimately,  macrophage 
occurrence  indicated  by  both  CD68  and  Iba-1  expression 
was also found in 28 out of 30 human biopsy samples from 
sporadic  schwannomas,  9  out  of  10  NF2-related  schwan-
nomas and in 4 out of 4 investigated Schwann cell tumors 
associated with schwannomatosis (Fig. 8b). Using the mac-
rophage  mannose  receptor  MMR/CD206  [53]  as  an  addi-
tional  non-lysosomal  marker,  M2-type  macrophages  were 
observed in human tissue of both sporadic and NF2-associ-
ated schwannomas (Fig. 8b).

Schwann  cells  have  repeatedly  been  shown  to  pro-
duce  chemotactic  cues  for  macrophages,  e.g.,  by  mac-
rophage  chemoattractant  protein-1,  leukemia  inhibitory 
factor  and  different  interleukins  [54].  In  order  to  iden-
tify  soluble  factors  that  might  be  causative  for  sustained 

macrophage presence, with the highest intensity in nerves 
of  P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+  animals,  we  performed  an 
unbiased detection of 40 different cytokines in sciatic nerve 
lysates. Notably, we found various cytokines to be differen-
tially  present  in  tissue  from  wild-type  mice,  P0-Cre;Nf2fl/
fl  animals  and  schwannoma-developing  P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice (Fig. 8c and Supplementary Fig. 13). Sev-
eral  cytokines  with  known  association  to  chronic  inflam-
mation (such as TNFα, IL-6 and IL-10) showed the highest 
levels in P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice [23]. Furthermore, 
IL-6  and  SDF-1/CXCL12,  which  exhibited  the  strongest 
levels  in  P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+  animals,  are  reportedly 
capable of inducing transactivation of ErbB2 receptor in a 
ligand-independent mechanism [7, 41].

In  order  to  experimentally  test  a  cause  and  effect  rela-
tionship  between  chronic  inflammation  and  schwannoma 
growth,  we  administered  medium-dose  aspirin  (5  mg  per 
kg equates to a dose of approximately 375 mg for humans) 
as commonly used anti-inflammatory drug to P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+  mice  after  tumor  induction  by  nerve  crush 
injury  (Fig.  9a).  Following  systemic  treatment  through 
intraperitoneal  injections  for  3  months,  tumor  size  was 
quantified  in  situ  (Fig.  9b  and  Supplementary  Fig.  14). 
Strikingly, aspirin-treated P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ animals 
had significantly smaller tumors than vehicle-treated mice 
of  the  same  genotype,  as  indicated  by  a  relevant  reduc-
tion  in  the  maximum  sciatic  nerve  diameter.  Subsequent 
immunohistochemical  analysis  of  longitudinal  nerve  sec-
tions indicated a decrease in the absolute number of mac-
rophages (Fig. 9d), but not when related to the area of tis-
sue section (Fig. 9e).

Taken  together,  our  data  highlights  an  unresolved 
inflammation  in  two  different  mouse  models  of  schwan-
noma development and human schwannoma tissue. For the 
first time, we provide causal evidence for the relevance of 
chronic inflammation in schwannoma development, as anti-
inflammatory  treatment  significantly  reduces  tumor  pro-
gression in our in vivo disease model.

Discussion

Schwann  cell-intrinsic  signaling  mechanisms  leading  to 
tumorigenic transformation and schwannoma development 
have  been  explored  in  great  detail.  However,  the  identifi-
cation of diversified signaling events related to the merlin 
tumor  suppressor  protein  has  yet  to  lead  to  the  develop-
ment  of  better  therapeutic  options  for  the  management  of 
sporadic or NF2-related schwannomas. Therefore, beyond 
‘watchful  waiting’,  surgical  resection  of  nerve  sheath 
tumors  is  often  the  only  available  treatment.  This  study 
aimed  to  investigate  the  importance  of  the  nerve  micro-
environment  and  Schwann  cell-extrinsic  factors  for  the 

1 3Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307 

303

Fig. 8     Appearance  of  M2-type  macrophages  in  merlin-deficient 
nerves  after  crush  injury  and  human  schwannoma  samples.  a  Rep-
resentative  images  of  sciatic  nerve  cross  sections  from  indicated 
genotypes.  Immunolabeling  of Arginase-1  as  a  marker  for  M2-type 
in  P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl  and 
macrophages  shows  strong  expression 
P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice, in comparison to wild-type (WT) lit-
termates.  Scale  bars  represent  100  μm.  b  Representative  images 
of  human  schwannoma  samples  from  a  tissue  microarray.  Immu-

nostainings  against  macrophage  markers  CD68  and  Iba-1,  as  well 
as M2-type macrophage marker MMR/CD206, indicate macrophage 
occurence in sporadic, NF2-associated and Schwannomatosis-associ-
ated schwannomas. Scale bars represent 50 μm (upper panel), 10 μm 
(middle  panel)  and  20  μm  (lower  panel),  respectively.  c  Cytokine 
levels  in  pooled  lysates  of  at  least  four  individual  sciatic  nerves  per 
indicated genotype (n = 2). Densitometric quantification is shown as 
median value. For full-length blots see Supplementary Fig. 13

1 3Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307

304 

Fig. 9   Systemic aspirin admin-
istration decreases schwannoma 
progression in P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice. a Schematic 
representation of the aspirin 
(ASS) treatment protocol. b 
Representative images showing 
the method for in situ tumor 
size quantification. The crushed 
sciatic nerve was exposed 
surgically in order to assess 
the maximum sciatic nerve 
diameter following as indicator 
for tumor size. c Quantifica-
tion of maximum sciatic nerve 
diameters in wild type (WT) 
and P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+ 
mice, 3 months after crush 
injury. Mice received sys-
temic administration of either 
medium-dose aspirin (5 mg 
per kg ASS i.p.) or vehicle 
(**P < 0.01; n = 7 mice per 
genotype; mean ± SD). d Lon-
gitudinal sciatic nerve sections 
were prepared from vehicle or 
aspirin-treated P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice 3 months after 
crush injury and immunohis-
tochemically stained for the 
macrophage marker Iba-1 (red). 
DAPI counterstaining indicates 
cell nuclei (blue). Scale bars 
represent 200 μm. e Quantifica-
tion of Iba-1-positive cells nerve 
tissue 3 months after crush 
injury, taken from aspirin and 
vehicle-treated P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+ mice (n.s. not 
significant; n = 3 nerves per 
genotype; mean ± SD)

development  of  schwannomas.  In  line  with  previous  find-
ings suggesting a key role for axons in Schwann cell con-
trol [9], we provide experimental evidence that the axonal 
compartment  of  peripheral  nerves  contributes  to  schwan-
noma formation. In fact, 12 of the 13 animals with the hete-
rozygous knockout of the nf2 gene in neurons and Schwann 
cells  (P0-Cre;Nefh-Cre;Nf2fl/+),  developed  macroscopic 
nerve swellings at the same position where a single crush 

injury  had  been  performed  8  months  earlier.  Strikingly, 
the  marked  swelling  was  not  just  restricted  to  the  crush 
site,  but  expanded  several  millimeters  into  the  distal  part 
of  the  nerve  where  branching  of  the  sciatic  nerve  into 
tibial  and  common  peroneal  nerve  occurs.  Crush  injury-
induced  macroscopic  nerve  swelling  was  also  observed 
in  another  mouse  model  frequently  used  to  mimic  NF2 
disease  by  conditional  biallelic  nf2  knockout  in  Schwann 

1 3Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307 

305

cells  (P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl).  However,  neuropathological  assess-
ment of the macroscopic nerve swellings revealed that NF2 
patient-resembling tumors and Schwann cell de-differenti-
ation  only  occurred  in  animals  with  cooperative  nf2  gene 
loss  in  axons  and  adjacent  Schwann  cells  (P0-Cre;Nefh-
Cre;Nf2fl/+).  Our  findings  suggest 
that  axon-derived 
instructive  cues  for  Schwann  cells  might  be  implicated  in 
schwannoma formation. Because of the bidirectional com-
munication  between  cells  and  their  surrounding  context, 
the  microenvironment  has  been  proven  to  be  critical  for 
both tissue homeostasis and tumor growth [42]. Consistent 
with previous work from our group and others, we provide 
more evidence that the Neuregulin1-ErbB network, crucial 
for  normal  cell-to-cell  communication  between  Schwann 
cells and axons, is persistently disturbed in merlin-deficient 
nerve tissue.

The  reason  for  the  preference  of  the  vestibular  nerve 
for schwannoma growth remains profoundly obscure [52]. 
However, our data raise the question of whether mechani-
cal  irritation  of  nerves  or  local  nerve  injury,  respectively, 
can  act  as  predilection  sites  for  schwannoma  develop-
ment—comparable  to  neurofibroma,  which  are  often 
viewed  as  unrepaired  wounds  [3,  43].  Remarkably,  NF2-
related  schwannomas  often  occur  at  localizations  where 
peripheral  nerves  are  in  close  proximity  to  bony  struc-
tures, e.g., spinal nerves emerging from the spinal column 
through the intervertebral foramen and the vestibular nerve, 
which  uses  the  internal  auditory  meatus  as  a  passageway. 
However, while the connection between neuromas and de-
regulated  nerve  regeneration  after  injury  (traumatic  neu-
roma) is widely accepted [6], schwannoma formation after 
mechanical  nerve  irritation  has  not  been  studied  in  a  sys-
tematic manner.

Wounding  of  the  sciatic  nerve  has  previously  been 
shown to induce a transient inflammatory response involv-
ing  macrophages  [34].  On  the  other  hand,  sustained  or 
chronic tissue inflammation is known to drive tumor forma-
tion  [25].  In  our  model,  we  can  clearly  correlate  the  for-
mation of schwannomas with the presence of macrophages. 
Furthermore, we provide evidence that at least a subset of 
macrophages  shows  ‘alternatively  activated’  M2  polari-
zation,  which  can  exert  anti-inflammatory  but  pro-tumo-
rigenic  functions.  Importantly,  in  each  mouse  line  of  this 
study, macrophages have a wild-type genetic setup and are 
spared  from  genetic  modifications. The  finding  that  virtu-
ally all sporadic and NF2-associated human schwannomas 
tested in this study show macrophage presence, further sup-
ports the concept that schwannoma formation is promoted 
by  an  unresolved  inflammatory  response.  In  line  with  our 
own  causal  evidence,  a  recent  retrospective  study  found 
that aspirin intake as an anti-inflammatory drug correlated 
with slowed growth of vestibular schwannomas in patients 
[20].

The results presented here enable us to clearly correlate 
the appearance and number of non-differentiated, non-mye-
linating,  Schwann  cells  at  the  lesion  site  with  the  occur-
rence of macrophages. This in turn coincides with substan-
tial  cellular  proliferation  resulting  in  tumorlet  formation, 
identical  to  NF2-related  schwannomas  again  underlining 
the  notion  that  tumors  do  not  diversify  solely  in  terms  of 
genetic  alterations,  but  also  with  respect  to  the  nature  of 
their microenvironment [42].

The necessity of bi-allelic Nf2 gene (e.g., due to LOH) 
for  schwannoma  development  for  human  individuals  is 
a  long-standing  clinical  hypothesis.  However,  a  growing 
number  of  tumor  suppressor  genes  have  been  shown  not 
to conform to the classical two-hit hypothesis proposed by 
Alfred Knudson [37]. In fact, the data on LOH frequency in 
schwannoma samples are not entirely conclusive through-
out the existing literature. Therefore, we aimed to investi-
gate  whether  LOH  might  not  be  a  necessary  prerequisite 
for schwannoma initiation. From the mouse model and the 
LOH detection technique applied in this study, we conclude 
that LOH of the nf2 gene is neither required for initiation 
nor  progression  of  schwannomas,  considering  the  inher-
ent  detection  limit  of  the  chosen  technique.  Nonetheless, 
other  genetic  mutations  might  occur  during  the  course  of 
schwannoma  growth  that  remain  to  be  detected  or  con-
sidered.  This  potential  necessity  for  other  genetic  events 
to occur to prompt schwannoma formation is further sup-
ported  by  our  results  from  P0-Cre;Nf2fl/fl  animals—where 
nerve  injury  is  not  sufficient  to  induce  schwannomas, 
despite biallelic nf2 gene inactivation. We therefore suggest 
performing  a  systematic  and  unbiased  analysis  of  genetic 
alterations found in human schwannoma samples, e.g., by 
whole-genome sequencing.

In essence, our data suggest that a Schwann cell-focused 
pathogenesis  of  schwannoma  development  is  insufficient. 
Instead,  we  provide  evidence  for  a  multi-leveled  impor-
tance  of  the  nerve  microenvironment,  where  instructive 
cues from axons and macrophage presence play important 
roles  in  combination  with  failed  regenerative  processes 
of  afflicted  nerves.  Clearly,  microenvironmental  consid-
erations further complicate the already challenging task of 
understanding tumors. On the other hand, this increasingly 
complex  construct  of  tumor  development  presents  more 
opportunities  for  the  identification  of  potential  new  thera-
peutic  targets,  urgently  needed  for  debilitating  tumor  pre-
disposition syndromes like NF2 disease.

Acknowledgments  The authors would like to thank Sara Holly and 
Dominique Galendo for their skilled husbandry of animals. Stefanie 
Ramrath  and Alexander  Gloria  are  acknowledged  for  their  excellent 
technical assistance. This work was supported by SFB 604, DFG MO 
1421/2-1, RTG1715 and Krebshilfe 107089 (H.M.) and by the Chil-
dren’s Tumor Foundation (Drug Discovery Initiative Award 2015-05-
010) to A.S.

1 3306 

Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307

Open Access  This article is distributed under the terms of the Crea-
tive  Commons  Attribution  4.0  International  License  (http://crea-
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),  which  permits  unrestricted  use, 
distribution,  and  reproduction  in  any  medium,  provided  you  give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a 
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were 
made.

References

  1.  Allavena  P,  Mantovani  A  (2012)  Immunology  in  the  clinic 
tumour-associated  mac-
tumour 
167:195–205. 

review  series;  focus  on  cancer: 
rophages:  undisputed  stars  of 
microenvironment.  Clin  Exp 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2249.2011.04515.x

Immunol 

the 

inflammatory 

  2.  Antinheimo  J,  Sankila  R,  Carpen  O,  Pukkala  E,  Sainio  M, 
Jaaskelainen J (2000) Population-based analysis of sporadic and 
type  2  neurofibromatosis-associated  meningiomas  and  schwan-
nomas. Neurology 54:71–76

  3.  Atit  RP,  Crowe  MJ,  Greenhalgh  DG,  Wenstrup  RJ,  Rat-
ner  N  (1999)  The  Nf1  tumor  suppressor  regulates  mouse 
skin  wound  healing,  fibroblast  proliferation,  and  collagen 
deposited  by  fibroblasts.  J  Invest  Dermatol  112:835–842. 
doi:10.1046/j.1523-1747.1999.00609.x

  4.  Bauder  AR,  Ferguson  TA  (2012)  Reproducible  mouse  sciatic 
nerve crush and subsequent assessment of regeneration by whole 
mount muscle analysis. J Vis Exp JoVE. doi:10.3791/3606

  5.  Boin  A,  Couvelard  A,  Couderc  C,  Brito  I,  Filipescu  D,  Kal-
amarides  M,  Bedossa  P,  De  Koning  L,  Danelsky  C,  Dubois  T 
et al (2014) Proteomic screening identifies a YAP-driven signal-
ing network linked to tumor cell proliferation in human schwan-
nomas.  Neuro-oncology  16:1196–1209.  doi:10.1093/neuonc/
nou020

  6.  Burchiel  KJ,  Johans  TJ,  Ochoa  J  (1993)  The  surgical  treat-
ment  of  painful  traumatic  neuromas.  J  Neurosurg  78:714–719. 
doi:10.3171/jns.1993.78.5.0714

  7.  Cabioglu N, Summy J, Miller C, Parikh NU, Sahin AA, Tuzlali 
S,  Pumiglia  K,  Gallick  GE,  Price  JE  (2005)  CXCL-12/stromal 
cell-derived  factor-1alpha  transactivates  HER2-neu  in  breast 
cancer  cells  by  a  novel  pathway  involving  Src  kinase  activa-
tion.  Cancer  Res  65:6493–6497.  doi:10.1158/0008-5472.
CAN-04-1303

  8.  Cooper  J,  Giancotti  FG  (2014)  Molecular  insights  into  NF2/
Merlin  tumor  suppressor  function.  FEBS  Lett  588:2743–2752. 
doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2014.04.001

  9.  Corfas  G,  Velardez  MO,  Ko  CP,  Ratner  N,  Peles  E  (2004) 
Mechanisms  and  roles  of  axon-Schwann  cell  interactions.  J 
Neurosci  Offi  J  Soc  Neurosci  24:9250–9260.  doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.3649-04.2004

 10.  Coussens LM, Werb Z (2002) Inflammation and cancer. Nature 

420:860–867. doi:10.1038/nature01322

 11.  de Vries  M,  Hogendoorn  PC,  Briaire-de  Bruyn  I,  Malessy  MJ, 
van der Mey AG (2012) Intratumoral hemorrhage, vessel density, 
and the inflammatory reaction contribute to volume increase of 
sporadic vestibular schwannomas. Virchows Archiv Int J Pathol 
460:629–636. doi:10.1007/s00428-012-1236-9

 12.  Feltri ML, D’Antonio M, Previtali S, Fasolini M, Messing A, Wra-
betz L (1999) P0-Cre transgenic mice for inactivation of adhesion 
molecules in Schwann cells. Ann N Y Acad Sci 883:116–123

 13.  Gehlhausen  JR,  Park  SJ,  Hickox AE,  Shew  M,  Staser  K,  Rho-
des SD, Menon K, Lajiness JD, Mwanthi M, Yang X et al (2014) 
A  murine  model  of  neurofibromatosis  type  2  that  accurately 
phenocopies  human  schwannoma  formation.  Hum  Mol  Genet. 
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddu414

 14.  Giovannini  M,  Robanus-Maandag  E,  van  der  Valk  M,  Niwa-
Kawakita M, Abramowski V, Goutebroze L, Woodruff JM, Berns 
A, Thomas  G  (2000)  Conditional  biallelic  Nf2  mutation  in  the 
mouse  promotes  manifestations  of  human  neurofibromatosis 
type 2. Genes Dev 14:1617–1630

 15.  Hadfield KD, Smith MJ, Urquhart JE, Wallace AJ, Bowers NL, 
King  AT,  Rutherford  SA,  Trump  D,  Newman  WG,  Evans  DG 
(2010)  Rates  of  loss  of  heterozygosity  and  mitotic  recombina-
tion  in  NF2  schwannomas,  sporadic  vestibular  schwannomas 
and  schwannomatosis  schwannomas.  Oncogene  29:6216–6221. 
doi:10.1038/onc.2010.363

 16.  Hagel C, Lindenau M, Lamszus K, Kluwe L, Stavrou D, Maut-
ner VF  (2002)  Polyneuropathy  in  neurofibromatosis  2:  clinical 
findings, molecular genetics and neuropathological alterations in 
sural  nerve  biopsy  specimens. Acta  Neuropathol  104:179–187. 
doi:10.1007/s00401-002-0535-7

 17.  Hirasawa M, Cho A, Sreenath T, Sauer B, Julien JP, Kulkarni AB 
(2001)  Neuron-specific  expression  of  Cre  recombinase  during 
the late phase of brain development. Neurosci Res 40:125–132

 18.  Hirose  T,  Tani  T,  Shimada  T,  Ishizawa  K,  Shimada  S,  Sano  T 
(2003)  Immunohistochemical  demonstration  of  EMA/Glut1-posi-
tive perineurial cells and CD34-positive fibroblastic cells in periph-
eral nerve sheath tumors. Mod Pathol Off J U St Can Acad Pathol 
Inc 16:293–298. doi:10.1097/01.MP.0000062654.83617.B7

 19.  Jessen  KR,  Mirsky  R  (2005)  The  origin  and  development  of 
glial  cells  in  peripheral  nerves.  Nat  Rev  Neurosci  6:671–682. 
doi:10.1038/nrn1746

 20.  Kandathil CK, Dilwali S, Wu CC, Ibrahimov M, McKenna MJ, 
Lee  H,  Stankovic  KM  (2014)  Aspirin  intake  correlates  with 
halted growth of sporadic vestibular schwannoma in vivo. Otol 
Neurotol Off Publ Am Otol Soc Am Neurotol Soc Eur Acad Otol 
Neurotol 35:353–357. doi:10.1097/MAO.0000000000000189

 21.  Karamchandani JR, Nielsen TO, van de Rijn M, West RB (2012) 
Sox10  and  S100  in  the  diagnosis  of  soft-tissue  neoplasms. Appl 
Immunohistochem Mol Morphol AIMM Off Publ Soc Appl Immu-
nohistochem 20:445–450. doi:10.1097/PAI.0b013e318244ff4b

 22.  Knudson AG Jr (1971) Mutation and cancer: statistical study of 

retinoblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 68:820–823

 23.  Landskron  G,  De  la  Fuente  M,  Thuwajit  P,  Thuwajit  C,  Her-
moso  MA  (2014)  Chronic  inflammation  and  cytokines  in 
the  tumor  microenvironment.  J  Immunol  Res  2014:149185. 
doi:10.1155/2014/149185

 24.  Lassaletta  L,  Torres-Martin  M,  Pena-Granero  C,  Roda  JM, 
Santa-Cruz-Ruiz S, Castresana JS, Gavilan J, Rey JA (2013) NF2 
genetic alterations in sporadic vestibular schwannomas: clinical 
implications.  Otol  Neurotol  Off  Publ Am  Otol  Soc Am  Neuro-
tol  Soc  Eur  Acad  Otol  Neurotol  34:1355–1361.  doi:10.1097/
MAO.0b013e318298ac79

 25.  Lu  H,  Ouyang  W,  Huang  C  (2006)  Inflammation,  a  key  event 
in  cancer  development.  Mol  Cancer  Res  MCR  4:221–233. 
doi:10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-05-0261

 26.  Luo  Y,  Zhou  H,  Krueger  J,  Kaplan  C,  Lee  SH,  Dolman  C, 
Markowitz D, Wu W, Liu C, Reisfeld RA et al (2006) Targeting 
tumor-associated macrophages as a novel strategy against breast 
cancer. J Clin Investig 116:2132–2141. doi:10.1172/JCI27648

 27.  Mantovani A,  Sozzani  S,  Locati  M, Allavena  P,  Sica A  (2002) 
Macrophage  polarization:  tumor-associated  macrophages  as  a 
paradigm  for  polarized  M2  mononuclear  phagocytes.  Trends 
Immunol 23:549–555

 28.  Martins WS, Lucas DC, Neves KF, Bertioli DJ (2009) WebSat—
a web software for microsatellite marker development. Bioinfor-
mation 3:282–283

 29.  Mautner  VF,  Nguyen  R,  Kutta  H,  Fuensterer  C,  Bokemeyer  C, 
Hagel C, Friedrich RE, Panse J (2010) Bevacizumab induces regres-
sion of vestibular schwannomas in patients with neurofibromatosis 
type 2. Neuro-oncology 12:14–18. doi:10.1093/neuonc/nop010

1 3Acta Neuropathol (2016) 132:289–307 

307

 30.  McClatchey AI,  Saotome  I,  Mercer  K,  Crowley  D,  Gusella  JF, 
Bronson RT, Jacks T (1998) Mice heterozygous for a mutation at 
the Nf2 tumor suppressor locus develop a range of highly meta-
static tumors. Genes Dev 12:1121–1133

 31.  Mills CD (2012) M1 and M2 macrophages: oracles of health and 

disease. Crit Rev Immunol 32:463–488

 32.  Morrison  H,  Sherman  LS,  Legg  J,  Banine  F,  Isacke  C,  Haipek 
CA, Gutmann DH, Ponta H, Herrlich P (2001) The NF2 tumor 
suppressor gene product, merlin, mediates contact inhibition of 
growth through interactions with CD44. Genes Dev 15:968–980. 
doi:10.1101/gad.189601

 33.  Morrison H, Sperka T, Manent J, Giovannini M, Ponta H, Herr-
lich P (2007) Merlin/neurofibromatosis type 2 suppresses growth 
by inhibiting the activation of Ras and Rac. Cancer Res 67:520–
527. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1608

 34.  Mueller M, Leonhard C, Wacker K, Ringelstein EB, Okabe M, 
Hickey WF, Kiefer R (2003) Macrophage response to peripheral 
nerve injury: the quantitative contribution of resident and hema-
togenous  macrophages.  Lab  Investig  J  Tech  Methods  Pathol 
83:175–185

 35.  Nakai  Y,  Zheng  Y,  MacCollin  M,  Ratner  N  (2006)  Temporal 
control of Rac in Schwann cell-axon interaction is disrupted in 
NF2-mutant  schwannoma  cells.  J  Neurosci  Off  J  Soc  Neurosci 
26:3390–3395. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4865-05.2006

 36.  Nave KA, Salzer JL (2006) Axonal regulation of myelination by 
neuregulin  1.  Curr  Opin  Neurobiol  16:492–500.  doi:10.1016/j.
conb.2006.08.008

 37.  Paige AJ (2003) Redefining tumour suppressor genes: exceptions 
to  the  two-hit  hypothesis.  Cell  Mol  Life  Sci  CMLS  60:2147–
2163. doi:10.1007/s00018-003-3027-6

 38.  Parkinson  DB,  Bhaskaran  A,  Droggiti  A,  Dickinson  S, 
D’Antonio  M,  Mirsky  R,  Jessen  KR  (2004)  Krox-20  inhibits 
Jun-NH2-terminal  kinase/c-Jun  to  control  Schwann  cell  pro-
liferation  and  death.  J  Cell  Biol  164:385–394.  doi:10.1083/
jcb.200307132

 39.  Parrinello  S,  Noon  LA,  Harrisingh  MC,  Wingfield  Digby  P, 
Rosenberg  LH,  Cremona  CA,  Echave  P,  Flanagan AM,  Parada 
LF,  Lloyd  AC  (2008)  NF1  loss  disrupts  Schwann  cell-axonal 
interactions:  a  novel  role  for  semaphorin  4F.  Genes  Dev 
22:3335–3348. doi:10.1101/gad.490608

 40.  Plotkin  SR,  Stemmer-Rachamimov  AO,  Barker  FG  2nd,  Hal-
pin C, Padera TP, Tyrrell A, Sorensen AG, Jain RK, di Tomaso 
E  (2009)  Hearing  improvement  after  bevacizumab  in  patients 
with  neurofibromatosis  type  2.  N  Engl  J  Med  361:358–367. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa0902579

 41.  Qiu Y, Ravi L, Kung HJ (1998) Requirement of ErbB2 for sig-
nalling  by  interleukin-6  in  prostate  carcinoma  cells.  Nature 
393:83–85. doi:10.1038/30012

 42.  Quail  DF,  Joyce  JA  (2013)  Microenvironmental  regulation  of 
tumor  progression  and  metastasis.  Nat  Med  19:1423–1437. 
doi:10.1038/nm.3394

 43.  Ribeiro  S,  Napoli  I,  White  IJ,  Parrinello  S,  Flanagan  AM, 
Suter  U,  Parada  LF,  Lloyd  AC  (2013)  Injury  signals  cooper-
ate  with  nf1  loss  to  relieve  the  tumor-suppressive  environment 
of  adult  peripheral  nerve.  Cell  Rep  5:126–136.  doi:10.1016/j.
celrep.2013.08.033

 44.  Schneider J, Warzok R, Schreiber D, Guthert H (1983) Tumors 
of the central nervous system in biopsy and autopsy material. 7th 
communication:  neurinomas  and  neurofibromatoses  with  CNS 

involvement.  Zentralblatt  fur  allgemeine  Pathologie  u  patholo-
gische Anatomie 127:305–314

 45.  Schulz  A,  Baader  SL,  Niwa-Kawakita  M,  Jung  MJ,  Bauer  R, 
Garcia C, Zoch A, Schacke S, Hagel C, Mautner VF et al (2013) 
Merlin  isoform  2  in  neurofibromatosis  type  2-associated  poly-
neuropathy. Nat Neurosci. doi:10.1038/nn.3348

 46.  Schulz A,  Geissler  KJ,  Kumar  S,  Leichsenring  G,  Morrison  H, 
Baader SL (2010) Merlin inhibits neurite outgrowth in the CNS. 
J  Neurosci  Off  J  Soc  Neurosci  30:10177–10186.  doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.0840-10.2010

 47.  Schulz A,  Kyselyova A,  Baader  SL,  Jung  MJ,  Zoch A,  Maut-
ner  VF,  Hagel  C,  Morrison  H  (2014)  Neuronal  merlin  influ-
ences  ERBB2  receptor  expression  on  Schwann  cells  through 
neuregulin  1  type  III  signalling.  Brain  J  Neurol  137:420–432. 
doi:10.1093/brain/awt327

 48.  Schulz A,  Zoch A,  Morrison  H  (2014) A  neuronal  function  of 
the tumor suppressor protein merlin. Acta Neuropathol Commun 
2:82. doi:10.1186/s40478-014-0082-1

 49.  Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Ino Y, Lim ZY, Jacoby LB, MacCol-
lin M, Gusella JF, Ramesh V, Louis DN (1998) Loss of the NF2 
gene  and  merlin  occur  by  the  tumorlet  stage  of  schwannoma 
development in neurofibromatosis 2. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 
57:1164–1167

 50.  Stemmer-Rachamimov  AO,  Louis  DN,  Nielsen  GP,  Anto-
nescu  CR,  Borowsky  AD,  Bronson  RT,  Burns  DK,  Cervera 
P,  McLaughlin  ME,  Reifenberger  G  et  al  (2004)  Compara-
tive  pathology  of  nerve  sheath  tumors  in  mouse  models  and 
humans.  Cancer  Res  64:3718–3724.  doi:10.1158/0008-5472.
CAN-03-4079

 51.  Stemmer-Rachamimov  AO,  Xu  L,  Gonzalez-Agosti  C,  Bur-
wick  JA,  Pinney  D,  Beauchamp  R,  Jacoby  LB,  Gusella  JF, 
Ramesh V,  Louis  DN  (1997)  Universal  absence  of  merlin,  but 
not other ERM family members, in schwannomas. Am J Pathol 
151:1649–1654

 52.  Stivaros SM, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Alston R, Plotkin SR, 
Nadol JB, Quesnel A, O’Malley J, Whitfield GA, McCabe MG, 
Freeman  SR  et  al  (2015)  Multiple  synchronous  sites  of  origin 
of vestibular schwannomas in neurofibromatosis Type 2. J Med 
Genet. doi:10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103050

 53.  Sun  X,  Gao  D,  Gao  L,  Zhang  C, Yu  X,  Jia  B, Wang  F,  Liu  Z 
(2015) Molecular imaging of tumor-infiltrating macrophages in 
a preclinical mouse model of breast cancer. Theranostics 5:597–
608. doi:10.7150/thno.11546

 54.  Tofaris GK, Patterson PH, Jessen KR, Mirsky R (2002) Dener-
vated Schwann cells attract macrophages by secretion of leuke-
mia  inhibitory  factor  (LIF)  and  monocyte  chemoattractant  pro-
tein-1 in a process regulated by interleukin-6 and LIF. J Neurosci 
Off J Soc Neurosci 22:6696–6703

 55.  Trofatter  JA,  MacCollin  MM,  Rutter  JL,  Murrell  JR,  Duyao 
MP, Parry DM, Eldridge R, Kley N, Menon AG, Pulaski K et al 
(1993) A novel moesin-, ezrin-, radixin-like gene is a candidate 
for the neurofibromatosis 2 tumor suppressor. Cell 75:826

 56.  Velanac V, Unterbarnscheidt T, Hinrichs W, Gummert MN, Fis-
cher TM, Rossner MJ, Trimarco A, Brivio V, Taveggia C, Willem 
M  et  al  (2012)  Bace1  processing  of  NRG1  type  III  produces  a 
myelin-inducing signal but is not essential for the stimulation of 
myelination. Glia 60:203–217. doi:10.1002/glia.21255

1 3