Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

PERSPECTIVE

Targeting oncogenic Ras

Ernesto Diaz-Flores and Kevin Shannon1
Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA

Reversing the consequences of oncogenic Ras is a funda-
mental problem in cancer therapeutics. Somatic RAS
mutations are highly prevalent in many human cancers
that respond poorly to current treatments, including car-
cinomas of the lung, pancreas, and colon; melanoma; and
myeloid leukemia (for review, see Schubbert et al. 2007).
At first glance, oncogenic Ras is an appealing target for
rational drug discovery as the mutant protein is a mem-
brane-associated signaling molecule that is expressed at
robust levels in primary tumor cells. However, targeting
oncogenic Ras is extremely challenging in practice due
to the nature of the Ras cycle and the functional conse-
quences of oncogenic mutations (for review, see Vetter
and Wittinghofer 2001; Downward 2003). Ras relies on
an intrinsic GTPase activity to terminate signaling by
hydrolyzing GTP to GDP. This “off” reaction is rela-
tively inefficient, but is accelerated thousands of fold by
the GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) neurofibromin
and p120 GAP, which stabilize a transition state be-
tween Ras-GTP and Ras-GDP. Cancer-associated amino
acid substitutions at codons 12, 13, and 61 both impair
intrinsic Ras GTPase activity and confer resistance to
GAPs. In principle, an effective small molecule therapy
must therefore restore enzymatic activity within a
highly constrained phosphate-binding loop of the onco-
protein without deregulating normal Ras or related cel-
lular GTPases. Given these grim biochemical realities,
drug discovery efforts have primarily focused in two ar-
eas: (1) blocking enzymes such as farnesyl transferase,
which catalyze post-translational modifications of Ras
that are essential for membrane targeting; and (2) devel-
oping inhibitors of downstream kinases such as MEK,
Akt, and mTOR. Inherent in these strategies is the no-
tion that reversing the growth of Ras-driven malignan-
cies inevitably requires interrupting aberrant cell-intrin-
sic signaling networks. However, despite substantial ef-
fort, there are currently no agents that effectively
counter the biochemical consequences of oncogenic Ras.
A provocative paper by Ancrile et al. (2007) in the July 15
issue of Genes and Development suggests that interfer-
ing with the ability of Ras-driven tumors to modulate
the behaviors of other cells in the microenvironment
could represent a viable therapeutic approach.

1Corresponding author.
E-MAIL shannonk@peds.ucsf.edu; FAX (415) 502-5127.
Article is online at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.1587907.

The current work was inspired, in part, by a previous
study showing that HRAS-transformed HeLa cells se-
crete the cytokine interleukin 8 (IL8), which contributes
to tumor growth in immunodeficient mice by promoting
angiogenesis (Sparmann and Bar-Sagi 2004), and by the
reports of elevated levels of another cytokine, interleu-
kin 6 (IL6), in the sera of patients with pancreatic cancer
(Wigmore et al. 2002). Ancrile et al. (2007) harnessed a
tractable system for transforming primary cells with a
defined set of genes that includes SV40 T/t antigens, the
telomerase catalytic subunit hTERT, the p110 isoform of
phosphoinositide-3-OH (PI-3) kinase fused to a CAAX
membrane localization sequence, and a regulatable
HRASG12V oncogene (Lim and Counter 2005). Inducing
H-RasG12V protein expression resulted in morphologic
transformation and a tumorigenic phenotype, which was
associated with dramatic up-regulation of IL6 production
in multiple cell types. Moreover, reducing IL6 levels
through the use of short hairpin RNA (shRNA) knock-
down technology markedly attenuated tumorigenesis in
vivo. Interestingly, Ancrile et al. (2007) present data that
argue strongly against autocrine signaling as the reason
that IL6 enhances tumor growth. Instead, the data sup-
port a paracrine mechanism through which tumor-pro-
duced IL6 acts on infiltrating cells in the tissue micro-
environment (see Fig. 1). In related studies, these authors
observed attenuated tumor formation in IL6 mutant
mice that are exposed to a well-established model of skin
carcinogenesis. They also showed that IL6 knockdown
altered the growth of kidney and mesenchymal cancer
cell lines. These experiments support the general prin-
ciple of targeting the microenvironment as a strategy for
inhibiting the growth of tumors expressing oncogenic
Ras. This idea is consistent with elegant studies of
Schwann cell tumorigenesis in Nf1 mutant mice. The
Nf1 tumor suppressor gene encodes neurofibromin, a
GAP for Ras, and inactivating this gene in the Schwann
cell lineage deregulates Ras signaling and results in tu-
mor formation, which is dependent on aberrant cytokine
signaling between the tumor and infiltrating haploinsuf-
ficient mast cells (Zhu et al. 2002; Yang et al. 2003).

The data of Ancrile et al. (2007) also raise new ques-
tions. First, it is uncertain how oncogenic Ras expression
induces IL6 production and, in particular, whether this is
consequence of activating Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK, Ral-GDS,
PI3 kinase/Akt, and/or other effectors of Ras-GTP. Sec-
ond, whereas IL6 production by tumorigenic cells is as-

GENES & DEVELOPMENT 21:1989–1992 © 2007 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 0890-9369/07; www.genesdev.org

1989

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Diaz-Flores and Shannon

Figure 1. Model for the effects of IL6 produc-
tion by HRas mutant tumor cells and effects
on the microenvironment. The tumor (green
cells) produces IL6 (yellow), which diffuses
into the surrounding stroma and activates re-
ceptors expressed on infiltrating cells (pink).
The identity of these intermediary cells is un-
certain, but they could be epithelial cells, T
lymphocytes, myeloid cells, and/or dendritic
cells. This IL6-responsive population might
produce soluble factors that directly stimu-
late tumor growth (blue arrow). These cells
might also express cell surface proteins (green
bar) and/or produce soluble factors (green
circles) that recruit endothelial cells (orange)
into the microenvironment. Endothelial cells,
in turn, could contribute to tumor growth
either by feedback activation of tumor cells
(orange arrow) and/or by releasing angiogenic
factors (short red arrows) that promote blood
vessel formation around the tumor.

sociated with a marked increase in the number of intra-
tumoral endothelial cells, these cells are not known to
express the IL6 receptor. This suggests that an interme-
diary population of IL6-responsive cells recruits endothe-
lial cells (and perhaps other cell types) into the evolving
tumor, and that these infiltrating cells promote the
growth of the tumor mass by either overcoming negative
regulatory factors and/or by producing molecules that
directly or indirectly stimulate growth (Fig. 1). Under-
standing this complex interplay between tumor-pro-
duced IL6 and the microenvironment and, in turn, iden-
tifying Ras-dependent and Ras-independent pathways
within the tumor that are subsequently activated by in-
filtrating IL6-responsive normal cells may uncover trac-
table therapeutic targets. Finally, the data presented in
this work largely focuses on the role of IL6 in tumor
initiation. Regrettably, human cancers are not diagnosed
until much later in the natural history of the disease and
a sine qua non for an effective therapeutic is the ability
to induce objective regression of established disease.
Along these lines, it will be important to investigate if
inhibiting IL6 signaling in advanced tumors is effica-
cious in animal models and, if this approach appears
promising, in clinical trials.

Oncogenic Ras: meek or macho?

Ras occupies a high position in the pantheon of oncopro-
teins—diabolically activated with the ability to potently
deregulate multiple effector molecules and cellular pro-
cesses. This traditional view, which is largely based on
observations made in immortalized cancer cell lines, has
gradually given way to a more nuanced understanding
that emphasizes cell context and the capacity of primary
cells to adapt to the stress of oncogenic Ras protein ex-
pression by remodeling signaling networks and adopting
alternate fates such as senescence. Moreover, insights
from cancer and developmental genetics infer that sub-

1990

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

stantial gaps in our knowledge remain, which have im-
portant therapeutic implications. The availability of ac-
curate mouse models that now allow investigators to
interrogate the genetic, cell biologic, and biochemical
consequences of ablating one or more Ras alleles has
provided provocative insights. For example, inactivating
one normal Kras allele was shown to greatly accelerate
the penetrance and aggressiveness of lung cancer in mice
exposed to a mutagen that induces a high frequency of
Kras point mutations (Zhang et al. 2001). Based on our
understanding of Ras biochemistry, this result is unex-
pected, as oncogenic K-Ras should confer a dominant
cellular phenotype irrespective of the presence or ab-
sence of the normal protein. Yet the genetics indicates
that the normal K-Ras protein matters and somehow re-
strains the deleterious effects of its mutant sibling. An-
other major advance was the development of strains of
“knock-in” mice that were engineered to conditionally
express oncogenic K-RasG12D from the endogenous Kras
promoter. Remarkably, biochemical investigation of pri-
mary cell lineages from these animals revealed little or
no activation of downstream effector signaling pathways
even in the presence of elevated levels of Ras-GTP
(Guerra et al. 2003; Braun et al. 2004; Tuveson et al.
2004). However, despite the apparent ability of normal
cells to moderate the downstream consequences of hy-
peractive Ras, these mice are strongly predisposed to the
development of fatal pancreatic, lung, and hematologic
cancers (Guerra et al. 2003; Hingorani et al. 2003; Braun
et al. 2004; Tuveson et al. 2004).

A most surprising recent discovery was that HRAS and
KRAS mutations are tolerated in the germline and un-
derlie disorders of the Noonan syndrome spectrum (for
review, see Schubbert et al. 2007). These conditions,
which include Noonan, Costello, and cardio–facio–cuta-
neous syndromes, are characterized by facial abnormali-
ties, heart defects, and impaired growth and develop-
ment. The germline KRAS mutations found in these in-
dividuals introduce novel amino acid substitutions that

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

are not found in cancer and encode K-Ras proteins that
display intermediate biochemical and functional proper-
ties (i.e., they are less activated than oncogenic K-Ras,
but deregulated compared with the wild-type protein)
(Niihori et al. 2006; Schubbert et al. 2006). Cancer is
uncommon in Noonan syndrome, although affected in-
fants frequently demonstrate a spectrum of hematologic
abnormalities, and occasionally develop juvenile myelo-
monocytic leukemia (for review, see Lauchle et al. 2006).
In contrast, the germline HRAS mutations found in Cos-
tello syndrome, which almost invariably alter codons 12
and 13, also occur as somatic mutations in cancer (Aoki
et al. 2005). Remarkably, persons with Costello syn-
drome are not exceptionally cancer prone. The tissues
that are perturbed developmentally (nervous system,
musculoskeletal system) overlap with the types of ma-
lignancies that are observed (rhabdomyosarcoma, neuro-
blastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma, and bladder cancer).
These data suggest that endogenous levels of activated
H-Ras are only transforming in the context of certain
tissues or the gene is expressed at low levels in most
types of cancer-initiating cells. HRAS mutations ac-
count for <1% of all cancer-associated RAS mutations.
The observation that many individuals with Costello
syndrome never develop cancer supports the idea that
mutant HRAS requires cooperating mutations for tu-
morigenesis. Interestingly, loss or silencing of the nor-
mal HRAS allele has been reported in some of the ma-
lignancies that arise in Costello syndrome patients. It is
remarkable that epithelial cancers that show a high in-
cidence of KRAS mutations have not been reported in
persons with either Noonan or Costello syndrome.
Whereas genetic ablation of either Nras or Hras is com-
patible with normal development, homozygous Kras
mutant embryos succumb in utero (Johnson et al. 1997;
Koera et al. 1997; Esteban et al. 2001). If KRAS is the
most important isoform for controlling developmental
programs, it logically follows that it would be activated
by somatic mutation in cancer cells far more often than
either HRAS or NRAS. Together, recent observations in
genetically engineered mice and human patients under-
score the intimate interrelationship of development and
cancer, and infer that most normal cell types have a re-
markable capacity to tolerate hyperactive Ras signaling
without deleterious phenotypic consequences. This is
the “meek” side of oncogenic Ras. However, the same
“macho” oncoprotein somehow overcomes the best ef-
forts to contain it, and ultimately contributes to about a
third of all human cancers. Understanding how cells re-
spond acutely to the stress of oncogenic Ras expression
and how these adaptive responses are subverted in can-
cer have emerged as central questions in the field.

Oncogenic Ras in context

A persistent theme in understanding the biology of Ras
in normal and malignant cells is the immense specificity
conferred by specific growth factor/receptor interactions,
the dose and duration of signaling, and different roles of
the H-Ras, K-Ras, and N-Ras isoforms (for review, see

Targeting oncogenic Ras

Marshall 1995; Downward 2006). Translating this com-
plexity into better treatments for cancers with RAS gene
mutations will require maintaining a healthy degree of
skepticism about any particular result with an aware-
ness of the potential limitations of specific experimental
systems. Investigators will need to integrate data from
human tumors, mouse models, and cell lines. The clinic
is always a good place to begin. Any analysis of onco-
genic Ras in cancer leads to the inexorable conclusion
that there is something special about KRAS. The reason
for this is uncertain, although emerging evidence sup-
ports the idea that differences within the C-terminal hy-
pervariable domains have profound effects on signal out-
put from different subcellular compartments (for review,
see Mor and Philips 2006). While it is uncertain why
primary human cancers frequently mutate KRAS, some-
times mutate NRAS, and rarely mutate HRAS, the im-
plications for developing and testing new therapeutic
strategies are clear—the isoform matters. Provocative
data that are obtained with oncogenic H-Ras or N-Ras
should be extended to K-Ras wherever possible. These
studies are best carried out in a primary tissue context
such as the pancreas where somatic KRAS mutations are
common, and should ideally exploit a system in which
oncogenic K-Ras is expressed from the endogenous pro-
moter. Along these lines, investigators who are studying
the biology of melanoma or myeloid leukemia might
consider models driven by NRAS, as this isoform is com-
monly mutated in these cancers. Patients can also pro-
vide clues about treatment strategies. For example, the
observation that effector pathways in primary murine
cancers that are initiated by K-RasG12D expression con-
tinue to respond robustly to cytokine growth factors
raises the possibility of therapeutically targeting pro-
teins upstream of Ras-GTP. However, genetic analysis of
lung tumors from patients who received small molecule
inhibitors of
receptor
showed that oncogenic KRAS mutations were predictive
of treatment failure (Pao et al. 2005). As additional tar-
geted agents are tested clinically, correlating RAS muta-
tion status with treatment responses should illuminate
general principles for inhibiting oncogenic Ras in differ-
ent tumor contexts. Well-designed preclinical trials in
genetically engineered mice and biochemical analysis of
tumors from these animals will also help to define both
the architecture of Ras signaling networks in primary
cells and potential approaches for achieving a beneficial
therapeutic index in vivo. Finally, data from animal
models should be integrated with high throughput analy-
sis in well-defined panels of cancer cell lines. Although
these studies must be interpreted with caution due to
potential artifacts from adaptation to life on plastic and
the lack of supporting stromal cells, looking across many
cell lines can reveal general patterns such as the depen-
dence of BRAF mutant cells, but not KRAS mutant cells,
on MEK signaling (Solit et al. 2005).

the epidermal growth factor

After three decades and thousands of reports, the Ras
field remains as dynamic and unsettled as ever. Onco-
genic Ras represents both a tantalizing target and formi-
dable obstacle to decreasing the burden of cancer

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

1991

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Diaz-Flores and Shannon

throughout the world. Together, the development of
many small molecules against aberrant signaling mol-
ecules, the possibility of modulating the tumor micro-
environment, and the availability of new tools for inter-
rogating oncogenic Ras in primary cells hold out promise
for substantial advances in the next few years.

Acknowledgments

We apologize to authors whose work we were not able to cite
due to format restrictions. We are indebted to Jennifer Lauchle
and David Tuveson for helpful conversations. The work in our
laboratory addressing hyperactive Ras signaling in cancer is sup-
ported by NIH grants CA72614 and CA104282, by a Leukemia
and Lymphoma Society SCOR award, and by the Department of
Defense Neurofibromatosis Research Program. E.D.-F. is the re-
cipient of a Young Investigator Award from the Children’s Tu-
mor Foundation.

References

Ancrile, B., Lim, K.-H., and Counter, C.M. 2007. Oncogenic
Ras-induced secretion of IL6 is required for tumorigenesis.
Genes & Dev. 21: 1714–1719.

Aoki, Y., Niihori, T., Kawame, H., Kurosawa, K., Ohashi, H.,
Tanaka, Y., Filocamo, M., Kato, K., Suzuki, Y., Kure, S., et al.
2005. Germline mutations in HRAS proto-oncogene cause
Costello syndrome. Nat. Genet. 37: 1038–1040.

Braun, B.S., Tuveson, D.A., Kong, N., Le, D.T., Kogan, S.C.,
Rozmus, J., Le Beau, M.M., Jacks, T.E., and Shannon, K.M.
2004. Somatic activation of oncogenic Kras in hematopoietic
cells initiates a rapidly fatal myeloproliferative disorder.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 101: 597–602.

Downward, J. 2003. Targeting RAS signalling pathways in can-

cer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 3: 11–22.

Downward, J. 2006. Signal transduction. Prelude to an anniver-

sary for the RAS oncogene. Science 314: 433–434.

Esteban, L.M., Vicario-Abejon, C., Fernandez-Salguero, P., Fern-
andez-Medarde, A., Swaminathan, N., Yienger, K., Lopez, E.,
Malumbres, M., McKay, R., Ward, J.M., et al. 2001. Targeted
genomic disruption of H-ras and N-ras, individually or in
combination, reveals the dispensability of both loci for
mouse growth and development. Mol. Cell Biol. 21: 1444–
1452.

Guerra, C., Mijimolle, N., Dhawahir, A., Dubus, P., Barradas,
M., Serrano, M., Campuzano, V., and Barbacid, M. 2003. Tu-
mor induction by an endogenous K-ras oncogene is highly
dependent on cellular context. Cancer Cell 4: 111–120.

Hingorani, S.R., Petricoin, E.F., Maitra, A., Rajapakse, V., King,
C., Jacobetz, M.A., Ross, S., Conrads, T.P., Veenstra, T.D.,
Hitt, B.A., et al. 2003. Preinvasive and invasive ductal pan-
creatic cancer and its early detection in the mouse. Cancer
Cell 4: 437–450.

Johnson, L., Greenbaum, D., Cichowski, K., Mercer, K., Mur-
phy, E., Schmitt, E., Bronson, R.T., Umanoff, H., Edelmann,
W., Kucherlapati, R., et al. 1997. K-ras is an essential gene in
the mouse with partial functional overlap with N-ras. Genes
& Dev. 11: 2468–2481.

Koera, K., Nakamura, K., Nakao, K., Miyoshi, J., Toyoshima, K.,
Hatta, T., Otani, H., Aiba, A., and Katsuki, M., 1997. K-ras is
essential for the development of the mouse embryo. Onco-
gene 15: 1151–1159.

Lauchle, J.O., Braun, B.S., Loh, M.L., and Shannon, K. 2006.
Inherited predispositions and hyperactive Ras in myeloid

1992

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

leukemogenesis. Pediatr. Blood Cancer 46: 579–585.

Lim, K.H. and Counter, C.M. 2005. Reduction in the require-
ment of oncogenic Ras signaling to activation of PI3K/AKT
pathway during tumor maintenance. Cancer Cell 8: 381–
392.

Marshall, C. 1995. Specificity of receptor tyrosine kinase sig-
naling: Transient versus sustained extracellular signal-regu-
lated kinase activation. Cell 80: 179–185.

Mor, A. and Philips, M.R. 2006. Compartmentalized Ras/MAPK

signaling. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 24: 771–800.

Niihori, T., Aoki, Y., Narumi, Y., Neri, G., Cave, H., Verloes,
A., Okamoto, N., Hennekam, R.C., Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.,
Wieczorek, D., et al. 2006. Germline KRAS and BRAF mu-
tations in cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome. Nat. Genet. 38:
294–296.

Pao, W., Wang, T.Y., Riely, G.J., Miller, V.A., Pan, Q., Ladanyi,
M., Zakowski, M.F., Heelan, R.T., Kris, M.G., and Varmus,
H.E. 2005. KRAS mutations and primary resistance of lung
adenocarcinomas to gefitinib or erlotinib. PLoS Med. 2: e17.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020017.

Schubbert, S., Zenker, M., Rowe, S.L., Boll, S., Klein, C., Bollag,
G., van der Burgt, I., Musante, L., Kalscheuer, V., Wehner,
L.E., et al. 2006. Germline KRAS mutations cause Noonan
syndrome. Nat. Genet. 38: 331–336.

Schubbert, S., Shannon, K., and Bollag, G. 2007. Hyperactive
Ras in developmental disorders and cancer. Nat. Rev. Can-
cer 7: 295–308.

Solit, D.B., Garraway, L.A., Pratilas, C.A., Sawai, A., Getz, G.,
Basso, A., Ye, Q., Lobo, J.M., She, Y., Osman, I., et al. 2005.
BRAF mutation predicts sensitivity to MEK inhibition. Na-
ture 439: 358–362.

Sparmann, A. and Bar-Sagi, D. 2004. Ras-induced interleukin-8
expression plays a critical role in tumor growth and angio-
genesis. Cancer Cell 6: 447–458.

Tuveson, D.A., Shaw, A.T., Willis, N.A., Silver, D.P., Jackson,
E.L., Chang, S., Mercer, K.L., Grochow, R., Hock, H., Crow-
ley, D., et al. 2004. Endogenous oncogenic K-rasG12D stimu-
lates proliferation and widespread neoplastic and develop-
mental defects. Cancer Cell 5: 375–387.

Vetter, I.R. and Wittinghofer, A. 2001. The guanine nucleotide-
binding switch in three dimensions. Science 294: 1299–
1304.

Wigmore, S.J., Fearon, K.C., Sangster, K., Maingay, J.P., Garden,
O.J., and Ross, J.A. 2002. Cytokine regulation of constitutive
production of interleukin-8 and -6 by human pancreatic can-
cer cell lines and serum cytokine concentrations in patients
with pancreatic cancer. Int. J. Oncol. 21: 881–886.

Yang, F.C., Ingram, D.A., Chen, S., Hingtgen, C.M., Ratner, N.,
Monk, K.R., Clegg, T., White, H., Mead, L., Wenning, M.J., et
al. 2003. Neurofibromin-deficient Schwann cells secrete a
potent migratory stimulus for Nf1+/− mast cells. J. Clin. In-
vest. 112: 1851–1861.

Zhang, Z., Wang, Y., Vikis, H.G., Johnson, L., Liu, G., Li, J.,
Anderson, M.W., Sills, R.C., Hong, H.L., Devereux, T.R., et
al. 2001. Wildtype Kras2 can inhibit lung carcinogenesis in
mice. Nat. Genet. 29: 25–33.

Zhu, Y., Ghosh, P., Charnay, P., Burns, D.K., and Parada, L.F.
2002. Neurofibromas in NF1: Schwann cell origin and role of
tumor environment. Science 296: 920–922.

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Targeting oncogenic Ras
  
Ernesto Diaz-Flores and Kevin Shannon
  
Genes Dev. 
Access the most recent version at doi:

2007, 

 21:

10.1101/gad.1587907
 

Related Content

Oncogenic Ras-induced secretion of IL6 is required for tumorigenesis
Brooke Ancrile, Kian-Huat Lim and Christopher M. Counter
Genes Dev. July , 2007 21: 1714-1719
 
  

References
  

License
  
Email Alerting
Service

This article cites 26 articles, 7 of which can be accessed free at:
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/21/16/1989.full.html#ref-list-1
 
  
Articles cited in:
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/21/16/1989.full.html#related-urls
 
  

Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top
right corner of the article or 
  

click here.

 

Copyright © 2007, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

