Cell Stem Cell

Article

Cell of Origin and Microenvironment Contribution
for NF1-Associated Dermal Neuroﬁbromas

Lu Q. Le,1,2,3 Tracey Shipman,1,2 Dennis K. Burns,4 and Luis F. Parada1,2,*
1Department of Developmental Biology
2Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for Basic Research on Nerve Growth and Regeneration
3Department of Dermatology
4Department of Pathology
The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9133, USA
*Correspondence: luis.parada@utsouthwestern.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.stem.2009.03.017

SUMMARY

The tumor predisposition disorder neuroﬁbromatosis
type I (NF1) is one of the most common genetic disor-
ders of the nervous system. It is caused by mutations
in the Nf1 tumor-suppressor gene, which encodes
a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) that negatively
regulates p21-RAS. Development of malignant nerve
tumors and neuroﬁbromas occurs frequently in NF1.
However, little is known about the molecular mecha-
nisms mediating the initiation and progression of these
complex tumors, or the identity of the speciﬁc cell type
that gives rise to dermal or cutaneous neuroﬁbromas.
In this study, we identify a population of stem/progen-
itor cells residing in the dermis termed skin-derived
precursors (SKPs) that, through loss of Nf1, form
neuroﬁbromas. We propose that SKPs, or their deriv-
atives, are the cell of origin of dermal neuroﬁbroma.
We also provide evidence that additional signals
from nonneoplastic cells in the tumor microenviron-
ment play essential roles in neuroﬁbromagenesis.

INTRODUCTION

In the classic ‘‘initiation and promotion’’ experiments involving
two-stage mouse skin carcinogenesis,
increasing the time
interval between initiation with 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene
(DMBA) and promotion with 12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-
acetate (TPA) had no effect on papilloma formation (Stenback
et al., 1981). This implied that the tumor-initiating cells harbor
the mutations prior to tumor promotion. Because epidermal
epithelial cells have a short life span, tumor-initiating cells are
likely epithelial stem/progenitor cells, suggesting that squamous
cell carcinoma of the skin may originate in the stem cells. In fact,
recent progress in the ﬁeld of stem cell research points to the
importance of stem cells in the initiation and maintenance of
many cancers, including leukemia, sarcomas, blastomas, and
carcinomas (Al-Hajj and Clarke, 2004; Gao, 2008; Miller et al.,
2005; Reya et al., 2001; Singh et al., 2004). This body of evidence
is based largely on the isolation of cancer stem cells from tumors
via cell markers or functional assays. However, for many types of
cancer, the cell(s) of origin—i.e., the cell(s) that directly initiate
and form a tumor—remain unknown.

(NF1)

The tumor predisposition disorder von Recklinghausen’s
is one of the most common
neuroﬁbromatosis type I
genetic disorders of the nervous system, affecting 1 in 3500 indi-
viduals worldwide (Szudek et al., 2000; Trovo-Marqui and Tajara,
2006). Current treatment options for NF1 are primarily limited to
surgery and longitudinal surveillance. NF1 patients have a wide
spectrum of clinical presentations,
including developmental,
pigment, or neoplastic aberrations of the skin, nervous system,
bones, endocrine organs, blood vessels, and eyes. The cardinal
features of NF1 are cafe´ au lait macules and axillary and groin
freckling, combined with multiple peripheral and central nerve
tumors (Cichowski and Jacks, 2001; Le and Parada, 2007;
Ward and Gutmann, 2005; Zhu and Parada, 2001).

the nerve ﬁbers,

The development of neuroﬁbromas, the most frequent tumor in
NF1, and malignant nerve tumors represents a serious complica-
tion of NF1. These are unique and complex tumors that contain
proliferating Schwann-like cells and other local supporting
elements of
including perineurial cells,
ﬁbroblasts, and blood vessels, as well as inﬁltration of mast cells.
Neuroﬁbromas are classiﬁed into three subtypes: cutaneous
(dermal), subcutaneous, and plexiform neuroﬁbromas. Dermal
forms are exclusively in the skin and occur in virtually all individ-
uals with NF1. They initially appear at puberty and increase in
number with age and during pregnancy, implicating a requisite
hormonal component (Ferner, 2007; Lakkis and Tennekoon,
2000). Although similar to dermal neuroﬁbromas at the cellular
and ultrastructural levels, plexiform neuroﬁbromas develop along
a nerve plexus. They occur in about 30% of NF1 individuals and
are virtually pathognomonic of the disease (Ferner, 2007). Unlike
their dermal counterparts, plexiform neuroﬁbromas are thought
to be congenital and progressively enlarge throughout life. The
temporally and spatially distinct clinical presentation of dermal
versus plexiform neuroﬁbromas supports the hypothesis that
these neuroﬁbromas may originate from distinct progenitor cells.
Thus, as elaborated below, a unique feature of NF1 is the appear-
ance of these complex multicellular and idiotypic tumors at two
different times (embryonic versus adolescent) and in two distinct
locations (nerve plexus versus dermal nerve twigs).

The development of genetic murine models for plexiform
neuroﬁbroma has permitted identiﬁcation of the origin of these
tumors, demonstrating that they originate from embryonic neural
crest-derived progenitors (Cichowski et al., 1999; Joseph et al.,
2008; Vogel et al., 1999; Wu et al., 2008; Zheng et al., 2008; Zhu
et al., 2002). Another indication of the dual origin of dermal and
plexiform tumors is that mice that develop plexiform tumors

Cell Stem Cell 4, 453–463, May 8, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 453

Cell Stem Cell

Cell of Origin for Dermal Neuroﬁbroma

Figure 1. SKPs Are Multipotent Progenitor
Cells in the Dermis
Isolation of neural stem/progenitor cells from the
skin and brain. Phase photomicrograph of neuro-
spheres derived from mouse skin (A) and subven-
tricular zone (SVZ) (B). Under the same culturing
conditions, bone marrow cells did not
form
spheres (C). Both neurosphere cells puriﬁed from
skin (D and F) and subventricular zone (E and G)
express the neural stem cell markers nestin and
GFAP, respectively. Under differentiating condi-
tions, SKP-derived spheres differentiate into
neurons that express bIII tubulin (H), glial cells
that express S100b (I), and adipocytes containing
characteristic intracellular lipid droplets (J), as
demonstrated by oil red O staining (K).

conditions, we did not observe any
sphere formation when we cultured
bone marrow cells (Figure 1), indicating
that these culture conditions have some
speciﬁcity for neural stem/progenitor
cells. As previously demonstrated by
Miller and colleagues, SKPs can be prop-
agated in vitro under ‘‘undifferentiated’’
conditions for more than ﬁve passages
and exhibit a surface marker expression
proﬁle similar
to that of adult neural
stem cells derived from brain dentate
gyrus or subventricular zone, including nestin and glial ﬁbrillary
acidic protein (GFAP)
(Figure 1). In addition, SKPs also ex-
pressed ﬁbronectin as previously reported (Toma et al., 2001).
We also conﬁrmed their ability to generate neural crest deriva-
tives including Schwann cells, neurons, and adipocytes
(Figure 1). These results are consistent with the adult stem/
progenitor cell nature of SKPs.

We next tested the capability to ablate genes of interest in
SKPs. We crossed a broadly expressed CMV promoter-driven,
tamoxifen-inducible Cre transgene (CMV-CreERT2)
(Hayashi
and McMahon, 2002) into the Flox-stop-Flox ROSA26 reporter
background (Soriano, 1999) to generate CMV-CreERT2;ROSA26
mice. When SKPs derived from these mice were X-gal stained
following a 48 hr exposure to 1 mM 4-hydroxy tamoxifen, they
all turned blue (Figure 2). These results indicated that 4-hydroxy
tamoxifen, via Cre activity, can mediate recombination at the
ROSA26 locus in these cells and that the system can be adapted
for the recombination of ﬂoxed alleles.

Ex Vivo Ablation of NF1 in SKPs to Induce In Vivo
Neuroﬁbroma in Mice
Many cells can give rise to tumors when implanted ectopically.
For example, oncogenic ﬁbroblasts can give rise to subcuta-
neous sarcomas (Gray et al., 1993), and embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) can give rise to ectopic teratomas (Nussbaum et al.,
2007). In the context of NF1, neuroﬁbroma formation requires
unique interactions between nullizygous Schwann cell precur-
sors, mast cells, and peripheral nerves that then engage aberrant
ﬁbroblastic, angiogenic, and ensheathing cell reactions (Yang
et al., 2006, 2008; Le and Parada, 2007; Zhu et al., 2002) To

with 100% frequency fail to develop dermal tumors, consistent
with the idea that differing cells are at play. The fact that dermal
tumors appear in adolescence, as well as the increasing appre-
ciation for the existence of a variety of adult tissue stem cells, has
led us to consider adult progenitor cells as a source.

Miller and coworkers identiﬁed and pioneered the study of
a population of neural crest-like stem cells present in both human
and mouse dermis, named skin-derived precursors (SKPs), that
can differentiate along neuronal and glial lineages (Fernandes
et al., 2006; McKenzie et al., 2006; Toma et al., 2001; Toma
et al., 2005). The location and pluripotency of these cells made
them an attractive potential source for the origin of dermal neuro-
ﬁbromas. In the present study, we show that Nf1-deﬁcient SKPs
can give rise to classic plexiform or dermal neuroﬁbromas contin-
gent on their local microenvironment and exhibit the same prop-
erties as the embryonic Schwann cell progenitors that give rise to
plexiform neuroﬁbromas. Thus, our data point to skin-derived
neural progenitors (SKPs), or their derivatives, as the cell of origin
of NF1-associated dermal neuroﬁbromas. Furthermore, loss of
Nf1 in SKPs is required but not sufﬁcient to induce tumors, sug-
gesting an essential
the tumor microenvironment,
including neurons and hormones, in neuroﬁbroma development.

role for

RESULTS

Isolation and Differentiation of Multipotent Neural
Precursors from the Skin
We cultured mouse SKPs that were isolated from either back,
neck, or ear skin using a standardized neurosphere-forming
assay (Biernaskie et al., 2006). Importantly, under the same

454 Cell Stem Cell 4, 453–463, May 8, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

Cell Stem Cell

Cell of Origin for Dermal Neuroﬁbroma

Figure 2. Schematic Representation of the
Experimental Design to Generate a Novel
Dermal Neuroﬁbroma Model
SKPs are puriﬁed from skin on neck, ears, or back
for deletion of Nf1 ex vivo with 4-OH-tamoxifen.
The SKPs are then analyzed by X-gal staining
and PCR genotyping to ensure successful recom-
bination at the ROSA26 and Nf1 loci, respectively.
The Nf1 /  SKPs are then autologously trans-
planted back into the same animal either intrader-
mally/subcutaneously in the right ﬂank or
in
proximity to the right sciatic nerve. As controls,
Nf1+/  or Nf1+/+ SKPs are transplanted on the
left side in the same manner.

date, there are no reports of a cell type that, when ectopically
implanted, can generate a tumor that even remotely resembles
the multicellular and structural
idiosyncracies of NF1-related
neuroﬁbromas. We wished to examine whether Nf1-deﬁcient
SKPs could be the elusive cell of origin of dermal neuroﬁbromas.
To obtain Nf1 /  SKPs, we ﬁrst crossed CMV-CreERT2 trans-
genic mice with Nf1ﬂox/-;ROSA26 mice (Zhu et al., 2002) to obtain
CMV-CreERT2;Nf1ﬂox/-;ROSA26 mice. We then harvested skin
from the backs and necks of these mice, isolated SKPs, and
exposed them to 4-OH-tamoxifen. Cre-mediated recombination
would be expected to generate Nf1 / ;LacZ+ SKPs. This was
veriﬁed by genomic analysis of the Nf1 gene and by X-gal stain-
ing for LacZ expression (Figure 2).

NF1-associated plexiform and dermal neuroﬁbromas always
develop in close association with peripheral nerves, whether it
is a plexus, in the former case, or dermal twigs, in the latter. We
implanted the Nf1 / ;LacZ+ SKPs into the same animal, i.e., as
an autograft, to avoid immunological rejection and to maintain
a heterozygous microenvironment (Figure 2). When implanted
intradermally/subcutaneously, we observed no tumor/neuroﬁ-
broma formation over the course of 7 months (data not shown).
We reasoned that one possible explanation for failure of tumor
engraftment might be technical, caused by ineffective associa-
tion of the mutant SKPs with terminal peripheral nerve projec-
tions. The sciatic nerve, a much larger nerve than those found
in dermis, is a common site of plexiform neuroﬁbromas in NF1.
We therefore next reimplanted the SKPs into the sciatic nerves,
where close proximity to the nerve could be achieved. The auto-
logously transplanted Nf1 / ;LacZ+ SKPs gave rise to sciatic
plexiform neuroﬁbromas within 2 months postimplantation
100% of the time, whereas the transplanted heterozygous
(Nf1+/ ) SKPs showed no signs of tumor growth (Figure 3A; and
see below). The neuroﬁbromas exhibited the characteristics of
human plexiform neuroﬁbromas, being poorly circumscribed,
composed primarily of spindle cells, and expressing the

tumor

In addition,

initiation that

Schwann cell marker S100b (Figures 3A
and 4). We also observed excess collagen
deposition (data not shown) and heavy
inﬁltration of mast cells into these plexi-
form neuroﬁbromas, a critical component
of
is commonly
observed in human neuroﬁbromas (Yang
et al., 2003, 2008) (Figure 3A). To verify
that the tumors were arising from the
transplanted SKPs and not from some paracrine tumor induction
of host sciatic nerve cells, we took advantage of the fact that the
transplanted SKPs are lacZ positive and the hosts are not. X-gal
staining of the tumors demonstrated that the tumor cells were
lacZ positive, and we further demonstrated that the tumor cells
had undergone loss of heterozygosity (LOH) for the Nf1 locus
(Figure 3B), thus indicating that the neuroﬁbromas were derived
from the transplanted SKPs.
the tumors were
conﬁned to the site of Nf1 /  SKP implantation and resolved
into normal nerve architecture distally (Figure 4). In all experi-
ments, control Nf1-heterozygous SKPs (isolated from the same
mouse but not treated with tamoxifen) were simultaneously
transplanted into the left sciatic nerve. We observed only slight
nerve hyperplasia, and no pathological evidence of neuroﬁbroma
was seen. These data indicate that when placed in a favorable
microenvironment (in proximity to a peripheral nerve), Nf1-deﬁ-
cient SKPs can give rise to bona ﬁde plexiform neuroﬁbromas.
As such, these results show that SKPs have the full potential to
generate neuroﬁbromas and suggest that they may be the cell
of origin of dermal neuroﬁbroma. Moreover, the essential role of
peripheral nerves and the tumor microenvironment in neuroﬁ-
broma genesis is underscored.

In Vivo Ablation of Nf1 in the Skin to Induce Dermal
Neuroﬁbromas
Although we achieved neuroﬁbroma formation by transplanta-
tion of puriﬁed, Nf1-ablated SKPs, we wished to identify whether
endogenous SKPs undergo neuroﬁbromagenesis in situ in
response to in vivo Nf1 LOH. To address this issue, we ﬁrst
tested the efﬁciency of tamoxifen-mediated Cre activation in
SKPs in vivo. CMV-CreERT2;ROSA26 mice were subjected to
topical tamoxifen administration onto the upper back twice
a day for 5 consecutive days. Five days after the last application,
we harvested the skin for both X-gal staining and puriﬁcation of
SKPs for subsequent X-gal staining. We observed that both

Cell Stem Cell 4, 453–463, May 8, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 455

Cell Stem Cell

Cell of Origin for Dermal Neuroﬁbroma

the topical

indicating that

the gross skin and also isolated SKPs were positive for X-gal
staining,
tamoxifen was able to
penetrate the skin and induce recombination at the ﬂox sites
within SKP DNA (Figure 5A). We next applied this tamoxifen
administration protocol onto the back and neck skin of neonatal
CMV-CreERT2;Nf1ﬂox/  mice to ablate NF1 expression in SKPs
in vivo. Six to seven months posttamoxifen application, we
observed cutaneous nodules similar to human dermal neuroﬁ-
bromas at the application site on these mice (Figure 5B). These
tumors were analyzed histopathologically, and all results indi-
cated that these nodules were, in fact, dermal neuroﬁbromas
(Figure 5B). Analyses included hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
staining, S100b expression as well as other markers of Schwann
cells, and Leder staining for mast cell inﬁltration. These results
further indicate that the cells of origin for dermal neuroﬁbroma
likely reside locally in the skin, since neuroﬁbromas only
developed at the site of tamoxifen application on the back and
not at distant sites. Moreover, because the latency period is 6–
7 months from the time of initiation to visible tumor development,
it also suggests that the cells of origin of dermal neuroﬁbroma are
likely stem/progenitor cells and that other genetic/microenviron-
mental events, in addition to loss of NF1, participate in dermal
neuroﬁbroma development. In this regard, we observed that
these mice have enlarged cutaneous nerves in the proximity of
the dermal tumors (Figures 5Bb and 5Bc, arrow). Tamoxifen
penetration of the skin would be expected to induce Cre-medi-
ated recombination in diverse cell types including SKPs. For
example, terminally differentiated cells of many sources as well
as epidermal and hair follicle stem cells might undergo Nf1
loss. However, among these diverse cell types, only SKPs
(Figure 3) are known to have the potential to generate the
complex multicellular neuroﬁbroma.

Nf1-Deﬁcient SKPs Give Rise to Classic Dermal
Neuroﬁbromas
In patients with NF1, dermal neuroﬁbromas typically ﬁrst appear
around puberty and subsequently continue to appear with time.
These tumors have also been shown to increase in number and
size during pregnancy and,
in certain cases, regress after
delivery (Dugoff and Sujansky, 1996; Roth et al., 2008). These
observations indicate that altered levels of certain hormones at
puberty or during pregnancy may provide an important trigger
to initiate or enhance dermal neuroﬁbroma formation. Therefore,
we next tested whether the hormonal milieu during pregnancy
can facilitate induction of dermal neuroﬁbroma development

dehyde, and left and right sciatic nerves were harvested for gross X-gal
staining of whole nerves. The nerves were then postﬁxed in formalin for
parafﬁn sectioning and subsequently counterstained with nuclear fast red.
Representative X-gal stainings of whole left and right sciatic nerves show
that the enlarged right sciatic nerve is X-gal positive ([Bc], right panel), but
not the control left sciatic nerve ([Bc], left panel). The corresponding parafﬁn
sections also show histological evidence of neuroﬁbroma with X-gal-positive,
disordered spindle-cell morphology, with ovoid and spindle-shaped nuclei for
the right sciatic nerve (Bb), but not the control left sciatic nerve (Ba). The left
and right sciatic nerves were also subjected to semiquantitative PCR genotyp-
ing (Bd). The recombined loxP sites (Dﬂoxed Nf1) at the Nf1 locus were
detected in the tumor on the right sciatic nerve (Bd), further indicating that
the neuroﬁbromas are derived from the implanted SKPs (Flox Nf1, ﬂoxed
Nf1 allele; Nf1 KO, mutant Nf1 allele).

Figure 3. Neuroﬁbroma Formation Requires Proximity to the Nerves
and Develops from Implanted SKPs
(A) H&E staining of enlarged right sciatic nerve where Nf1 / ;LacZ+ SKPs had
been implanted ([Ab], original magniﬁcation 203; [Ad], original magniﬁcation
403) showing features consistent with plexiform neuroﬁbroma, including
disordered, convoluted bundles of cells exhibiting spindle-cell morphology,
with ovoid and spindle-shaped nuclei and adjacent ﬁne ﬁbrillar stroma. There
is also massive mast cell inﬁltration (black arrows) within the tumor, as demon-
strated by Leder staining (Af), which stains mast cells red. As shown by H&E
staining, these features are absent in the left sciatic nerve where control
Nf1+/ ;LacZ- SKPs were implanted ([Aa], original magniﬁcation 203; [Ac], orig-
inal magniﬁcation 403) and Leder staining (Ae).
(B) SKPs were puriﬁed from skin taken from neck, ears, or back of CMV-
CreERT2;Nf1ﬂox/-;ROSA26ﬂox-stop-ﬂox mice and exposed to 4-OH-tamoxifen to
induce recombination at the ROSA26 and Nf1 loci. Two to three months after
SKP implantation, mice underwent total body perfusion with 4% paraformal-

456 Cell Stem Cell 4, 453–463, May 8, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

Cell Stem Cell

Cell of Origin for Dermal Neuroﬁbroma

Figure 4. Neuroﬁbroma Formation at the
Site of NF1 /  SKP Implantation
H&E staining of a longitudinal section of right
sciatic nerve ([A], original magniﬁcation 43)
showing neuroﬁbroma formation with features
consistent with plexiform neuroﬁbroma, only at
the site of SKP implantation ([D], original magniﬁ-
cation 203; [E], original magniﬁcation 403), and
not at the site further away from where the Nf1 / 
SKPs were implanted ([B], original magniﬁcation
203;
[C], original magniﬁcation 403). These
neuroﬁbromas are positive for the Schwann cell
marker S100b ([F], original magniﬁcation 203;
[G], original magniﬁcation 403).

DISCUSSION

Classic chemotherapy targets the differ-
ential proliferative capacity of tumor cells
versus normal cells. While variably effec-
tive, new strategies are now being devel-
oped that target speciﬁc tumor-causing
and -propagating events within the tumor.
These more-recent strategies aim to limit
nonspeciﬁc effects of the therapy while
neutralizing essential components of the
tumor phenotype. Insights into potential
new therapeutic targets will be greatly enhanced by an increased
understanding of the natural history of tumor development and
the identiﬁcation of the cells that are susceptible to mutation
and to giving rise to tumors. In NFI, identiﬁcation of the cell of
origin of dermal neuroﬁbromas has yet to be resolved. Plexiform
neuroﬁbromas are congenital and develop along nerve plexuses,
and they are therefore thought to derive from the embryonic
Schwann cell lineage (Wu et al., 2008; Yang et al., 2008; Zheng
et al., 2008). On the other hand, dermal neuroﬁbromas ﬁrst
appear around puberty and arise exclusively in the skin, suggest-
ing that these two highly similar tumors arise from distinct cells:
one present in the embryo and the other present in the adolescent
and adult skin.

Tumor Cell of Origin
Major advances in the development of in vitro and in vivo assays
have enabled identiﬁcation and characterization of many types
of adult stem cells as well as functional evaluation of the tumor-
igenic effects of cancer-related genetic alterations in these pop-
ulations of stem cells (Stindl, 2008). In addition, the discovery of
the Philadelphia chromosome by Newell and Hungerford has
had far-reaching implications in our understanding of the genetic
basis and the stem cell origin of some types of cancer (Nowell
and Hungerford, 1960). Patients in the chronic phase of chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML) have elevated myeloid cell
numbers. However, upon blast crisis, the acutely leukemic cells
can be any of the cell types within the hematopoetic lineage, indi-
cating that CML is a disease of the hematopoetic stem cell
(Wong and Witte, 2004). The role of stem and progenitor cells
has recently been addressed in many solid tissue cancers as
well, from squamous cell carcinoma of the skin to glioma in the
brain (Al-Hajj and Clarke, 2004; Gao, 2008; Miller et al., 2005;

Cell Stem Cell 4, 453–463, May 8, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 457

from Nf1 /  SKPs in the skin. We again harvested skin from the
backs and necks of male and female CMV-CreERT2;Nf1ﬂox/ ;
ROSA26 mice for SKP isolation. We then exposed the CMV-
CreERT2;Nf1ﬂox/ ;ROSA26 SKPs ex vivo to 4-OH-tamoxifen to
induce NF1 deletion and dermally reimplanted the Nf1 / ;
LacZ+ SKPs back to the same animals. The reimplantations
were placed in the dorsal/sacral area to prevent the mice from
scratching at the site of implantation. Both male and female
mice were then housed in the same cage prior to reimplantation
to facilitate breeding, and all female mice eventually became
pregnant. Strikingly, only the female mice, but not the male
mice, developed cutaneous nodules at the graft site within 3–4
months post-SKP implantation (Figure 6). Because the SKPs
are lacZ positive and the hosts are not, we performed X-gal
staining on the tumors, which turned blue (Figure 7), indicating
that the tumors derived from the transplanted SKPs. We per-
formed histological analysis of these tumors using the published
classiﬁcation scheme for peripheral nerve sheath tumors in
murine models (Stemmer-Rachamimov et al., 2004). Parafﬁn
sections were assessed with S100b and GAP43 immunohisto-
chemistry (Schwann cell markers), and Leder (mast cell) and
H&E staining. The tumors were circumscribed but unencapsu-
lated and contained abundant mast cell inﬁltration and S100b+
and S100b  spindle-shaped cells in a disorderly arrangement
(Figure 7). Thus, all tumor characteristics were consistent with
classic dermal neuroﬁbroma. These results indicate that loss of
Nf1 expression in a permissive environment can effectively
induce SKPs to form dermal neuroﬁbromas. Moreover, as in
the human condition, pregnancy accelerates and enhances
tumor appearance, presumably due to hormonal inﬂuence. We
conclude from these data that SKPs, or their derivatives, can
be the cell of origin for NF1-associated dermal neuroﬁbromas.

Cell Stem Cell

Cell of Origin for Dermal Neuroﬁbroma

Figure 5. Topical Application of Tamoxifen to the Skin for In Vivo Deletion of Nf1 in SKPs Induced Dermal Neuroﬁbromas
(A) The CMV-CreERT2;ROSA26ﬂox-stop-ﬂox mice were painted with tamoxifen topically onto the back skin twice a day for 5 consecutive days. Five days after the last
application, the skin was harvested for both X-gal staining and puriﬁcation of SKPs for subsequent X-gal staining. Only skin and isolated SKPs derived from
tamoxifen-painted sites were positive for X-gal staining, indicating that the tamoxifen was able to penetrate the skin and recombine the ﬂox sites within the
SKP nuclei in vivo.
(B) (Ba) Tamoxifen was painted topically onto the upper back skin of neonatal CMV-CreERT2;Nf1ﬂox/- mice twice a day for 5 consecutive days. Six to seven months
posttamoxifen application, these mice developed cutaneous nodules similar to human dermal neuroﬁbroma at the tamoxifen application sites. (Bb) Represen-
tative H&E staining of these cutaneous nodules showing circumscribed, nonencapsulated, intradermal, spindle cell proliferation within the dermis (E, epidermis;
D, dermis; F, fat; M, muscle). The dermal neuroﬁbroma (NF, neuroﬁbroma) stroma has ﬁne wavy strands of collagen with associated spindle cells containing
elongated wavy nuclei. There is an enlarged cutaneous nerve just beneath the tumor, between the subcutaneous fat and muscle layer (open arrow; N, nerve).
These are classic features of dermal neuroﬁbroma (upper panel, original magniﬁcation 103; lower panel, original magniﬁcation 403). (Bc) Immunohistochemical
stains show spindle cells within neuroﬁbromas are positive for S-100b protein. The enlarged cutaneous nerve just beneath the tumor (arrow) served as the positive
control, and the epidermis served as the negative control (upper panel, original magniﬁcation 103; lower panel, original magniﬁcation 403). (Bd) Leder staining
showed heavy inﬁltration of mast cells (Red) within the dermal neuroﬁbroma (upper panel, original magniﬁcation 203; lower panel, original magniﬁcation 403).

Reya et al., 2001; Singh et al., 2004; Kwon et al., 2008; Zhu et al.,
2002).

Most speculation regarding the cell of origin of neuroﬁbromas
comes from genetic studies examining the participation of
differing cells including neural crest derivatives in the pathogen-
esis of many of the clinical presentations of NF1, including neuro-
ﬁbroma. In human neuroﬁbromas, Schwann cells with biallelic
Nf1 mutations are the most abundant cell type, consistent with
the notion that the tumors may initiate in Schwann cells or their
earlier precursors. Indeed, genetic mouse models have demon-
strated that NF1 gene deletion in the embryonic Schwann cell
lineage is the genetic bottleneck for neuroﬁbroma development
(Cichowski et al., 1999; Joseph et al., 2008; Vogel et al., 1999;
Wu et al., 2008; Zheng et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2002). In contrast,
conditional deletion of Nf1 from fetal neural crest stem cells
(NCSCs) using reliable Wnt-1-Cre transgenic mice leads to
transient increase in NCSC frequency and self-renewal, but not
tumorigenicity (Joseph et al., 2008), suggesting that later NCSC
derivatives may be the speciﬁc cell of origin of neuroﬁbroma.

458 Cell Stem Cell 4, 453–463, May 8, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

However, it is still debated whether the neuroﬁbroma-initiating
cell is a committed mature Schwann cell, an immature Schwann
cell, or a postcrest precursor cell. We and others have used well-
characterized Krox-20-Cre (Yang et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2002),
Plp-CreERT, and P0-CreERT (our unpublished data) transgenic
mice to conditionally delete Nf1 and have effectively generated
plexiform, but not dermal, neuroﬁbromas. These results indicate
that the cells that give rise to dermal neuroﬁbromas are not deriv-
atives of those that give rise to plexiform tumors, and do not
express this speciﬁc subset of promoters common to embryonic
Schwann cell precursors. Indeed, we have isolated SKPs from
the tamoxifen-inducible P0-CreERT;Nf1ﬂox/-;ROSA26 and Plp-
CreERT;Nf1ﬂox/:ROSA26 mice and exposed them to tamoxifen
and did not see induction of recombination at the ROSA26 locus
(see Figure S1 available online). Therefore, these Schwann cell
promoters are apparently not expressed in SKPs and accordingly
give rise to plexiform, but not dermal, neuroﬁbromas. One study
reported that plexiform neuroﬁbromas and dermal neuroﬁ-
bromas arise following inactivation of NF1 with a Desert

Cell Stem Cell

Cell of Origin for Dermal Neuroﬁbroma

Figure 6. Role of Steroid Hormones in
Dermal Neuroﬁbroma Development
SKPs were puriﬁed from skin on occipital scalp,
ears, and superior back of both male and female
mice for deletion of NF1 ex vivo with 4-OH-tamox-
ifen. The SKPs were then X-gal stained and PCR
genotyped to ensure successful recombination
at the ROSA26 and Nf1 loci, respectively. The
Nf1 /  SKPs were then autologously transplanted
back into the same animal either intradermally/
subcutaneously at dorsal, distal back (sacral
area). Both male and female mice are then housed
in the same cage to facilitate breeding. All female
mice eventually became pregnant. Subsequently,
within 3 months post-SKP implantation,
the
female mice, but not the male mice, developed
cutaneous nodules at the graft site.

Hedgehog (Dhh) promoter-driven Cre transgene (Wu et al., 2008),
suggesting that Dhh is expressed by SKPs. We do observe Dhh
protein expression in SKPs, although the level of expression is
variable between samples (Figure S2). Of note, Dhh is a widely
and robustly expressed neural crest precursor gene; thus it
cannot be ruled out that this promoter can be expressed in two
independent lineages that can then give rise to these two different
tumors. As such, we stress that the Dhh study does not provide
sufﬁcient detailed information for us to conclude that they
produce bona ﬁde dermal tumors.

SKPs
SKPs are self-renewing, multipotent neural stem/precursor cells,
identiﬁed in both human and mouse dermis (Fernandes et al.,

2006; McKenzie et al., 2006; Toma
et al., 2001, 2005) using neurosphere
culture conditions. They are distinct
from other known stem/precursor cells
within the skin (Fernandes et al., 2008). However, the exact
biological function and origin of SKPs are not fully understood.
Using Wnt1-Cre;ROSA26ﬂox/stop/ﬂox
compound transgenic
mice, which permanently express b-galactosidase in derivatives
of NCSCs, Fernandes et al. reported that SKPs derived from
these mice are b-galactosidase positive (Fernandes et al.,
2004). In addition, SKPs were shown to express a variety of
neural crest-associated transcription factors including Twist,
Sox9, Pax3, Slug, and Snail (Fernandes et al., 2004). We have
veriﬁed these properties in the cells used in the present study
(data not shown). Moreover, under differentiating conditions,
SKPs can generate neural cells (neurons, Schwann cells), meso-
dermal (smooth muscle) cells, and adipocytes, the same cell
types that are known to derive from NCSCs. Thus, these data

Figure 7. Dermal Neuroﬁbromas Arise from
Implanted Nf1 /  SKPs
(A) Cutaneous nodule formation at the site of SKP
implantation in female mice.
(B) X-gal staining showing the tumor/nodule within
the dermis and subcutaneous tissue is lacZ posi-
tive. However, the epidermis of the same tissue
(arrow), which is genetically unmodiﬁed host
tissue, is lacZ negative, indicating that the tumor
is derived from the implanted SKPs.
(C) X-gal staining of skin, where there is no SKP
implantation, showing this control skin is lacZ
negative.
(D) Representative H&E staining of these cuta-
neous nodules showing classic features of dermal
neuroﬁbroma (original magniﬁcation 203).
(E) Leder staining shows heavy inﬁltration of mast
cells (red) within the dermal neuroﬁbroma (original
magniﬁcation 203).
(F) Anti-GAP 43 and (G) anti-S100b
(F and G)
immunohistochemistry show that spindle cells in
the neuroﬁbroma are positive for the Schwann
cell markers GAP43 and S100b (original magniﬁ-
cation 203).

Cell Stem Cell 4, 453–463, May 8, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 459

Cell Stem Cell

Cell of Origin for Dermal Neuroﬁbroma

strongly support the theory that SKPs are multipotent neural
crest-related and possibly -derived precursors present in the
skin. Such relatedness to the cells previously identiﬁed to give
rise to plexiform neuroﬁbromas would explain the similarities in
gene expression and the unique potential to give rise to these
unique and rare multicellular tumors.

Role of Microenvironment
We undertook this study to test the hypothesis that SKPs were in
fact the source of dermal neuroﬁbromas in the context of Nf1
deletion. Initially we did not observe neuroﬁbroma formation
when Nf1 nullizygous SKPs were implanted intradermally.
However, in the human condition, dermal and plexiform neuroﬁ-
bromas are always physically associated with peripheral nerves,
and indeed, when Nf1 /  SKPs were implanted in proximity to
the sciatic nerve, they always gave rise to neuroﬁbromas.
SKPs have the capacity to myelinate unmyelinated peripheral
nerves in vivo (Biernaskie et al., 2007; McKenzie et al., 2006).
We therefore hypothesize that the microenvironment established
by neurons and their associated cells may inﬂuence SKPs to
preferentially differentiate toward the Schwann cell
lineage,
creating a ‘‘window of opportunity’’
in which Nf1-deﬁcient
progenitors become neuroﬁbromas.

Our studies reveal that the tumor microenvironment plays an
essential role in neuroﬁbroma genesis and that loss of Nf1 in
SKPs is required but not sufﬁcient for neuroﬁbroma develop-
ment. First, when Nf1-homozygous SKPs, which normally reside
in the dermis, were implanted in proximity to the sciatic nerve,
they transformed into plexiform neuroﬁbromas, which are
otherwise derived from embryonic Schwann cell progenitors
and form large tumors surrounding a peripheral nerve plexus.
Thus, remarkably, SKPs, when in normal association with
peripheral nerve twigs,
form limited size dermal nodules.
However, when placed in the presence of a nerve plexus micro-
environment, SKPs acquire the capacity to develop the typical
embryonic form of tumor. Second, when tamoxifen is applied
to the neck and superior dorsal back skin of neonatal CMV-
CreERT2;Nf1ﬂox/- mice, it takes 6–7 months before dermal neuro-
ﬁbromas appear at the tamoxifen application sites. The delay of
tumor appearance,
together with the restricted location,
suggests that the cell of origin of dermal neuroﬁbroma is in the
skin and that additional genetic and/or microenvironmental
cues are required for tumor development. For example, we
observed that these dermal neuroﬁbromas are always in prox-
imity to an enlarged cutaneous nerve and have a large number
of mast cells inﬁltrating the tumor (Figure 5B). It is feasible that
trauma to the skin and cutaneous nerves, such as from scratch-
ing, can induce nerve regeneration and hypertrophy, which in
turn recruits and activates the nearby Nf1-homozygous SKPs
to transform into a dermal neuroﬁbroma. This is in alignment
with the human clinical scenario, as it is known that trauma to
the skin of NF1 patients can induce dermal neuroﬁbroma forma-
tion (Riccardi, 1981). Third, when Nf1-homozygous SKPs were
autologously implanted intradermally/subcutaneously,
they
efﬁciently gave rise to dermal neuroﬁbromas only in female
mice that were pregnant at the time of implantation, and not in
male mice or in nonpregnant female mice. In the absence of
pregnancy, tumors took 7–8 months to appear, compared to
2–3 months in the former case. This feature again suggests

460 Cell Stem Cell 4, 453–463, May 8, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

that the hormonal milieu can be a critical contributor to dermal
neuroﬁbroma genesis. NF1 patients typically begin to develop
dermal neuroﬁbromas around puberty, and in female patients,
the number and size of neuroﬁbromas increases during preg-
nancy (Dugoff and Sujansky, 1996; Huson et al., 1988; Roth
et al., 2008). While levels of steroid hormones such as proges-
terone, testosterone, and 17b-estradiol are elevated during
pregnancy (Roth et al., 2008), the exact hormonal
inﬂuences
on neuroﬁbroma initiation and growth are currently not known.
17b-estradiol has been implicated in cell proliferation and tumor-
igenesis, speciﬁcally in breast, endometrial, and prostate
cancers. McLaughlin et al. reported that 5% of human neuroﬁ-
bromas expressed the estrogen receptor, while 75% expressed
the progesterone receptor (McLaughlin and Jacks, 2003). In
addition, Schwann cells synthesize progesterone and express
progesterone receptor (Jung-Testas et al., 1996), and neuroﬁ-
broma-derived Schwann cells have elevated proliferation rates
in response to progesterone (Overdiek et al., 2008). In human
pregnancy, progesterone levels are elevated more than 15 times
the preconception level, more than any other steroid hormone
(Gardner et al., 2007; Roth et al., 2008), and progesterone can
act as an inducer, transdifferentiating bone marrow stromal cells
into cells with a Schwann-like phenotype (Movaghar et al., 2008).
Thus, a compelling scenario is that elevation of steroid hormones
during pregnancy or puberty may be one possible factor that
drives the Nf1-deﬁcient SKPs toward Schwann cell differentia-
tion and tumor formation. In this regard, we have observed that
SKPs express both estrogen receptor and progesterone
receptor (data not shown).

The question remains as to why Nf1+/  mice do not develop
dermal neuroﬁbromas during puberty or pregnancy, as in
human. One possible explanation is that LOH necessary for
neuroﬁbroma development is impaired in mice. Perhaps, given
the short time of gestation and life span and a smaller neural
crest compartment compared with human, the Nf1+/  mice
do not have the necessary window of opportunity to undergo
effective LOH in target cells to initiate neuroﬁbroma formation.
Cichowski et al. (1999) addressed this issue elegantly when
they created chimeric mice by injecting LacZ-positive Nf1 / 
ESCs into wild-type C57BL/6 blastocysts. These mice devel-
oped microscopic plexiform neuroﬁbromas derived from the
injected ESCs, demonstrating the requirement of NF1 homozy-
gosity for tumor formation (Cichowski et al., 1999).

In a previously reported study utilizing a tissue-speciﬁc
knockout model using Cre/loxP technology, the Krox20-Cre;
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mice (an inefﬁcient Cre driver that generated some
Nf1 /  Schwann cell precursors and in an Nf1+/+ background)
did not develop plexiform neuroﬁbromas. On the other hand,
the Krox20-Cre;Nf1ﬂox/- mice (containing some Nf1 /  Schwann
cell precursors and in an Nf1+/  background) develop plexiform
neuroﬁbromas (Zhu et al., 2002). Yang et al. (2008) reported that
heterozygous mast cells can cooperate with nullizygous
Schwann cells to elicit tumor development. They noted that, as
in NF1 patients that harbor germline heterozygosity, LOH of Nf1
in the Schwann cell lineage must be rare and stochastic and
that this interaction with heterozygous mast cells must confer
a growth advantage. In the experimental setting, using a more
robust and widely expressed Desert Hedgehog Cre driver permits
neuroﬁbroma formation in Nf1 wild-type background (Wu et al.,

Cell Stem Cell

Cell of Origin for Dermal Neuroﬁbroma

2008). It is worth emphasizing that in this scenario, a large pool of
Schwann cell precursors undergo LOH simultaneously and can
therefore compete with the wild-type environment more effec-
tively than when only one or very few isolated Schwann cell
precursors undergo LOH. One possible advantage of having
a large pool of precursors undergoing LOH would be a rapid
and large increase in cytokine and growth factor secretion that
could be sufﬁcient to elicit wild-type mast cells without the need
for the hypersensitive heterozygous state of the latter. In contrast,
when only one or a few Schwann cell precursors undergo LOH,
a hypersensitive heterozygous mast cell, but not a wild-type
mast cell, would be in a position to respond. It is clear that, in addi-
tion to loss of Nf1, paracrine and endocrine signals in the tumor
microenvironment, such as neurons, hormones, mast cells, etc.,
are essential for tumorigenesis. In the physiologic scenario, we
envision a rare Schwann cell undergoing LOH that would normally
disappear except for the response of the mast cell that assists it to
form a tumor. In another scenario, supraphysiologic contribution
of a multitude of LOH cells may override the otherwise-required
contributions from other factors, such as heterozygous back-
ground or mast cells, to induce neuroﬁbroma development.

In our current dermal neuroﬁbroma model, complete loss of
Nf1 expression in SKPs is essential for neuroﬁbroma to develop,
but Nf1-heterozygous background is not required. However, we
believe this result cannot be fully interpreted at this moment. In
all cases in which dermal tumors formed, either a large bolus
of cells was injected into the sciatic nerve or dermis (thus artiﬁ-
cially circumventing the physiologic, more spontaneous, or
rare LOH), or alternatively LOH was induced by the ‘‘painting’’
with tamoxifen of a deﬁned cutaneous area that, again, presum-
ably induces widespread LOH. More-reﬁned tumor models that
address the potential signiﬁcance of haploinsufﬁciency for these
dermal tumors will be required to further investigate this issue.
In conclusion, our data reveal a remarkable similarity of SKPs
to embryonic neural crest precursors, apparently including the
capacity to engender plexiform or dermal neuroﬁbromas. In
fact, neuroﬁbromas derived from Nf1-deﬁcient SKPs exhibit all
the classic features that are unique for neuroﬁbromas, including
tumor mastocytosis, proliferation of spindle-shaped Schwann
cells, and excess collagen deposition. Therefore, the identity of
the tumor cell of origin and the facility for isolation and expansion
provides fertile ground for the continued analysis to identify addi-
tional factors and signals within the tumor microenvironment that
likely play essential roles in neuroﬁbromagenesis.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Mice
All mice were housed in the animal facility at the University of Texas South-
western Medical Center at Dallas (UTSW). Animal care and use were in compli-
ance with regulations of the Institutional Animal Care and Research Advisory
Committee at UTSW. The Nf1ﬂox/  mice are in a mixed genetic background
of C57BL/6/Sv129 and have been described previously (Zhu et al., 2002).
For conditional ablation of Nf1, we used a tamoxifen-inducible Cre line, the
CMV-CreERT transgenic mice (Hayashi and McMahon, 2002). The lacZ
reporter mice, ROSA26 (Soriano, 1999), were obtained from the Jackson
Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME).

Cell Culture and Differentiation Assays
SKPs were isolated as previously reported (Biernaskie et al., 2006; Toma et al.,
2001). Brieﬂy, mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of 40 ml of

a ketamine and xylazine (4:1) solution. Skin was harvested from neck, ears,
or back. The hair, fascia, adipose, blood vessel, and muscle tissues were care-
fully dissected out, and the skin was cut into small pieces (2–3 mm), washed
three times in Hank’s balanced salt solution (Invitrogen), and then digested
with 0.1% trypsin at 37C for 30 min. The skin tissues were then mechanically
dissociated, passed through a 70 mm cell strainer, and washed once with
Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium (DMEM)/F12 + 10% fetal bovine serum.
The cell pellet was then washed three times with serum-free DMEM/F12
media, counted, and plated at a density of 20 cells/ml on uncoated, ultra-low
attachment 6-well plates (Corning) in proliferation media: DMEM/F12 contain-
ing penicillin/streptomycin (0.1%); fungizone (40 mg/ml); B27 (without vitamin
A), epidermal growth factor (20 ng/ml), and basic ﬁbroblast growth factor
(40 ng/ml; Sigma). The sphere cells were fed every 3–4 days and passaged
every 7 days. For differentiation assays, we seeded 1.0 3 104 cells per well
of an eight-chamber slide coated with poly-D-lysine/laminin and cultured
with fresh media containing B27 + 5% FBS for 7–14 days. Then we ﬁxed the
cells with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min and performed immunostaining
for lineage markers as below (see ‘‘Histology and Immunostaining,’’ below).

Transplant Experiments
SKPs were isolated as above. Mice were allowed to recover from anesthesia
after closure of excision wounds with 4-0 nylon suture. After 7–10 days in
culture, SKPs were exposed to 1 mM of 4-OH-tamoxifen. Sphere cells were
subsequently harvested for X-gal staining and genotypic PCR analysis
(Kwon et al., 2008) along with control sphere cells (no 4-OH-tamoxifen expo-
sure). Once recombination was conﬁrmed, 1 3 105 viable Nf1 / ;LacZ-posi-
tive single cells from SKP spheres were resuspended in 40 ml of L15 medium
(GIBCO) and implanted either intradermally/subcutaneously or next to the right
sciatic nerve of the same mouse from which the SKPs were originally isolated.
For the control, a suspension of 1 3 105 viable Nf1+/ ;LacZ-negative single
cells was implanted either intradermally/subcutaneously or next to the left
sciatic nerve in the same manner. To evaluate the effect of the hormonal milieu
during pregnancy on neuroﬁbroma development, the Nf1 / ;LacZ-positive
SKPs were prepared as above from both male and female mice. One week
before reimplantation, these male and female mice were housed in the same
cage to promote breeding. Viable Nf1 / ;LacZ-positive SKPs (1 3 105) were
then suspended in 40 ml of L15 medium (GIBCO) and implanted back to the
same animal intradermally/subcutaneously at the dorsal, distal back (sacral
area). We chose this anatomical location to prevent the mice from scratching
at the site of implantation.

Histology and Immunostaining
For H&E histology analysis, tissue specimens were harvested and ﬁxed with
10% formalin in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 1 day and subsequently
embedded in parafﬁn. Sections (5 mm thick) were stained with H&E as per the
manufacturer’s protocol (StatLab, Lewisville, TX). For immunohistochemistry,
parafﬁn sections were deparafﬁnized, rehydrated, and subjected to antigen
retrieval prior to incubation with the primary antibodies. The primary antibodies
were visualized by treating the sections with biotinylated secondary antibody
and followed by ampliﬁcation with peroxidase-conjugated avidin and DAB
substrate as per the manufacturer’s protocol (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA).
For immunoﬂuorescent staining, cells grown in eight-chamber slides were
ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min, blocked, and incubated with
different primary antibodies as described below for lineage marking. The
primary antibodies were detected by secondary antibodies conjugated with
Cy3 or FITC (Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA) followed by counter-
staining with DAPI (Vector Labs). The dilutions of primary antibodies used in
this study were as follows: b-tubulinIII (rabbit, 1:2000, Sigma), GAP43 (rabbit,
1:1000, Abcam), GFAP (rabbit, 1:2000, DAKO), nestin (mouse, 1:200, Chemi-
con), and S100b (rabbit, 1:5000, DAKO).

X-Gal Staining and Western Blotting
For X-gal staining, mice were anesthetized with ketamine (1.5 mg/mouse) and
subjected to total body perfusion with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Tissues
were harvested, equilibrated in 30% sucrose in PBS overnight at 4C, washed
three times with 13 PBS, and stained with X-gal at 30C overnight. Part of the
tissues was also concurrently embedded in OTC medium (Tissue-Tek). Frozen
sections were sliced with a cryostat and mounted on superfrost microscope

Cell Stem Cell 4, 453–463, May 8, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 461

Cell Stem Cell

Cell of Origin for Dermal Neuroﬁbroma

slides (Fisher Scientiﬁc). Cryostat sections were postﬁxed with 4% parafor-
maldehyde, stained with X-gal at 30C overnight, and counterstained
with nuclear fast red. The X-gal reaction mixture is comprised of 1 mg/ml
4-chloro-5-bromo-3-indolyl-b-galactoside (X-gal), 4 mM potassium ferrocya-
nide, 4 mM potassium ferricyanide, and 2 mM magnesium chloride in PBS.
Western blotting on lysates of SKPs and 3T3 cells with Dhh antibody (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology) was performed following the manufacturer’s protocol.

Leder Stain for Mast Cells
Leder staining, an enzymatic stain for Naphthol AS-D (3-hydroxy-2-naphthoic
acid-O-toluidine) chloroacetate esterase to detect tissue mast cells, was
performed as previously described (Prophet et al., 1992). Brieﬂy, parafﬁn
sections were deparafﬁnized, rehydrated, and placed in pararosaniline veronal
acetate esterase solution for 30 min, rinsed in distilled water for 2 min, and
counterstained with hematoxylin solution. The tissue slides were then rinsed
again in distilled water, dehydrated, and mounted using xylene base medium.

Oil Red O Stain for Adipocytes
Lipid droplets were stained with oil red O. SKPs from the primary sphere colo-
nies were differentiated on poly-D-lysine/laminin-coated eight-chamber slides
as described above for 7–14 days in the presence of FBS. The cells were ﬁxed
with formalin at room temperature for 5 min and washed three times with 13
PBS. The cells were then stained with 0.3% oil red O solution for 1 hr at
room temperature and washed three times with water, and the red-staining
lipid droplets were visualized by using an inverted microscope.

SUPPLEMENTAL DATA

The Supplemental Data include two ﬁgures and can be found with this article
online at http://www.cell.com/cell-stem-cell/supplemental/S1934-5909(09)
00153-2.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank members of the Parada lab for helpful suggestions and discussions,
Chiachi Liu for technical help, and Renee McKay for assistance in the prepa-
ration of this manuscript. We also thank Dr. Ueli Suter for the P0-CreERT
and the Plp-CreERT mice. L.Q.L. holds a Career Award for Medical Scientists
from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund. L.F.P. is an American Cancer Society
Research Professor. This work was partially supported by funding from the
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), Department
of Defense (DOD) Grant # DAMD 17-02-1-0638, and DAMD 17-03-1-0216,
ACS RP-04-084-01 to L.F.P.; and by funding from the Dermatology Founda-
tion and Galderma to L.Q.L.

Received: December 6, 2008
Revised: February 4, 2009
Accepted: March 30, 2009
Published: May 7, 2009

REFERENCES

Al-Hajj, M., and Clarke, M.F. (2004). Self-renewal and solid tumor stem cells.
Oncogene 23, 7274–7282.

Biernaskie, J.A., McKenzie, I.A., Toma, J.G., and Miller, F.D. (2006). Isolation of
skin-derived precursors (SKPs) and differentiation and enrichment of their
Schwann cell progeny. Nat. Protocols 1, 2803–2812.

Biernaskie, J., Sparling, J.S., Liu, J., Shannon, C.P., Plemel, J.R., Xie, Y., Miller, F.D.,
and Tetzlaff, W. (2007). Skin-derived precursors generate myelinating Schwann
cells that promote remyelination and functional recovery after contusion spinal
cord injury. J. Neurosci. 27, 9545–9559.

Cichowski, K., and Jacks, T. (2001). NF1 tumor suppressor gene function:
narrowing the GAP. Cell 104, 593–604.

Dugoff, L., and Sujansky, E. (1996). Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 and pregnancy.
Am. J. Med. Genet. 66, 7–10.

Fernandes, K.J., McKenzie, I.A., Mill, P., Smith, K.M., Akhavan, M., Barnabe-
Heider, F., Biernaskie, J., Junek, A., Kobayashi, N.R., Toma, J.G., et al. (2004).
A dermal niche for multipotent adult skin-derived precursor cells. Nat. Cell Biol.
6, 1082–1093.

Fernandes, K.J., Kobayashi, N.R., Gallagher, C.J., Barnabe-Heider, F.,
Aumont, A., Kaplan, D.R., and Miller, F.D. (2006). Analysis of the neurogenic
potential of multipotent skin-derived precursors. Exp. Neurol. 201, 32–48.

Fernandes, K.J., Toma, J.G., and Miller, F.D. (2008). Multipotent skin-derived
precursors: adult neural crest-related precursors with therapeutic potential.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 363, 185–198.

Ferner, R.E. (2007). Neuroﬁbromatosis 1. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 15, 131–138.

Gao, J.X. (2008). Cancer stem cells: the lessons from pre-cancerous stem
cells. J. Cell. Mol. Med. 12, 67–96.

Gardner, D., Shoback, D., and Greenspan, F. (2007). Greenspan’s Basic and
Clinical Endocrinology (New York: McGraw-Hill Medical).

Gray, G.D., Hernandez, O.M., Hebel, D., Root, M., Pow-Sang, J.M., and
Wickstrom, E. (1993). Antisense DNA inhibition of tumor growth induced by
c-Ha-ras oncogene in nude mice. Cancer Res. 53, 577–580.

Hayashi, S., and McMahon, A.P. (2002). Efﬁcient recombination in diverse
tissues by a tamoxifen-inducible form of Cre: a tool for temporally regulated
gene activation/inactivation in the mouse. Dev. Biol. 244, 305–318.

Huson, S.M., Harper, P.S., and Compston, D.A. (1988). Von Recklinghausen
neuroﬁbromatosis. A clinical and population study in south-east Wales. Brain
111, 1355–1381.

Joseph, N.M., Mosher, J.T., Buchstaller, J., Snider, P., McKeever, P.E., Lim, M.,
Conway, S.J., Parada, L.F., Zhu, Y., and Morrison, S.J. (2008). The loss of Nf1
transiently promotes self-renewal but not tumorigenesis by neural crest stem
cells. Cancer Cell 13, 129–140.

Jung-Testas, I., Schumacher, M., Robel, P., and Baulieu, E.E. (1996). Demon-
stration of progesterone receptors in rat Schwann cells. J. Steroid Biochem.
Mol. Biol. 58, 77–82.

Kwon, C.H., Zhao, D., Chen, J., Alcantara, S., Li, Y., Burns, D.K., Mason, R.P.,
Lee, E.Y., Wu, H., and Parada, L.F. (2008). Pten haploinsufﬁciency accelerates
formation of high-grade astrocytomas. Cancer Res. 68, 3286–3294.

Lakkis, M.M., and Tennekoon, G.I. (2000). Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. I. General
overview. J. Neurosci. Res. 62, 755–763.

Le, L.Q., and Parada, L.F. (2007). Tumor microenvironment and neuroﬁbroma-
tosis type I: connecting the GAPs. Oncogene 26, 4609–4616.

McKenzie, I.A., Biernaskie, J., Toma, J.G., Midha, R., and Miller, F.D. (2006).
Skin-derived precursors generate myelinating Schwann cells for the injured
and dysmyelinated nervous system. J. Neurosci. 26, 6651–6660.

McLaughlin, M.E., and Jacks, T. (2003). Progesterone receptor expression in
neuroﬁbromas. Cancer Res. 63, 752–755.

Miller, S.J., Lavker, R.M., and Sun, T.T. (2005). Interpreting epithelial cancer
biology in the context of stem cells: tumor properties and therapeutic implica-
tions. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1756, 25–52.

Movaghar, B., Tiraihi, T., and Mesbah-Namin, S.A. (2008). Transdifferentiation
of bone marrow stromal cells into Schwann cell phenotype using progesterone
as inducer. Brain Res. 1208, 17–24.

Nowell, P.C., and Hungerford, D.A. (1960). Chromosome studies on normal
and leukemic human leukocytes. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 25, 85–109.

Nussbaum, J., Minami, E., Laﬂamme, M.A., Virag, J.A., Ware, C.B., Masino, A.,
Muskheli, V., Pabon, L., Reinecke, H., and Murry, C.E. (2007). Transplantation
of undifferentiated murine embryonic stem cells in the heart: teratoma forma-
tion and immune response. FASEB J. 21, 1345–1357.

Overdiek, A., Winner, U., Mayatepek, E., and Rosenbaum, T. (2008). Schwann
cells from human neuroﬁbromas show increased proliferation rates under the
inﬂuence of progesterone. Pediatr. Res. 64, 40–43.

Cichowski, K., Shih, T.S., Schmitt, E., Santiago, S., Reilly, K., McLaughlin, M.E.,
Bronson, R.T., and Jacks, T. (1999). Mouse models of tumor development in
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Science 286, 2172–2176.

Prophet, E., Mills, B., Arrington, J., and Sobin, L., eds. (1992). Laboratory
Methods in Histotechnology (Washington, D.C.: American Registry of
Pathology).

462 Cell Stem Cell 4, 453–463, May 8, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

Cell Stem Cell

Cell of Origin for Dermal Neuroﬁbroma

Reya, T., Morrison, S.J., Clarke, M.F., and Weissman, I.L. (2001). Stem cells,
cancer, and cancer stem cells. Nature 414, 105–111.

Trovo-Marqui, A.B., and Tajara, E.H. (2006). Neuroﬁbromin: a general outlook.
Clin. Genet. 70, 1–13.

Riccardi, V.M. (1981). Cutaneous manifestation of neuroﬁbromatosis: cellular
interaction, pigmentation, and mast cells. Birth Defects Orig. Artic. Ser. 17,
129–145.

Vogel, K.S., Klesse, L.J., Velasco-Miguel, S., Meyers, K., Rushing, E.J., and
Parada, L.F. (1999). Mouse tumor model for neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Science
286, 2176–2179.

Roth, T.M., Ramamurthy, P., Muir, D., Wallace, M.R., Zhu, Y., Chang, L., and
Barald, K.F. (2008). Inﬂuence of hormones and hormone metabolites on the
growth of Schwann cells derived from embryonic stem cells and on tumor
cell lines expressing variable levels of neuroﬁbromin. Dev. Dyn. 237, 513–524.

Singh, S.K., Hawkins, C., Clarke, I.D., Squire, J.A., Bayani, J., Hide, T.,
Henkelman, R.M., Cusimano, M.D., and Dirks, P.B. (2004). Identiﬁcation of
human brain tumour initiating cells. Nature 432, 396–401.

Soriano, P. (1999). Generalized lacZ expression with the ROSA26 Cre reporter
strain. Nat. Genet. 21, 70–71.

Stemmer-Rachamimov, A.O., Louis, D.N., Nielsen, G.P., Antonescu, C.R.,
Borowsky, A.D., Bronson, R.T., Burns, D.K., Cervera, P., McLaughlin, M.E.,
Reifenberger, G., et al. (2004). Comparative pathology of nerve sheath tumors
in mouse models and humans. Cancer Res. 64, 3718–3724.

Stenback, F., Peto, R., and Shubik, P. (1981). Initiation and promotion at
different ages and doses in 2200 mice. I. Methods, and the apparent persis-
tence of initiated cells. Br. J. Cancer 44, 1–14.

Stindl, R. (2008). Deﬁning the steps that lead to cancer: replicative telomere
erosion, aneuploidy and an epigenetic maturation arrest of tissue stem cells.
Med. Hypotheses 71, 126–140.

Szudek, J., Birch, P., Riccardi, V.M., Evans, D.G., and Friedman, J.M. (2000).
Associations of clinical features in neuroﬁbromatosis 1 (NF1). Genet. Epide-
miol. 19, 429–439.

Toma, J.G., Akhavan, M., Fernandes, K.J., Barnabe-Heider, F., Sadikot, A.,
Kaplan, D.R., and Miller, F.D. (2001). Isolation of multipotent adult stem cells
from the dermis of mammalian skin. Nat. Cell Biol. 3, 778–784.

Ward, B.A., and Gutmann, D.H. (2005). Neuroﬁbromatosis 1: from lab bench to
clinic. Pediatr. Neurol. 32, 221–228.

Wong, S., and Witte, O.N. (2004). The BCR-ABL story: bench to bedside and
back. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 22, 247–306.

Wu, J., Williams, J.P., Rizvi, T.A., Kordich, J.J., Witte, D., Meijer, D., Stemmer-
Rachamimov, A.O., Cancelas, J.A., and Ratner, N. (2008). Plexiform and
dermal neuroﬁbromas and pigmentation are caused by Nf1 loss in desert
hedgehog-expressing cells. Cancer Cell 13, 105–116.

Yang, F.C., Ingram, D.A., Chen, S., Hingtgen, C.M., Ratner, N., Monk, K.R.,
Clegg, T., White, H., Mead, L., Wenning, M.J., et al. (2003). Neuroﬁbromin-deﬁ-
cient Schwann cells secrete a potent migratory stimulus for Nf1+/  mast cells.
J. Clin. Invest. 112, 1851–1861.

Yang, F.C., Chen, S., Clegg, T., Li, X., Morgan, T., Estwick, S.A., Yuan, J.,
Khalaf, W., Burgin, S., Travers, J., et al. (2006). Nf1+/  mast cells induce
neuroﬁbroma like phenotypes through secreted TGF-beta signaling. Hum.
Mol. Genet. 15, 2421–2437.

Yang, F.C., Ingram, D.A., Chen, S., Zhu, Y., Yuan, J., Li, X., Yang, X., Knowles, S.,
Horn, W., Li, Y., et al. (2008). Nf1-dependent tumors require a microenvironment
containing Nf1+/ - and c-kit-dependent bone marrow. Cell 135, 437–448.
Zheng, H., Chang, L., Patel, N., Yang, J., Lowe, L., Burns, D.K., and Zhu, Y.
(2008). Induction of abnormal proliferation by nonmyelinating schwann cells
triggers neuroﬁbroma formation. Cancer Cell 13, 117–128.

Zhu, Y., and Parada, L.F. (2001). Neuroﬁbromin, a tumor suppressor in the
nervous system. Exp. Cell Res. 264, 19–28.

Toma, J.G., McKenzie, I.A., Bagli, D., and Miller, F.D. (2005). Isolation and
characterization of multipotent skin-derived precursors from human skin.
Stem Cells 23, 727–737.

Zhu, Y., Ghosh, P., Charnay, P., Burns, D.K., and Parada, L.F. (2002). Neuro-
ﬁbromas in NF1: Schwann cell origin and role of tumor environment. Science
296, 920–922.

Cell Stem Cell 4, 453–463, May 8, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 463

