Published Online: 23 October, 2006 | Supp Info: 
Downloaded from 

jcb.rupress.org 

http://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.200608009

on June 12, 2018

JCB: ARTICLE

Y
G
O
L
O

I

B

L
L
E
C

F
O

L
A
N
R
U
O
J

E
H
T

Phosphorylation and activity of the tumor 
suppressor Merlin and the ERM protein Moesin 
are coordinately regulated by the Slik kinase

Sarah C. Hughes1 and Richard G. Fehon2

1Department of Cell Biology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2H7, Canada
2Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637

M erlin and Moesin are closely related members 

of the 4.1 Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin domain super-
family  implicated  in  regulating  proliferation 
and epithelial integrity, respectively. The activity of both 
proteins is regulated by head to tail folding that is con-
trolled, in part, by phosphorylation. Few upstream regu-
lators of these phosphorylation events are known. In this 

study, we demonstrate that in Drosophila melanogaster, 
Slik, a Ste20 kinase, controls subcellular localization and 
phosphorylation of Merlin, resulting in the coordinate but 
opposite regulation of Merlin and Moesin. These results 
suggest the existence of a novel mechanism for coordinate 
regulation of cell proliferation and epithelial integrity in 
developing tissues.

Introduction

The  maintenance  of  epithelial  integrity  is  closely  integrated 
with the regulation of cell proliferation in a variety of biologi-
cal  contexts,  including  normal  development,  tissue  regenera-
tion, and tumor progression. During mammalian development, 
there is close linkage between regulation of the cell cycle and 
the  ability  of  neural  crest  progenitors  to  delaminate  from  the 
neurepithelium  and  initiate  migratory  behavior  (Kalcheim 
and Burstyn-Cohen, 2005). In addition, epithelial  wounding 
produces  a  local  stimulation  of  proliferation  as  a  result  of 
the  disruption  of  cell  contacts  (Bryant  and  Simpson,  1984; 
Johnston and Gallant, 2002). Most importantly, recent studies 
have revealed that a number of neoplastic tumor suppressor mu-
tations result simultaneously in the disruption of epithelial po-
larity, tissue integrity, and normal controls on proliferation. For 
example, loss of the Drosophila melanogaster tumor suppres-
sor gene scribble results in highly disorganized cell masses that 
display uncontrolled proliferation (Bilder et al., 2000; Zeitler 
et al., 2004). The underlying basis for the observed tight linkage 
between epithelial organization and cell proliferation remains 
unclear,  but  current  models  include  cell  contact–mediated 
mechanisms for growth arrest, compartmentalized distribution 
of  growth  factors,  their  receptors,  and/or  intracellular  trans-
ducers,  and  the  existence  of  components  that  have  dual  but 

Correspondence to Richard G. Fehon: rfehon@uchicago.edu
Abbreviations used in this paper: ERM, Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin; kd, kinase dead; 
MARCM, mosaic analysis with a repressible cell marker; PAK, p21-activated 
 kinase; Thr, threonine; UAS, upstream activation sequence.

© The Rockefeller University Press   $8.00
The Journal of Cell Biology, Vol. 175, No. 2, October 23, 2006 305–313
http://www.jcb.org/cgi/doi/10.1083/jcb.200608009

separable  roles  in  epithelial  integrity  and  cell  signaling  (for 
 example, β-catenin; Bilder, 2004). These studies highlight the 
importance  of  cellular  architecture,  particularly  the  cytoskel-
eton and its ability to organize the cell membrane through link-
age  with  transmembrane  proteins,  to  regulate  both  epithelial 
integrity and proliferation.

The neurofi bromatosis 2 tumor suppressor protein Merlin 
and  its  close  relatives  Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin  (ERM;  Trofatter 
et al., 1993b; Bretscher et al., 2002) function as membrane-
 cytoskeletal linkers and regulators of multiple signaling pathways 
(Shaw et al., 2001; Bretscher et al., 2002; Speck et al., 2003). 
Merlin and ERMs share ⵑ45% sequence identity and a similar 
domain  organization  with  an  N-terminal  4.1  ERM  domain,  a 
putative  coiled-coil  spacer,  and  a  C-terminal  domain  that  in 
ERMs binds to fi lamentous actin (Bretscher et al., 2002). Merlin 
has a clear role in regulating proliferation (Rouleau et al., 1993; 
Trofatter et al., 1993a), whereas Moesin and its paralogues  Ezrin 
and  Radixin  are  thought  to  maintain  epithelial  integrity  by 
 organizing the apical cytoskeleton (Speck et al., 2003).

A central question in the study of these proteins has been 
how  their  interaction  with  binding  partners  is  regulated.  For 
both Merlin and ERMs, there is abundant evidence for an intra-
molecular  interaction  between  the  4.1  ERM  domain  and  the 
C-terminal domain (Gary and Bretscher, 1995; Sherman et al., 
1997;  Gonzalez-Agosti  et  al.,  1999;  Gronholm  et  al.,  1999; 
Meng et al., 2000; Nguyen et al., 2001). In ERM proteins, this 
interaction produces a closed, inactive form of the protein that 
does not interact with either transmembrane binding partners 

JCB 305

or  fi lamentous  actin  (Matsui  et  al.,  1998;  Nakamura  et  al., 
1999). For Merlin, studies in mammalian cells suggest that 
the closed form is active in inhibiting proliferation (Sherman 
et al., 1997; Shaw et al., 1998; Gutmann et al., 1999;  Morrison 
et al., 2001), whereas studies in Drosophila suggest that, as with 
ERMs,  the  open  form  of  Merlin  retains  all  essential  genetic 
functions  (LaJeunesse  et  al.,  1998).  Whether  this  apparent 
distinction between fl ies and mammals represents a true func-
tional difference or refl ects methodological differences  remains 
to be resolved.

Phosphorylation  of  a  conserved  threonine  (Thr)  in  the 
 actin-binding domain of ERM proteins has been demonstrated 
to be important for their activation by relieving the head to tail 
interaction (Nakamura et al., 1995; Matsui et al., 1998; Oshiro 
et al., 1998; Hayashi et al., 1999; Tran Quang et al., 2000). The 
precise kinase responsible for this event is unclear, although its 
activity seems to be positively regulated by Rho activation in 
mammalian cells. In Drosophila, the Ste20 family kinase Slik is 
necessary for the phosphorylation of Moesin, although, again, it 
is not clear whether Slik phosphorylates Moesin directly or via 
intermediate kinases (Hipfner et al., 2004). In mammalian cells, 
Merlin activity is regulated by a phosphorylation event at serine 
518  that  blocks  head  to  tail  interactions  (Shaw  et  al.,  2001). 
However, unlike ERMs, it appears that the phosphorylated form 
of Merlin is inactive in that it does not suppress growth (Shaw 
et al., 2001). In contrast, hypophosphorylated Merlin is enriched 
under conditions of serum starvation or confl uency, suggesting 
that this form is growth suppressive (Sherman et al., 1997; Shaw 
et al., 1998; Gutmann et al., 1999). Serine 518 is thought to be 
phosphorylated by the p21-activated kinase (PAK) downstream 
of Rac activity (Kissil et al., 2002; Xiao et al., 2002), although 
the  possibility  of  other  mechanisms  regulating  Merlin  phos-
phorylation cannot be excluded. In addition, evidence to date 
has failed to demonstrate phosphorylation of the equivalent 
Thr residue to the one phosphorylated in ERMs, although this 
residue is conserved in both mammalian and fl y Merlin.

Many  questions  remain  about  the  regulation  of  Merlin 
 activity, particularly in the context of developing tissues under-
going  normal  proliferation.  To  better  understand  how  Merlin  is 
 regulated, we have investigated the mechanism by which Merlin 
phosphorylation and, thus, its activity are controlled in Drosophila. 
In  particular,  we  have  examined  the  possibility  that  Merlin 
and  Moesin  are  regulated  by  the  same  molecular  mechanism. 
In this study, we show that Slik kinase, which positively regu-
lates Moesin function, also regulates Merlin but in the opposite 
 direction. In addition, our observations suggest a competitive 
 interaction between Moesin and Merlin for Slik activity. These 
results provide in vivo evidence of a kinase-based regulation of 
 Drosophila Merlin and suggest that Merlin and Moesin are co-
ordinately  regulated in developing tissues.

Results
Merlin subcellular localization is dependent 
on Slik function
Previous studies in Drosophila and mammalian cells have dem-
onstrated that Merlin displays complex subcellular localizations, 

being found both at the apical plasma membrane and in punc-
tate cytoplasmic structures that are associated with endocytic 
compartments  (McCartney  and  Fehon,  1996;  Scherer  and 
Gutmann, 1996; Schmucker et al., 1997; Kissil et al., 2002). 
Deletion  mutagenesis  indicates  that  the  C- terminal  domain 
is  important  in  regulating  Merlin’s  subcellular  localization 
and its  activity  in  rescue  assays  (LaJeunesse  et  al.,  1998). 
This domain is similar in structure to the C-terminal domain 
of  ERM  proteins,  and,  although  it  does  not  bind  actin,  the 
Thr  residue  that  is  phosphorylated  in  ERMs  is  conserved  in 
both  fl y  and  human  Merlin  (McCartney  and  Fehon,  1996). 
Collectively,  these   observations  raise  the  possibility  that  the 
phosphorylation state and, therefore, Merlin subcellular local-
ization and function are modulated similarly to Moesin. A pre-
vious study has shown that the phosphorylation of Drosophila 
Moesin is regulated by the Ste20 family kinase Slik and that 
like Moesin and Merlin, Slik is localized in the apical region 
of epithelial cells (Hipfner et al., 2004). Based on these ob-
servations,  we  investigated   possible  functional  interactions 
between Slik and Merlin.

To examine the effect of the loss of Slik function on  Merlin 
subcellular localization, we used FLP/FRT (Flip recombinase/
Flip recombination target)-mediated mitotic recombination to 
generate  clones  of  slik−/−  cells  in  heterozygous  slik−/+  (wild 
type) imaginal epithelia. Induction of a homozygous slik mutant 
clone by mitotic recombination simultaneously produces a ho-
mozygous wild-type (slik+/+) sister clone, thus allowing side by 
side comparisons between cells containing two, one, or no func-
tional copies of the slik gene. Wild-type cells within the epithe-
lium are positively marked by the expression of either one copy 
(slik−/+)  or  two  copies  (slik+/+)  of  a  GFP  transgene,  whereas 
slik−/− cells lack this marker. Optical sections taken below the 
apical surface of the epithelium (Fig. 1, A–A′′) show a clear in-
verse correlation between slik gene dosage and Merlin staining. 
Merlin staining was increased in homozygous slik− clones and 
decreased in homozygous wild-type sister clones relative to the 
surrounding heterozygous slik−/+ cells.

To extend this result, we next asked whether the apparent 
increase in Merlin staining in slik− clones might refl ect altered 
subcellular localization. Specifi cally, we wondered whether 
Merlin, which is normally localized primarily to the apical junc-
tional region in imaginal epithelial cells, might be redistributed 
basally in slik− cells. Such redistribution might refl ect an altered 
phosphorylation state for Merlin, as has been observed for the 
ERM proteins (Bretscher et al., 2002). For this experiment, we 
fi xed  tissues  using  a  TCA  treatment  that  has  previously  been 
shown  to  preserve  the  phosphorylation  state  in  mammalian 
ERM  proteins  (Hayashi  et  al.,  1999).  Our  initial  experiments 
 indicated  that  this  protocol  considerably  enhanced  detection 
of the phosphorylated form of Moesin and confi rmed the previ-
ous  report  that  Moesin  phosphorylation  is  dependent  on  Slik 
 activity (Fig. 1, B and B′; Hipfner et al., 2004). In these pre-
parations, phospho-Moesin staining was decreased both in apical 
(Fig. 1 B′) and basolateral (Fig. 1 C′) optical sections. Consistent 
with our initial observations, we observed obviously increased 
levels of Merlin protein throughout the basolateral part of slik− 
epithelial  cells  (Fig.  1  C′′).  In  stark  contrast,  Merlin  staining  in 

 

306

JCB • VOLUME 175 • NUMBER 2 • 2006

Figure 1.  Slik activity affects Merlin protein localization in a 
dose-dependent  manner. Mitotic  clones  of  slik1  mutant  cells 
are marked by the lack of a GFP marker (A′, arrowhead; and 
D,  E,  and  F’)  or  the  lack  of  phospho-Moesin  (B′  and  C′, 
arrowheads). (A–A′′) Sections taken below the apical surface 
show  a  marked  increase  in  Merlin  staining  within  homo-
zygous  slik1  clones  (A′′,  arrowhead),  with  a  concomitant 
 decrease in Merlin staining within the wild-type sister clone 
(A′′,  arrow)  marked  by  the  increased  expression  of  GFP 
(A′, arrow). (B–C′′) Optical sections taken either 1 (B–B′′) or 
6  μm  (C–C′′)  beneath  the  apical  surface  demonstrate  that 
in slik1 clones, Merlin is mislocalized away from the apical 
surface. An apical section (B′′, arrowheads) shows decreased 
Merlin staining in the slik1 clone, whereas more basal Merlin 
staining is increased in slik1 cells (C′′, arrowheads). (D–E′) 
Optical  cross  sections  of  clones  showing  the  reduction  of 
 Merlin apically (D′, arrows) and an increase in punctate Merlin 
 staining basally (E′, arrows). (F–F′′) A similar effect on Merlin 
protein staining and localization are seen in the follicle cell 
epithelium surrounding the developing oocyte. Bars, 10 μm.

slik− clones was decreased at the apical surface of the epithelium, 
where much of the protein is normally found (Fig. 1 B′′). Similar 
results were also observed using standard PFA fi xation in opti-
cal cross sections through clones (Fig. 1, D and E). In addition, 
these sections suggest that much of the basolateral Merlin stain-
ing in slik− cells is associated with punctate structures (Fig. 1, 
D′ and E′). Thus, the loss of Slik function results in a redistribu-
tion  of  Merlin  from  a  close  association  with  the  apical  mem-
brane to the basolateral domain of the cell. Similar effects are 
also observed in clones induced in the follicle cell epithelium 
that surrounds the developing  oocyte (Fig. 1, F–F′′).

Slik affects Merlin localization 
and trafﬁ cking in cultured cells
To  further  examine  the  effects  of  Slik  activity  on  Merlin 
subcellular  localization,  we  performed  coexpression  experi-
ments in cultured Drosophila S2 cells. Previous studies (McCartney 
and Fehon, 1996; LaJeunesse et al., 1998) have shown that upon 
induction, Merlin initially localizes to the membrane of S2 cells 
and then, within 3 h, traffi cs into punctate cytoplasmic struc-
tures  that  are  associated  with  endocytic  vesicles  (McCartney 
and  Fehon,  1996).  Perturbation  of  the  C-terminal  domain  of 
Merlin alters its localization and traffi cking pattern (LaJeunesse 
et al., 1998). To determine whether Slik affects the subcellular lo-
calization and movement of Merlin, a pulse-chase assay was per-
formed in S2 cells using a heat shock–inducible GFP-tagged Merlin 
expression construct (LaJeunesse et al., 1998). Control experiments 

in which cells were induced to express a pulse of Mer+ exhibited 
a similar pattern of Merlin localization to that reported previ-
ously (Fig. 2, B–E; LaJeunesse et al., 1998). In contrast, the co-
expression of Slik with Mer+ results in a shift in the temporal 
pattern of Merlin localization. In this case, a substantial propor-
tion of cells displayed Merlin that associated with the plasma 
membrane even 6 h after induction (Fig. 2, A and F). Thus, Slik 
activity  prevents  the  normal  traffi cking  of  Merlin  off  the 
plasma  membrane  and  into  cytoplasmic  punctate  structures. 
Coexpression of a kinase-inactive version of Slik has no effect 
on Merlin localization or traffi cking (Fig. 2, compare G with E). 
Together with the loss of function clonal analysis, these results 
indicate  that  Slik  kinase  activity  controls  the  localization  and 
traffi cking of Merlin.

Slik regulates Merlin phosphorylation
Given the documented role of Slik in Moesin phosphorylation 
(Hipfner et al., 2004) and the high degree of structural homol-
ogy  between  Merlin  and  Moesin  (Bretscher  et  al.,  2002),  we 
reasoned  that  the  alteration  in  Merlin  subcellular  localization 
in  slik−  clones  and  S2  cells  could  refl ect  changes  in  its  phos-
phorylation  state.  Therefore,  we  used  immunoprecipitation 
and  immunoblot  analysis  to  examine  Merlin  phosphorylation 
under varying levels of Slik activity. Previous studies in mam-
malian  cells  have  shown  that  Merlin  exists  in  several  isoforms, 
representing at least two and, under certain conditions, three phos-
phorylated  states  (Shaw  et  al.,  1998,  2001).  Drosophila  Merlin 

SLIK KINASE REGULATES MERLIN ACTIVITY • HUGHES AND FEHON 307

Figure 2.  Slik activity alters the subcellular localization and trafﬁ cking of Merlin protein in S2 cells. (A–D) Different subcellular localizations of Merlin 
are observed after transient expression using a short pulse of heat shock–driven expression of GFP-tagged Merlin (hs-Mer+GFP). (A) High levels of 
Merlin protein localized completely at the membrane. These levels are increased from what is seen with a pulse of Merlin expression alone. (B) Moderate 
levels  of  mostly  membranous  Merlin  localization  with  a  small  number  of  cytoplasmic  punctate  structures.  (C)  Merlin  localized  to  numerous  small 
 cytoplasmic vesicles throughout the cell. (D) Merlin localized to fewer, larger cytoplasmic vesicles. (E–K) Histograms of cells displaying various pheno-
types (in A–D) at different time points (1, 3, and 6 h) after Merlin expression. The y axis corresponds to the percentage of each phenotype observed 
in the ﬁ eld of cells counted. Error bars indicate SD of at least three replicates. (E) Trafﬁ cking of wild-type Merlin. A progression from the plasma 
membrane to large endocytic vesicles is observed over time as previously described (McCartney and Fehon, 1996; LaJeunesse et al., 1998). (F) Merlin 
trafﬁ cking in cells that express both Merlin and Slik. There is a slower progression of Merlin moving from the plasma membrane into cytoplasmic 
 vesicles. In addition, there is an increase in the number of cells exhibiting high levels of Merlin that remain at the membrane (A). (G) Cells in which both 
Merlin and Slikkd are expressed. Merlin localization in these cells is very similar to that observed in cells expressing Merlin alone (E). (H) A  phosphomimetic 
form of Merlin, MerT616D, is retained at the plasma membrane for an extended time compared with Mer+. (I) Nonphosphorylatable Merlin (MerT616A) 
trafﬁ cs away from the plasma membrane faster than Mer+. (J) Merlin coexpressed with wild-type Moesin trafﬁ cking similarly to Merlin expression 
alone (E). (K) Merlin trafﬁ cking in cells that express Merlin, Moesin, and Slik. Merlin localization patterns are similar to the expression of Merlin alone (E). 
Bar, 2 μm.

produces a similar pattern on immunoblots (Fig. 3 A), where at 
least three forms can be visualized. Treatment with λ phospha-
tase converted the slower migrating bands to the most rapidly 
migrating  form  (Fig.  3  B),  indicating  that  the  slower  migrat-
ing  forms  represent  differentially  phosphorylated  forms  of 
the protein.

When  upstream  activation  sequence   (UAS)–slik  was  ex-
pressed in wing imaginal discs under the apterous GAL4 driver, the 
ratio  of  phosphorylated  to  nonphosphorylated  Merlin  increased  
compared with wild-type imaginal discs (6.3 ± 1.6 vs. 4.3 ± 0.7; 
n = 6; P = 0.009). In contrast, Merlin isolated from wing discs 
that  overexpressed  kinase-inactive  Slik  showed  a  phosphoryla-
tion pattern that was indistinguishable from wild type (ratio of 
 phosphorylated to nonphosphorylated = 4.6 ± 1.0; n = 4; P = 
0.44; Fig. 3 A). This indicates that kinase activity of Slik is required 
for the  observed effect on the phosphorylation of Merlin protein.

To better characterize Slik effects on Merlin phosphory-
lation,  we  next  examined  these  proteins  when  expressed  in 
Drosophila  cultured  S2  cells.  A  similar  pattern  of  Merlin 
 isoforms is observed on immunoblots when Merlin is expressed 
in S2 cells, as was seen in wing imaginal discs (unpublished 
data).  Increased  phosphorylation  of  Merlin  in  the  presence 
of Slik kinase is also observed in S2 cells, albeit with a more 
subtle effect.

As the Thr residue near the C terminus of Moesin (Thr559) 
is  also  conserved  in  Merlin  (Thr616;  McCartney  and  Fehon, 
1996),  we  wondered  whether  Slik  activity  might  control  the 
phosphorylation of this site in Merlin. To address this question, 
we used site-directed mutagenesis to construct phosphomimetic 
(MerT616D)  and  nonphosphorylatable  (MerT616A)  versions  of 
the  Merlin  protein  and  examined  their  effect  on  Merlin 
phosphorylation  in  the  presence  of  Slik  kinase  in  S2  cells. 

 

308

JCB • VOLUME 175 • NUMBER 2 • 2006

Figure 3.  Slik activity can alter Merlin phosphorylation. (A) Merlin pro-
tein was immunoprecipitated from third instar imaginal disc cell lysates. 
Merlin protein migrates as two prominent bands and one or more minor 
bands in wild-type (WT) lysates. Numbers below the lanes represent the 
ratio of the top (phosphorylated) bands to the bottom (unphosphorylated) 
band in each lane (top bracket vs. the bottom bracket). For wild type and 
UAS-slik, n = 6, and for UAS-slikkd, n = 4. In cell lysates from imaginal 
discs in which Slik is overexpressed (UAS-slik), the more hyperphosphory-
lated  (slower  migrating)  bands  are  relatively  more  abundant,  as  evi-
denced by the increased ratio of top to bottom bands. Expression of the 
kinase-inactive Slik (UAS-slikkd) has a similar phosphorylation pattern to 
wild type. All samples in this blot are from the same experiment but have 
been rearranged for order. (B) To conﬁ rm that the shift observed in migra-
tion  of  the  Merlin  bands  is  caused  by  phosphorylation,  samples  were 
treated  with  λ  phosphatase.  All  Merlin  staining  is  reduced  to  a  single 
species after this treatment. The samples in this blot are representative ex-
amples taken from a separate experiment than that shown in A. In this 
case, the UAS-slikkd sample was under loaded. (C) The phosphorylation 
patterns  of  MerT616D  and  MerT616A  in  the  presence  or  absence  of  co-
expressed Slik kinase in S2 cells. The slowest migrating form of MerT616D is 
enhanced relative to MerT616A. Neither pattern is altered by the coexpres-
sion of Slik. (D) In vitro GST pull-down assay showing a direct interaction 
between  the  S35-labeled  Slik  protein  (arrow)  and  both  GST-Merlin  and 
GST-Moesin  but  not  with  GST  alone.  This  blot  is  taken  from  a  single 
experiment. A background band above Slik is also present in the GST 
control. FT, ﬂ ow through.

Expressed  MerT616D  displays  a  prominent  hyperphosphory-
lated  band,  whereas  this  band  is  much  less  prominent  in  ex-
pressed MerT616A (Fig. 3 C). These results indicate that sites in 
addition to Thr616 are phosphorylated in Merlin and suggest that 
the phosphorylation state of Thr616 may regulate the phosphory-
lation of these sites by other kinases. The addition of Slik kinase 
does not appear to alter the phosphorylation pattern of either 
 mutant (Fig. 3 C), which is consistent with the notion that Slik 
acts on Merlin via phosphorylation of the Thr616 residue.

If  Slik’s  effects  on  Merlin  localization  are  mediated  by 
phosphorylation, phosphomimetic Merlin mutations should af-
fect subcellular localization in a similar manner to the cotrans-
fection of wild-type Merlin with Slik. To examine this, MerT616D 
and MerT616A were tested in the aforementioned S2 cell traffi cking 
assay.  As  we  observed  for  wild-type  Merlin  in  the  presence 
of Slik kinase (Fig. 2 F), MerT616D alone traffi cked very slowly 

Figure 4.  Slik activity inhibits Merlin function genetically. The phenotypic 
modiﬁ cation of an activated Merlin protein (Mer1-600) by reduction in Slik 
function was analyzed. (A) A representative example of a male wild-type 
wing from ﬂ ies carrying the apGAL4 driver, which is expressed in the dor-
sal surface of the wing. (B) A representative example of a wing in which 
activated Merlin (Mer1-600) is expressed in the dorsal surface of the wing 
under the apGAL4 driver. There is a mean 15% decrease in wing area 
from the wild type. (C) Removal of one copy of slik1 in the wings expressing 
Mer1-600 produces a further reduction in wing area by a mean of 18% from 
the wild type. Thus, reduction of Slik function enhances the activated Merlin 
phenotype. Measurements in each panel represent the mean area of the 
wing (millimeters squared) for each genotype. For each combination, at 
least 10 wings were measured. Bar, 200 μm.

off the plasma membrane (Fig. 2 H). However, MerT616A inter-
nalized from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasm with even 
faster kinetics than Mer+ or Mer+ coexpressed with kinase-
 inactive Slik (Fig. 2, compare I with E and G). These results indi-
cate  that  one  effect  of  phosphorylation  is  to  regulate  Merlin 
traffi cking and subcellular localization. They also suggest that 
phosphorylated  Merlin  remains  closely  associated  with  the 
plasma  membrane,  whereas  hypophosphorylated  Merlin  rap-
idly traffi cs off of the membrane, possibly in association with 
transmembrane proteins.

To ask whether Slik interacts directly with Moesin and 
Merlin, we used an in vitro GST pull-down assay (Fig. 3 D). 
The  results  indicate  that  bacterially  expressed  Merlin  and 
Moesin both bind to Slik in vitro. In addition, we attempted 
to determine  whether  purifi ed  Slik  can  phosphorylate  either 
 Moesin or Merlin in vitro. However, as previously shown for 
Moesin (Hipfner et al., 2004), we were unable to detect direct 
phosphorylation of Merlin or Moesin by Slik kinase (unpub-
lished data). Whether this indicates that Slik acts in vivo via 
intermediary  kinases  or  requires  unidentifi ed  cofactors  not 
present  in  our  experiments  is  unknown,  but  the  observation 
that  Slik  interacts  directly  with  both  Moesin  and  Merlin  is 
 consistent with the idea that they serve as substrates for Slik’s 
 kinase activity.

SLIK KINASE REGULATES MERLIN ACTIVITY • HUGHES AND FEHON 309

enhances the phenotype from expressing an activated form of 
Merlin, suggesting that Slik antagonizes Merlin function. This 
phenotypic  interaction  is  most  likely  mediated  through  Slik’s 
effects  on  endogenously  expressed  wild-type  Merlin  acting 
 synergistically with the coexpressed Mer1-600, which lacks the 
Thr616 residue.

Is Slik regulation of Merlin independent 
of Moesin?
The evidence presented thus far supports a model whereby Slik 
controls Merlin subcellular localization and function by regu-
lating its phosphorylation state. In this model, Slik directly af-
fects Merlin function. Alternatively, it is possible that Slik alters 
Merlin  activity  indirectly  through  its  previously  documented 
effects  on  Moesin  function  (Hipfner  et  al.,  2004). To  address 
this question, we asked whether the expression of a phospho-
mimetic Moesin mutation, MoeT559D, which has been shown to 
be  active  even  in  the  absence  of  slik  function  (Hipfner  et  al., 
2004), could rescue the effects of the loss of slik on Merlin sub-
cellular localization (Fig. 1). For this experiment, we used the 
mosaic analysis with a repressible cell marker (MARCM) tech-
nique to express MoeT559D specifi cally in slik- somatic mosaic 
clones. This technique allows the overexpression of one protein 
(MoeT559D)  while  removing  the  expression  of  another  protein 
(Slik) in the same set of cells. As shown in Fig. 5 A, the expres-
sion of activated Moesin does not reverse Merlin mislocaliza-
tion away from the apical membrane in slik− cells, indicating 
that  the  effect  of  Slik  on  Merlin  is  not  mediated  through  its 
effects on Moesin activation. 

If Merlin and Moesin are substrates for Slik-dependent 
phosphorylation,  one  might  predict  that  Moesin  and  Merlin 
act competitively for Slik activity. To address this, we exam-
ined the effect of Slik overexpression on Merlin localization 
in  the  apical  domain  in  the  presence  or  absence  of  Moesin 
protein.  The  expression  of  Slik  alone  under  the  control  of 
the enGAL4 driver in the posterior compartment resulted in 
no  discernable  effect  on  Merlin  (Fig.  5  E′′). To  address  the 
potential role of Moesin, we simultaneously reduced  Moesin 
function  using  a  transgene  that  produces  double-stranded 
RNA for Moesin (Karagiosis and Ready, 2004). Reduction of 
Moesin  expression  using  this  RNAi  transgene  alone  results 
in  a  subtle  increase  in  Merlin  protein  staining  in  the  apical 
 domain  (Fig.  5  B′′).  However,  the  expression  of  wild-type 
Slik  in  combination  with  a  reduction  in  Moesin  produced  a 
marked increase in Merlin protein staining in the apical domain 
(Fig. 5 C′′), indicating a shift toward increased apical localization. 
In contrast, coexpression of kinase-dead (kd) Slik (Slikkd) and 
the Moesin RNAi transgene had no apparent effect on Merlin 
(Fig. 5 D′′), indicating again that Slik kinase activity is necessary 
for these effects.

We  also  addressed  the  relationship  between  Merlin  and 
Moesin  using  the  aforementioned  S2  cell  traffi cking  assay. 
 Coexpression of Merlin and Moesin does not alter the subcellular 
traffi cking of Merlin (Fig. 2, J vs. E). However, the coexpres-
sion of Moesin blocks the effect of Slik on Merlin traffi cking 
(Fig. 2, compare E with K), which is consistent with the hypoth-
esis that Moesin and Merlin act as competitive substrates.

Figure 5.  Slik affects Merlin independently of Moesin. The effect of Slik on 
Merlin was analyzed in the presence or absence of Moesin. (A–A′′) An 
activated Moesin (MoeT559D) transgene was expressed in slik1 clones using 
the  MARCM  technique.  Mutant  clones  are  positively  marked  with  GFP. 
Within slik1 clones, the expression of a constitutively active Moesin does not 
rescue the mislocalization of Merlin protein away from the apical membrane. 
(B–B′′)  A  Moesin  RNAi  transgene  expressed  under  the  control  of  the 
enGAL4 driver in the posterior compartment produces a subtle increase 
in Merlin staining. (C–C′′) Coexpression of a Moesin RNAi transgene to 
knock  down  Moesin  expression  together  with  UAS-slik  in  posterior  cells 
 results in a clear increase in Merlin protein staining in the apical domain. 
Note that the boundary between the anterior and posterior compartments 
is clearly deﬁ ned in C′′. (D–D′′) Coexpression of a Moesin RNAi trans-
gene with UAS-slikkd does not alter Merlin staining or localization, indicat-
ing that the kinase activity of Slik is required. (E–E′′) Expression of UAS-slik 
using enGAL4 in the presence of normal levels of Moesin has no detect-
able effect on Merlin protein staining in the posterior compartment of a 
third  imaginal  wing  disc.  Arrows  mark  the  anterior-posterior  boundary, 
with posterior to the right. Bar, 10 μm.

Slik interacts genetically with Merlin
As a further test of functional interaction between Merlin and 
Slik, we examined genetic interactions between Merlin and slik 
mutations. Specifi cally, we asked whether reducing slik func-
tion genetically modifi es the phenotype of an activated Merlin 
transgene (Mer1-600; LaJeunesse et al., 1998) that confers growth 
suppression.  The  expression  of  Mer1-600  in  wild-  type  wings 
causes  a  reduction  in  size  by  a  mean  of  15%  from  wild  type 
(P = 0.01; Fig. 4, A vs. B). Using this sensitized genetic back-
ground, we asked whether manipulating slik gene dose affects 
the activity of endogenously expressed wild-type Merlin. The 
reduction of slik dose (slik is completely recessive) by one half 
in this genetic background reduced wing size by a mean of 18% 
(P = 0.002; Fig. 4, A vs. C). Thus, reduction in Slik function 

 

310

JCB • VOLUME 175 • NUMBER 2 • 2006

Further studies to examine Slik expression and the regulation of 
its function will be of interest in this regard.

This  study  also  provides  the  fi rst  genetic  evidence  that 
Moesin  and  Merlin  functionally  interact  through  competition 
for Slik kinase activity, although previous studies have shown 
physical interactions between these proteins (Gonzalez-Agosti 
et al., 1999; Gronholm et al., 1999; Meng et al., 2000). It is in-
teresting  to  note  that  in  mammalian  Schwann  RT4  cell  lines, 
expressing  constitutively  phosphorylated  Merlin  not  only  im-
pairs the ability of Merlin to suppress proliferation and motility 
but  also  induces  a  novel  ERM-like  phenotype  (Surace  et  al., 
2004). Surace et al. (2004) attribute this phenotype to the con-
version of Merlin to an ERM-like molecule. However, if Merlin 
and Moesin are also coordinately regulated in mammalian cells, 
an alternative possibility is that overexpression of a phosphomi-
metic Merlin could affect the phosphorylation state of endoge-
nous ERM proteins, thereby increasing their level of activity.

We  found  that  the  loss  of  slik  function  results  in  a  dra-
matic shift in Merlin localization from the apical plasma mem-
brane  to  punctate  cytoplasmic  structures. We  have  previously 
shown that Merlin traffi cs from the plasma membrane with endo-
cytic vesicles in cultured cells (McCartney and Fehon, 1996), 
raising the possibility that in the absence of Slik, activated Merlin 
is more stably associated with endocytic compartments than 
in normal cells. If this is so, inactive Merlin may reside at the 
plasma membrane and, in response to activation, traffi cs inter-
nally, presumably in association with transmembrane proteins. 
If  this  model  is  correct,  it  suggests  that  Merlin  may  function 
in tumor  suppression  by  facilitating  removal  from  the  plasma 
membrane of receptors that promote cell proliferation. This 
model fi ts well with our recent observation that several recep-
tors, including Notch and the EGF receptor, accumulate to ab-
normal levels on the surface of cells that are mutant for Merlin 
and the functionally redundant related tumor suppressor expanded 
(Maitra et al., 2006).

Several important questions remain regarding the regula-
tion of Moesin and Merlin that we have described in this study. 
It remains unclear whether Slik itself can directly phosphorylate 
either protein or whether there are one or more kinases operat-
ing  downstream  of  Slik. Additionally,  the  dual  functions  de-
scribed  here  may  provide  novel  insights  into  the  role  of  the 
mammalian orthologues of Slik, such as PAK, in the malignant 
transformation of epithelial cells. Equally important will be to 
elucidate how Slik activity is itself controlled. Given its ability 
to simultaneously regulate epithelial integrity and proliferation 
in developing epithelial tissues, Slik may function as a central 
integrator of the multitude of signals that converge to regulate 
growth and morphology during development.

Materials and methods
Drosophila stocks
The UAS-slik and kinase-inactive slik transgenes are described in Hipfner 
and  Cohen  (2003).  For  Slik  loss  of  function  analysis  in  imaginal  discs, 
non-GFP larvae were selected from w−; FRT42D, slik1/CyO, KrGAL4, UAS-
GFP (Hipfner  and  Cohen,  2003).  For  overexpression  studies,  UAS-Myc-
Mer+ (LaJeunesse et al., 1998), UAS-Myc-Moe+, UAS-Myc-MoeT559A, and 
UAS-Myc-MoeT559D  (Speck  et  al.,  2003)  were  expressed  by  crossing  to 
apGAL4  ﬂ ies  (Brand  and  Perrimon,  1993).  A  Moesin  RNAi  transgene 

Figure  6.  Schematic  diagram  of  functional  relationships  between  Slik, 
Merlin, Moesin, and the regulation of tissue integrity and proliferation in 
developing epithelia. As demonstrated in this study, Slik activity simultane-
ously promotes Moesin function and inhibits Merlin. Our previous results 
have shown that Moesin functions to negatively regulate Rho activity and 
promote epithelial integrity (Speck et al., 2003). Merlin functions to restrict 
proliferation in the same epithelia. Thus, the net result of Slik activity is to 
drive proliferation and simultaneously stabilize epithelial integrity.

Discussion

A previous study has shown that the Slik kinase positively regu-
lates Moesin activity via phosphorylation near the C terminus, 
thereby inhibiting activation of the Rho small GTPase and pro-
moting epithelial integrity (Hipfner et al., 2004).  Overexpression 
of Slik in imaginal tissues results in the hyperphosphorylation 
of Merlin, suggesting that in addition to Moesin, Slik regulates 
the phosphorylation state of Merlin. Interestingly, in mamma-
lian cells, Merlin phosphorylation is affected by PAK, which, 
like Slik, is a member of the Ste20 family of kinases (Dan et al., 
2001).  Current  models  of  Merlin  function  predict  that  hyper-
phosphorylated Merlin is inactive (Bretscher et al., 2002), which 
is consistent with our observation that slik functions antagonis-
tically to Merlin in genetic interaction tests. In accord with this 
notion, slik was originally identifi ed in a misexpression screen 
by its ability to cause overproliferation when expressed ectopi-
cally in imaginal epithelia (Hipfner and Cohen, 2003). Collec-
tively, the data presented here leads us to predict that activity of 
the Slik kinase coordinately regulates both epithelial  morphology 
and, at the same time, cell proliferation (for summary see Fig. 6). 
To our knowledge, this is the fi rst demonstration of a single 
mechanism with the potential to regulate both processes simul-
taneously in developing tissues.

We  speculate  that  the  observed  coordinate  regulation  of 
Merlin and Moesin may be important in the developing imagi-
nal discs during larval and pupal development. In larval stages, 
most  imaginal  epithelia  proliferate  rapidly  and  at  the  same 
time maintain a highly structured epithelial monolayer (Bilder, 
2004). At this stage, Slik activity could allow high rates of pro-
liferation and simultaneously promote epithelial integrity that 
is necessary to prevent the unregulated growth or invasive cell 
behavior. At the end of larval life and at the onset of metamor-
phosis, the cell cycle slows dramatically, and, at the same time, the 
imaginal discs radically change shape during a morphogenetic 
process termed eversion. Previous studies have shown that these 
shape changes require rearrangements of local contacts between 
cells (Condic et al., 1991; Irvine and Wieschaus, 1994; Goode 
and Perrimon, 1997), suggesting that epithelial integrity must 
be modulated. We predict that at this stage, Slik function may be 
decreased to coordinate these changes in the imaginal epithelium. 

SLIK KINASE REGULATES MERLIN ACTIVITY • HUGHES AND FEHON 311

(Karagiosis  and  Ready,  2004)  was  crossed  to  enGAL4   ﬂ ies.  All  other 
stocks were obtained from the Bloomington Stock Center.

Pulse-chase of Merlin protein in Drosophila Schneider cells
S2 cells were cotransfected with either UAS-slik+ or UAS-slikkd and pCasper 
ubiquitin  GAL4  along  with  pCasper-hs  Mer+  to  allow  the  simultaneous 
 expression  of  wild-type  Slik  ubiquitously  and  a  heat  shock–driven  pulse 
(30 min at 37°C) of expression of wild-type hsGFP-tagged Merlin (hsMer+). 
 hsMer+ retains wild-type function (LaJeunesse et al., 1998). pCasperHS Myc 
MerT616A and pCasperHS Myc MerT616D were made by mutating Thr 616 to 
alanine  or  aspartic  acid  using  complementary  oligonucleotides  and  the 
QuikChange method (Stratagene; constructed by R. Kulikauskas, Duke 
 University, Durham, NC). Mutations were conﬁ rmed by sequencing. Cells 
were collected, ﬁ xed in 2% PFA for 20 min at room temperature, and Merlin 
GFP patterns were analyzed at 1, 3, and 6 h after heat shock. At least 
three independent replicates were scored for each experiment. For each 
combination and time point analyzed, a minimum of 150 transfected cells 
were  counted.  Myc-tagged  constructs  were  detected  using  monoclonal 
anti-Myc  at  1:4,000  (9B10;  Cell  Signaling).  Slik  was  detected  using  a 
polyclonal antibody (Hipfner and Cohen, 2003). Myc and Slik were then 
visualized  using  cyanine  dye  CY3,  FITC  secondary  antibodies  (Jackson 
 ImmunoResearch Laboratories), and cells mounted in ProLong (Invitrogen). 
Cells  were  analyzed  using  a  confocal  microscope  (LSM510;  Carl  Zeiss 
 MicroImaging, Inc.) and a plan-Apo 63× NA 1.4 lens.

Immunoblotting and immunolocalization
To characterize the phosphorylation patterns of Merlin protein, late third 
instar wing imaginal discs were dissected in Drosophila serum-free media 
(Invitrogen)  and  homogenized  in  lysis  buffer  (20  mM  Hepes,  pH  7.0, 
50  mM  NaCl,  1  mM  EDTA,  0.5  mM  EGTA,  10  mM  DTT,  1.0%  Triton 
X-100, Complete Protease Inhibitor [Roche], 50 mM NaF, 30 mM Na 
 pyrophosphate, and 100 μm Na orthovanadate). Merlin protein complexes 
were  subsequently  immunoprecipitated  using  guinea  pig  anti-Merlin 
linked to Sepharose protein A beads (McCartney and Fehon, 1996) and 
separated on 8% (118:1) polyacrylamide gels (Scheid et al., 1999). For 
phosphatase  treatment  after  immunoprecipitation,  the  protein  A  beads 
were precipitated, and one half was then treated with 400 U λ phos-
phatase  (New  England  Biolabs,  Inc.)  at  30°C  for  45  min  followed  by 
Western blot analysis.

Wandering third instar larvae were dissected in serum-free Drosophila 
media and ﬁ xed in either 4% PFA or ice-cold 10% TCA (Hayashi et al., 
1999) for 20 min. For Western analysis (W) and immunolocalization (I), 
antibodies  used  were  as  follows:  guinea  pig  anti-Slik  at  1:40,000  (W) 
and 1:10,000 (I; provided by S. Cohen and D. Hipfner, European Molecular 
Biology  Laboratory,  Heidelberg,  Germany),  rabbit  anti-Moesin  D44  at 
1:40,000 (W) and 1:20,000 (I; provided by D. Kiehart, Duke University, 
Durham, NC), rabbit antiphospho-Moesin at 1:10,000 (I; obtained from 
D. Ready, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN), guinea pig anti-Merlin at 
1:10,000, rhodamine phalloidin at 1:1,000 (Invitrogen), mouse anti-
 coracle at 1:500, and mouse anti–β-tubulin at 1:5,000 (W; E7; developed by 
M. Klymkowsky and obtained from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma 
Bank, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IO). Appropriate secondary ﬂ uo-
rescent antibodies (FITC and cyanine dyes CY3 and CY5) were obtained 
from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories and were used at 1:1,000. 
Western blots were visualized and quantiﬁ ed using an infrared imaging 
system (Odyssey; LI-COR). Immunostained tissues were mounted in ProLong 
(Invitrogen) and analyzed using either an LSM410 or LSM510 confocal 
microscope (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Inc.) with a plan-Apo 63× NA 1.4 
lens. Figures were compiled in Photoshop 7.0.1 (Adobe).

In vitro GST pull-down assay
GST, GST-Merlin, and GST-Moesin fusion proteins were grown in BL21 cells 
overnight at 37°C. Cultures were diluted 1:100, grown to an OD260 of 1, 
and GST constructs were induced by adding 1 mM IPTG and grown at 
18°C for 3 h. Lysates were sonicated and batch incubated with glutathione–
Sepharose 4B for 3 h at 4°C and washed in columns with an excess of 
10 bed volumes of 1× PBS. [S35]methionine-labeled probe protein (Slik) 
was prepared using the T7 TNT Quick Coupled Transcription/Translation 
System  (Promega)  according  to  the  manufacturer’s  instructions.  Proteins 
were incubated at 4°C for 4 h and boiled in SDS sample buffer, and pro-
teins were separated on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel, transferred to nitrocellulose, 
and exposed to ﬁ lm.

Generation of mosaic and MARCM clones
Larvae of the genotype w; 42DFRT Ubi-GFPnls/42DFRT slik1; hsFLP or UAS-
CD8-GFP hsFlp; FRT42 Gal80; TubG4/FRT 42D slik1; UAS MYC-MoeT559D 

were heat shocked at 36 ± 12 h after egg laying for 1 h at 37°C, 1 h at 
25°C, and 1 h at 37°C. Wing imaginal discs were dissected from wander-
ing  third  instar  larval  stages  and  ﬁ xed  in  4%  PFA.  GFP  was  visualized 
 directly. Moesin was detected with rabbit anti-Moesin D44 at 1:20,000 
(provided by D. Kiehart), and Merlin was detected with guinea pig anti-
Merlin at 1:10,000. Moesin and Merlin were then visualized using cya-
nine  dye  CY3  and  FITC  secondary  antibodies,  respectively  (Jackson 
ImmunoResearch  Laboratories),  and  cells  were  mounted  in  ProLong 
(Invitrogen). Cells were analyzed using a confocal microscope (LSM510; 
Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Inc.) with a plan-Apo 63× NA 1.4 lens.

Wing measurements
Crosses with ﬂ ies of the appropriate genotypes were raised at 25°C, and 
wings  were  analyzed  as  described  previously  (LaJeunesse  et  al.,  2001). 
 Images were collected on a camera (AxioCam HRm; Carl Zeiss  MicroImaging, 
Inc.) mounted on a microscope (Axiovert 200M; Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, 
Inc.) using a Fluar 5× NA 0.25 lens. Area measurements of each wing 
were obtained from images using the free draw tool in ImageJ software 
(National Institutes of Health). Statistics were calculated using Excel (Micro-
soft), and ﬁ gures were compiled in Photoshop 7.0.1 (Adobe).

We  thank  A.  Neisch,  S.  Maitra,  I.  Rebay,  A.  Simmonds,  and  members  of 
the  Fehon  laboratory  for  comments  and  critical  reading  of  the  manuscript, 
R.  Kulikauskas  for  Merlin  constructs,  and  D.  Hipfner  and  S.  Cohen  for  Slik 
 reagents. We also thank A. Simmonds for allowing part of this work to be 
completed in his laboratory.

S.C. Hughes was the recipient of a Young Investigator Award from the 
Children’s Tumor Foundation (formerly known as the National Neuroﬁ bromatosis 
Foundation). This work was funded by grant NS034783 from the National 
 Institutes of Health.

Submitted: 2 August 2006
Accepted: 19 September 2006

References
Bilder,  D.  2004.  Epithelial  polarity  and  proliferation  control:  links  from  the 

Drosophila neoplastic tumor suppressors. Genes Dev. 18:1909–1925.

Bilder, D., M. Li, and N. Perrimon. 2000. Cooperative regulation of cell polarity 

and growth by Drosophila tumor suppressors. Science. 289:113–116.

Brand, A.H., and N. Perrimon. 1993. Targeted gene expression as a means of altering 
cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes. Development. 118:401–415.
Bretscher, A., K. Edwards, and R.G. Fehon. 2002. ERM proteins and Merlin: 

integrators at the cell cortex. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:586–599.

Bryant, P.J., and P. Simpson. 1984. Intrinsic and extrinsic control of growth in 

developing organs. Q. Rev. Biol. 59:387–415.

Condic, M.L., D. Fristrom, and J.W. Fristrom. 1991. Apical cell shape changes 
during Drosophila imaginal leg disc elongation: a novel morphogenetic 
mechanism. Development. 111:23–33.

Dan, I., N.M. Watanabe, and A. Kusumi. 2001. The Ste20 group kinases as regu-

lators of MAP kinase cascades. Trends Cell Biol. 11:220–230.

Gary, R., and A. Bretscher. 1995. Ezrin self-association involves binding of an 
N-terminal domain to a normally masked C-terminal domain that  includes 
the F-actin binding site. Mol. Biol. Cell. 6:1061–1075.

Goode, S., and N. Perrimon. 1997. Inhibition of patterned cell shape change and 
cell  invasion  by  Discs  large  during  Drosophila  oogenesis.  Genes  Dev. 
11:2532–2544.

Gonzalez-Agosti, C., T. Wiederhold, M.E. Herndon, J. Gusella, and V. Ramesh. 
1999.  Interdomain  interaction  of  Merlin  isoforms  and  its  infl uence  on 
intermolecular binding to NHE-RF. J. Biol. Chem. 274:34438–34442.

Gronholm, M., M. Sainio, F. Zhao, L. Heiska, A. Vaheri, and O. Carpen. 1999. 
Homotypic and heterotypic interaction of the neurofi bromatosis 2 tumor 
suppressor  protein  Merlin  and  the  ERM  protein  ezrin.  J.  Cell  Sci. 
112:895–904.

Gutmann, D.H., L. Sherman, L. Seftor, C. Haipek, K. Hoang Lu, and M. Hendrix. 
1999. Increased expression of the NF2 tumor suppressor gene product, Merlin, 
impairs cell motility, adhesion and spreading. Hum. Mol. Genet. 8:267–275.
Hayashi,  K.,  S. Yonemura,  T.  Matsui,  and  S.  Tsukita.  1999.  Immunofl uores-
cence  detection  of  ezrin/radixin/Moesin  (ERM)  proteins  with  their 
carboxyl-terminal threonine phosphorylated in cultured cells and tissues. 
J. Cell Sci. 112:1149–1158.

Hipfner, D.R., and S.M. Cohen. 2003. The Drosophila sterile-20 kinase slik con-
trols cell proliferation and apoptosis during imaginal disc development. 
PLoS Biol. 1:E35.

 

312

JCB • VOLUME 175 • NUMBER 2 • 2006

Sherman, L., H.M. Xu, R.T. Geist, S. Saporito-Irwin, N. Howells, H. Ponta, P. 
Herrlich, and D.H. Gutmann. 1997. Interdomain binding mediates tumor 
growth suppression by the NF2 gene product. Oncogene. 15:2505–2509.
Speck, O., S.C. Hughes, N.K. Noren, R.M. Kulikauskas, and R.G. Fehon. 2003. 
Moesin functions antagonistically to the Rho pathway to maintain epithe-
lial integrity. Nature. 421:83–87.

Surace,  E.I.,  C.A.  Haipek,  and  D.H.  Gutmann.  2004.  Effect  of  Merlin  phos-
phorylation  on  neurofi bromatosis  2  (NF2)  gene  function.  Oncogene. 
23:580–587.

Tran Quang, C., A. Gautreau, M. Arpin, and R. Treisman. 2000. Ezrin function is 
required for ROCK-mediated fi broblast transformation by the net and dbl 
oncogenes. EMBO J. 19:4565–4576.

Trofatter,  J.A.,  M.M.  MacCollin,  J.L.  Rutter,  J.R.  Murrell,  M.P.  Duyao,  D.M. 
Parry, R. Eldridge, N. Kley, A.G. Menon, K. Pulaski, et al. 1993a. A novel 
Moesin-, ezrin-, radixin-like gene is a candidate for the  neurofi bromatosis 
2  tumor  suppressor.  Cell.  75:826.  (published  erratum  appears  in  Cell. 
1993. 72:791–800.

Trofatter,  J.A.,  M.M.  MacCollin,  J.L.  Rutter,  J.R.  Murrell,  M.P.  Duyao,  D.M. 
Parry, R. Eldridge, N. Kley, A.G. Menon, K. Pulaski, et al. 1993b. A novel 
Moesin-, ezrin-, radixin-like gene is a candidate for the neurofi bromatosis 
2 tumor suppressor. Cell. 72:791–800.

Xiao, G.H., A. Beeser, J. Chernoff, and J.R. Testa. 2002. p21-activated kinase 

links Rac/Cdc42 signaling to Merlin. J. Biol. Chem. 277:883–886.

Zeitler, J., C.P. Hsu, H. Dionne, and D. Bilder. 2004. Domains controlling cell 
polarity and proliferation in the Drosophila tumor suppressor Scribble. 
J. Cell Biol. 167:1137–1146.

Hipfner,  D.R.,  N.  Keller,  and  S.M.  Cohen.  2004.  Slik  Sterile-20  kinase  regu-
lates Moesin activity to promote epithelial integrity during tissue growth. 
Genes Dev. 18:2243–2248.

Irvine,  K.D.,  and  E.  Wieschaus.  1994.  Cell  intercalation  during  Drosophila 
germband extension and its regulation by pair-rule segmentation genes. 
Development. 120:827–841.

Johnston,  L.A.,  and  P.  Gallant.  2002.  Control  of  growth  and  organ  size  in 

Drosophila. Bioessays. 24:54–64.

Kalcheim,  C.,  and  T.  Burstyn-Cohen.  2005.  Early  stages  of  neural  crest 
 ontogeny: formation and regulation of cell delamination. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 
49:105–116.

Karagiosis, S.A., and D.F. Ready. 2004. Moesin contributes an essential struc-
tural  role  in  Drosophila  photoreceptor  morphogenesis.  Development. 
131:725–732.

Kissil, J.L., K.C. Johnson, M.S. Eckman, and T. Jacks. 2002. Merlin phosphory-
lation by p21-activated kinase 2 and effects of phosphorylation on Merlin 
localization. J. Biol. Chem. 277:10394–10399.

LaJeunesse, D.R., B.M. McCartney, and R.G. Fehon. 1998. Structural analysis 
of  Drosophila  Merlin  reveals  functional  domains  important  for  growth 
control and subcellular localization. J. Cell Biol. 141:1589–1599.

LaJeunesse,  D.R.,  B.M.  McCartney,  and  R.G.  Fehon.  2001.  A  systematic 
screen  for  dominant  second-site  modifi ers  of  Merlin/NF2  phenotypes 
reveals  an  interaction  with  blistered/DSRF  and  scribbler.  Genetics. 
158:667–679.

Maitra,  S.,  R.M.  Kulikauskas,  H.  Gavilan,  and  R.G.  Fehon.  2006. The  tumor 
suppressors Merlin and expanded function cooperatively to modulate re-
ceptor endocytosis and signaling. Curr. Biol. 16:702–709.

Matsui, T.,  M.  Maeda, Y.  Doi,  S. Yonemura,  M. Amano,  K.  Kaibuchi,  and  S. 
Tsukita.  1998.  Rho-kinase  phosphorylates  COOH-terminal  threonines 
of ezrin/radixin/Moesin (ERM) proteins and regulates their head-to-tail 
association. J. Cell Biol. 140:647–657.

McCartney, B.M., and R.G. Fehon. 1996. Distinct cellular and subcellular pat-
terns  of  expression  imply  distinct  functions  for  the  Drosophila  homo-
logues of Moesin and the neurofi bromatosis 2 tumor suppressor, Merlin. 
J. Cell Biol. 133:843–852.

Meng,  J.J.,  D.J.  Lowrie,  H.  Sun,  E.  Dorsey,  P.D.  Pelton,  A.M.  Bashour,  J. 
Groden, N. Ratner, and W. Ip. 2000. Interaction between two isoforms 
of the NF2 tumor suppressor protein, Merlin, and between Merlin and 
ezrin, suggests modulation of ERM proteins by Merlin. J. Neurosci. Res. 
62:491–502.

Morrison, H., L.S. Sherman, J. Legg, F. Banine, C. Isacke, C.A. Haipek, D.H. 
Gutmann,  H.  Ponta,  and  P.  Herrlich.  2001. The  NF2  tumor  suppressor 
gene product, Merlin, mediates contact inhibition of growth through inter-
actions with CD44. Genes Dev. 15:968–980.

Nakamura, F., M.R. Amieva, and H. Furthmayr. 1995. Phosphorylation of threonine 
558 in the carboxyl-terminal actin-binding domain of Moesin by throm-
bin activation of human platelets. J. Biol. Chem. 270:31377–31385.

Nakamura, F., L. Huang, K. Pestonjamasp, E.J. Luna, and H. Furthmayr. 1999. 
Regulation of F-actin binding to platelet Moesin in vitro by both phos-
phorylation of threonine 558 and polyphosphatidylinositides. Mol. Biol. 
Cell. 10:2669–2685.

Nguyen, R., D. Reczek, and A. Bretscher. 2001. Hierarchy of Merlin and ezrin 
N- and C-terminal domain interactions in homo- and heterotypic associa-
tions and their relationship to binding of scaffolding proteins EBP50 and 
E3KARP. J. Biol. Chem. 276:7621–7629.

Oshiro,  N., Y.  Fukata,  and  K.  Kaibuchi.  1998.  Phosphorylation  of  Moesin  by 
rho-associated kinase (Rho-kinase) plays a crucial role in the formation 
of microvilli-like structures. J. Biol. Chem. 273:34663–34666.

Rouleau,  G.A.,  P.  Merel,  M.  Lutchman,  M.  Sanson,  J.  Zucman,  C.  Marineau, 
K.  Hoang-Xuan,  S.  Demczuk,  C.  Desmaze,  B.  Plougastel,  et  al.  1993. 
Alteration in a new gene encoding a putative membrane-organizing pro-
tein causes neuro-fi bromatosis type 2. Nature. 363:515–521.

Scheid,  M.P.,  K.M.  Schubert,  and V.  Duronio.  1999.  Regulation  of  bad  phos-
phorylation  and  association  with  Bcl-x(L)  by  the  MAPK/Erk  kinase. 
J. Biol. Chem. 274:31108–31113.

Scherer, S.S., and D.H. Gutmann. 1996. Expression of the neurofi bromatosis 2 
tumor  suppressor  gene  product,  Merlin,  in  Schwann  cells.  J.  Neurosci. 
Res. 46:595–605.

Schmucker, B., W.G. Ballhausen, and M. Kressel. 1997. Subcellular localization 
and  expression  pattern  of  the  neurofi bromatosis  type  2  protein  Merlin/
schwannomin. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 72:46–53.

Shaw, R.J., A.I. McClatchey, and T. Jacks. 1998. Regulation of the neurofi bro-
matosis type 2 tumor suppressor protein, Merlin, by adhesion and growth 
arrest stimuli. J. Biol. Chem. 273:7757–7764.

Shaw, R.J., J.G. Paez, M. Curto, A. Yaktine, W.M. Pruitt, I. Saotome, J.P. O’Bryan, 
V.  Gupta,  N.  Ratner,  C.J.  Der,  et  al.  2001.  The  Nf2  tumor  suppressor, 
Merlin, functions in Rac-dependent signaling. Dev. Cell. 1:63–72.

SLIK KINASE REGULATES MERLIN ACTIVITY • HUGHES AND FEHON 313

