REVIEW

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

Mouse models of altered protein kinase A
signaling

Lawrence S Kirschner, Zhirong Yin, Georgette N Jones and Emilia Mahoney

Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, and Department of Molecular Virology,
Immunology and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, 420 West 12th Avenue, TMRF 544, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA

(Correspondence should be addressed to L S Kirschner; Email: lawrence.kirschner@osumc.edu)

Abstract

Protein kinase A (PKA) is an evolutionarily conserved protein which has been studied in model
organisms from yeast to man. Although the cAMP–PKA signaling system was the ﬁrst mammalian
second messenger system to be characterized, many aspects of this pathway are still not well
understood. Owing to ﬁndings over the past decade implicating PKA signaling in endocrine (and
other) tumorigenesis, there has been renewed interest in understanding the role of this pathway in
physiology, particularly as it pertains to the endocrine system. Because of the availability of
genetic tools, mouse modeling has become the pre-eminent system for studying the physiological
role of speciﬁc genes and gene families as a means to understanding their relationship to human
diseases. In this review, we will summarize the current data regarding mouse models that have
targeted the PKA signaling system. These data have led to a better understanding of both the
complexity and the subtlety of PKA signaling, and point the way for future studies, which may help
to modulate this pathway for therapeutic effect.

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

Introduction

PKA as a pre-eminent second messenger system

Protein kinase A (PKA) or the cAMP-dependent protein
kinase is a serine–threonine kinase that was charac-
terized initially as mediating the effects of elevated
cAMP levels, which arose as a result of stimulation of
cell membrane by epinephrine (Sutherland & Rall 1958,
Walsh et al. 1968). These observations formed the
basis for understanding hormonal signaling, and
provided the basis for two Nobel prize awards in
Medicine, to Sutherland (in 1971) and subsequently to
Gilman & Rodbell (in 1994). Studies of PKA have
formed the basis of signal
transduction mediated
through protein phosphorylation, and the character-
ization of this enzyme can be thought to lie at the ‘root’
of recent analysis of all human protein kinases
(Manning et al. 2002).

In canonical PKA signaling, extracellular hormones
bind to G-protein coupled receptors, a large family
of seven transmembrane domain proteins involved
in many forms of intercellular communication. After
liganding of the receptor, a conformational change is

triggered to activate the associated heterotrimeric
G-protein. For PKA signaling, these receptors couple
to the stimulatory G-protein, Gs. Subsequent dissociation
of the Gs complex allows Gsa to associate with
membrane bound adenylyl cyclases (ACs), which
catalyze the conversion of ATP to cAMP. cAMP binds
to PKA, dissociating the inactive holoenzyme and induc-
ing phosphorylation of downstream targets (Fig. 1).

Through early characterization, it was determined
the PKA holoenzyme is comprised of four
that
subunits,
two of which are catalytically active
(PKAC subunits), and two of each serve to regulate
enzyme activity (PKAR subunits). When bound
together,
the heterotetrameric enzyme is inactive.
However, when cAMP levels within the cell rise in
response to membrane signaling, cAMP binds coop-
eratively to paired binding pockets on each of the
regulatory subunits, causing release of free, catalyti-
cally active, PKAC monomers. Initial studies revealed
that manipulation of PKA activity produced changes in
the activity of protein substrates (e.g. phosphorylase
kinase (Walsh et al. 1968)), but also changes in gene
transcription, a function mapped to PKA’s ability to

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793
1351–0088/09/016–773 q 2009 Society for Endocrinology Printed in Great Britain

DOI: 10.1677/ERC-09-0068
Online version via http://www.endocrinology-journals.org

L S Kirschner et al.: Mouse models of PKA

Figure 1 General overview of protein kinase A signaling. This diagram depicts the canonical PKA signaling pathway. In this model,
signaling is initiated by a hormone binding to a transmembrane receptor, activating Gsa, leading to the production of cAMP (blue
circles) by adenylyl cylase. cAMP binds to the PKA heterotetramer, releasing PKAR subunit dimers and free PKAC subunits (red
squares). The catalytic subunits phosphorylate both cytoplasmic and nuclear targets (for e.g. CREB), leading to the downstream
effects of this intercellular signaling mechanism. At right is shown a PKA–AKAP multiprotein complex which can lead to the
phosphorylation of substrates in a highly localized fashion in response to cAMP elevation.

phosphorylate the transcription factor cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB; Montminy 1997,
Mayr & Montminy 2001, Rosenberg et al. 2002),
which functionally binds throughout the DNA tran-
scriptome (Conkright et al. 2003). A myriad of studies
over the past 40 years have identiﬁed hundreds (if not
thousands) of PKA substrates, both in the nucleus and
in the cytoplasm (Budovskaya et al. 2005, Huang et al.
2007, Neuberger et al. 2007, Gao et al. 2008). Like
other post-translational protein modiﬁcations, PKA-
mediated phosphorylation can affect any aspect of
target protein function, including activity, localization,
and stability (Huang et al. 2000, Mason et al. 2002,
Higuchi et al. 2003, Qiao et al. 2003, Hoang et al.
2004, Hino et al. 2005, Rolli-Derkinderen et al. 2005),
such that PKA exerts complex effects on most biologic
systems. For this reason, pharmacologic or genetic
manipulation in tissue culture cells may produce only
a limited understanding of the pleomorphic role of
PKA signaling.

To better appreciate the complexity of PKA
signaling, signiﬁcant work has been invested in
generating mouse models with genetic manipulation
of the PKA system. Although these systems are all to
some extent artiﬁcial, they allow speciﬁc investigation
of various aspects of PKA signaling, with a focus on

altered physiology in an intact organism. Thus, these
mouse models provide perhaps the best way in which to
appreciate how modulation of this system may produce
physiological changes, and might proﬁtably be
modulated for therapeutic purposes. For the bulk of
the review, we will focus on genetic manipulation of the
PKA subunits themselves, although other genetic
models that affect PKA signaling will also be addressed.

Components of the PKA signaling system

Biochemistry of the PKA system
PKA is evolutionarily conserved, such that analysis of
PKA function has been carried out in organisms ranging
from yeast (Tamaki 2007, Thevelein et al. 2008),
through Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila
(Noveen et al. 1996, The et al. 1997, Vanﬂeteren &
De Vreese 1997, Angelo & Rubin 1998), to mammals
(Skalhegg & Tasken 2000). Because the review of
each of these model systems is beyond the scope
of this review, we will focus on the human PKA
system, and how this relates to the genetically tractable
mouse system.

Biochemical studies have identiﬁed two distinct
isoforms of PKA, which exhibit different physical and
biochemical properties. Type 1 PKA is eluted off anion
exchange chromatography columns at a relatively low

774

www.endocrinology-journals.org

salt concentration, and exhibits binding afﬁnity for
cAMP in the 40–50 nM range (Woodford et al. 1989).
By contrast,
type 2 PKA requires higher salt
concentrations to recover the enzyme, and exhibits a
slightly lower afﬁnity for cAMP, with afﬁnities in the
50–200 nM range (Robinson-Steiner et al. 1984,
Rannels et al. 1985). Because of both kinetic and
afﬁnity parameters of cAMP binding, it is thought that
the bulk of the cytosolic PKA activity derives from
dissociation of type 1 PKA complexes. However, this
does not exclude the likelihood that type 2 PKA plays
an important signaling roles owing to very high
localized concentrations of cAMP generated at the
site of
large multiprotein signaling complexes
nucleated by A-kinase anchoring proteins (AKAPs;
Feliciello et al. 2001, Diviani et al. 2006).

PKA catalytic subunits. At the genetic level, humans
have three PKAC subunit genes, designated as
PRKARCA, PRKARCB, and PRKARCG. The three
genes produce three corresponding -a, -b, and -g
isoforms of the catalytic subunits. Functional studies
have not identiﬁed signiﬁcant functional differences
among the three isoforms, although there is tissue-
speciﬁcity of expression. By contrast, there are only two
isoforms of PKA catalytic subunits found in mice – Ca
and Cb (encoded by Prkaca and Prkacb). Of these two
isoforms, there also exist splice variants that have
similarities to those found in humans. The Ca subunit
consists of two splice variants deﬁned as Ca1 and Ca2,
also referred to as Ca-s (Uhler et al. 1986a,b, San
Agustin & Witman 2001). Although the Ca1 isoform is
expressed ubiquitously in mice, the expression of Ca2
is restricted to male germ cells, and it was shown that
Ca2 is the only catalytic subunit of PKA expressed in
mature sperm (Desseyn et al. 2000). Cb, on the other
hand, has three splice variants – Cb1, Cb2, and Cb3
(Uhler et al. 1986a,b, Guthrie et al. 1997). Cb1 is
ubiquitously expressed, albeit at lower levels than Ca1,
however, Cb2 and Cb3 expressions are limited to the
brain. More speciﬁcally, Cb2 expression is highest in
the limbic regions of the brain, whereas Cb3 is more
diffusely expressed throughout various brain regions at
low levels (Guthrie et al. 1997). While the Cb isoforms
comprise the major PKAC component in the brain,
Ca1 is considered to be the predominant source of
PKA catalytic activity in non-neuronal tissues (Uhler
et al. 1986a,b).

Both catalytic isoforms exhibit alternative splicing
events at the ﬁrst exon, resulting in amino-terminal
differences between transcript variants. Interestingly,
the Ca1 and Cb1 isoforms exhibit around 91% homo-
logy, and they are both myristoylated at the N-terminus

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

(Uhler et al. 1986a,b, Yonemoto et al. 1993, Guthrie
et al. 1997, Desseyn et al. 2000). Conversely, Ca2,
Cb2, and Cb3 are all non-myristoylated due to
splicing of alternative ﬁrst exons that provide novel
translation start sites and result in truncated amino
termini (Guthrie et al. 1997, Desseyn et al. 2000). It is
thought that N-myristoylation of Ca1 and Cb1 is not
important for membrane tethering, as is commonly
assumed with this type of co-translational modiﬁ-
cation; rather it
is important for protein structural
integrity and thermal resistance (Yonemoto et al.
1993). However, the lack of myristoylation in the
truncated isoforms suggests that this modiﬁcation is
not essential for protein stability.

PKA regulatory subunits. For the regulatory subunits,
there are four genes, two encoding type 1 subunits and
two encoding type 2 subunits. The type 1 subunit
genes, PRKAR1A and PRKAR1B, exhibit differential
expression patterns, with the former expressed ubiqui-
tously, and the latter limited to neural and adipose
tissue. The type 2 subunit genes, PRKAR2A and
PRKAR2B, exhibit similar differential expression,
although the levels of these two transcripts in most
tissues appear generally to be lower than their type 1
counterparts. The RIIb subunit
is also selectively
expressed, being highest in the central nervous system
(CNS), neuroendocrine tissues, Sertoli cells, ovarian
granulosa cells, and lung (Skalhegg & Tasken 2000).
In mice, the PKA regulatory system uses the same
genetic complement, with the corresponding mouse
genes known as Prkar1a, -r1b, -r2a, and -r2b. The
expression patterns in mice have been better studied
than in human subjects, with similar ﬁndings to those
described above. For the PRKAR1A/Prkar1a genes,
there is alternative splicing at the 5
end of the gene.
This allows the usage of multiple promoters; however,
given the fact that the initiation ATG is located in the
second exon,
the encoded proteins are identical
(Solberg et al. 1997, Barradeau et al. 2000).

0

PKA inhibitors. In addition to PKAC and PKAR
subunits, PKA activity is also modulated by the PKA
inhibitor (PKI) proteins, which are small, heat stable
proteins that are capable of binding and inhibiting
PKAC directly. In humans and mice, there are three
PKA genes (PKIA, PKIB, and PKIG). The three PKI
isoforms appear to exhibit similar biochemical function
but different tissue-speciﬁc patterns. PKIa is expressed
primarily in muscle, whereas PKIb is expressed at very
high levels in the testes. The third gene family member,
PKIg, exhibits ubiquitous expression, but seems to be
present at lower levels than the ﬁrst two.

www.endocrinology-journals.org

775

L S Kirschner et al.: Mouse models of PKA

A-kinase anchoring proteins
Early biochemical characterization of
the PKA
signaling system noted that PKA activity could be
partitioned into the cytosolic (soluble) and membrane
bound (particulate) fractions that exhibited differential
enzymatic behavior (Corbin et al. 1977). The search
for the molecular basis of this observation led to the
identiﬁcation of AKAPs, a family of proteins that bind
to PKA and enable its subcellular distribution. This
topic has been extensively reviewed (Michel & Scott
2002, Ruehr et al. 2004, Dell’Acqua et al. 2006, Beene
& Scott 2007, Jarnaess & Tasken 2007, Dodge-Kafka
et al. 2008) and will not be covered in the depth;
however, a few points are worth highlighting.

Although there are only 15 AKAP genes in humans,
most of the genes exhibit alternative splicing, so that
O50 distinct proteins have been described. In addition
to these genes, proteins with other functions in the
cell have been shown to serve as AKAPs, although
they were initially characterized for other activities
(Jarnaess & Tasken 2007). Examples of this latter class
of AKAP include cytoskeletal linking proteins of the
FERM family, including both Ezrin (Sun et al. 2000)
and Merlin (NF2; Gronholm et al. 2003), as well as
the microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2; Harada
et al. 2002). For most of the AKAPs, the binding
afﬁnity for type 2 PKA is signiﬁcantly higher than
for
type 1, although some AKAPs (particularly
AKAP1/D-AKAP1 and AKAP10/D-AKAP2) appear to be
able to bind both type 1 and type 2 with reasonable afﬁnity.
PKA–AKAP complexes are multiprotein structures
that contain the components to provide exquisite signal
feedback control. In addition to binding PKA, most
AKAPs also bind phosphodiesterases of the PDE4
family, which tightly regulate cAMP levels as part of a
complex feedback loop. Perhaps the best characterized
is an AKAP6 (mAKAP)-containing complex, which
not only contains PKA and PDE4D3, but the cAMP-
responsive protein Epac, Rap1, and ERK5, all of
which co-exist within overlapping feedback loops
(Dodge-Kafka et al. 2005). Other AKAP complexes
contain PP1- or PP2-type phosphatases, for regulation
of protein phosphorylation state (Michel & Scott 2002,
Dell’Acqua et al. 2006, McConnachie et al. 2006). In
addition to the signaling components, PKA–AKAP
complexes are typically localized to PKA-regulated
targets, including membrane channels and receptors.
As PKA-mediated phosphorylation of these target
proteins affects their function within the cell and
thence cell behavior, it is inherently obvious why so
much cellular effort goes into the exquisite spatio-
temporal regulation of PKA activity at these sites.

Relation to human disease
(and endocrine cancer)

interest

Although PKA signaling has been studied in cells for
many years, recent
in this ﬁeld has been
kindled by the observations that abnormalities of the
PKA signaling pathway are associated with human
disease. This paradigm was initially discovered in
association with the McCune–Albright syndrome
(MAS), an endocrine hyperplasia/hyperfunction syn-
drome caused by activating mutations in the GNAS1
gene, which stimulates AC and drives PKA activity in
cells where the mutant protein is expressed (Weinstein
et al. 1991, Shenker et al. 1994).

Because MAS can be associated with pituitary
tumors and hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules (among
other manifestations), these tumor types were also
evaluated for mutations in the GNAS1 gene. Mutations
in this gene are found in w33% of GH-secreting
pituitary tumors (Vallar et al. 1987, Barlier et al. 1998),
but are uncommon in thyroid tumors, although there
have been case reports of these mutations in congenital
autonomous goiters (Weinstein et al. 2001, Palos-Paz
et al. 2008). By contrast, activating mutations of the
TSH receptor, which signals through GNAS1, have
been described both in nodules and in congenital cases
(Parma et al. 1993, 1997, Russo et al. 1995, Fuhrer et al.
1997a,b, Cetani et al. 1999, Postiglione et al. 2002,
Palos-Paz et al. 2008).

Perhaps the most striking demonstration of the
association of PKA abnormalities with human disease
was the ﬁnding within the last decade that the inherited
multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome Carney
Complex (CNC) is due to inactivating mutations in
the PRKAR1A gene (Kirschner et al. 2000a,b).
Although CNC is genetically heterogeneous, mutations
of PRKAR1A appear to account for 60–75% of CNC
patients, either in the sporadic or familial setting
(Bertherat 2006). Mutation of this gene leads to
enhanced PKA activity and tumorigenesis (Kirschner
et al. 2000a,b). Subsequent
it
has been demonstrated that the same gene can be lost
from sporadic adrenocortical tumors (Bertherat et al.
2003) or from advanced thyroid cancers (Sandrini
et al. 2002a,b). These latter tumors exhibit loss of
the PRKAR1A locus in
heterozygosity (LOH) at
about one-third of the advanced tumors. Although
genetic changes in this gene have not been observed
in pituitary tumors (Kaltsas et al. 2002, Sandrini
et al. 2002a,b, Yamasaki et al. 2003), analysis of
protein expression has suggested that
it may be
down-regulated by epigenetic means speciﬁcally in
GH-producing tumors (Lania et al. 2004).

to this observation,

776

www.endocrinology-journals.org

Most recently, mutations in the PDE11 and PDE8
genes, which are involved in the degradation of cAMP,
have been detected in adrenocortical neoplasms
(Horvath et al. 2006, 2008). These ﬁndings conﬁrm
the strong biological link between PKA activation and
hyperproliferation/tumorigenesis.

Understanding the function of PKA
subunits by conventional gene
knockout models
PKA catalytic subunit knockout mouse models

Skalhegg et al. (2002) described a mouse in which both
the Ca1 and Ca2 subunits were effectively knocked
out by replacing exons 6–8 with a neomycin resistance
cassette. This targeted deletion of the Ca subunits led
to perinatal
lethality or delayed growth in mice.
Because Ca1 is not only ubiquitously expressed, but
also predominantly activated in non-neuronal tissues,
the effect on homozygous null (Prkaca
) animals
was widespread. Additionally, due to the speciﬁcity of
Ca2 to the testis, there were also dramatic defects seen
in sperm function in these animals.

K/K

K/K

K/K

In the germ cells of male Prkaca

The most notable defect seen in Prkaca

mice
was their delayed growth. Indeed, most mutant animals
died perinatally; however, w27% survived to adult-
hood. Of this small percentage of mice, there was a
marked decrease in overall body size at three months of
age, such that mutant mice weighed only about 65% as
much as their wild-type (WT) littermates (Skalhegg
et al. 2002). More recently, it has been shown that
the epithelial growth factor receptor protein levels are
signiﬁcantly decreased in Prkaca
mice, which
highlight a possible mechanism by which loss of PKA
activation potential results in an impaired ability for
cells to convey growth signals (Oksvold et al. 2008).
mice, loss of
testis
the catalytic subunits translated to normal
histology, and normal spermatogenesis as expected,
since PKA activity is normally minimal in these cells
(Skalhegg et al. 2002). However, after maturation,
Prkaca
sperm displayed signiﬁcant malformations
in head shape and forward velocity as compared with
sperm from normal
littermates. These results are
interesting, given that the opposite effect is seen in
Prkar1a heterozygotes, which exhibit fertility pro-
blems associated with deﬁcient sperm development
and overall reduced sperm count (Burton et al. 2006).
Taken together, these data represent the ﬁne balancing
act of activation and suppression of PKA in order that
the appropriate development and function of adult
tissues can be achieved.

K/K

K/K

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

K/K

K/K

In contrast to Prkaca

mice, the conventional
knockout (KO) mice for Cb1 (Prkacb[b1]
) are
viable, fertile, and phenotypically indistinguishable
from their WT littermates (Qi et al. 1996). Interest-
ingly, the only differences observed between mice
lacking Cb1 and normal mice were observed in the
hippocampus. Although Cb1 null hippocampal slices
could be stimulated acutely,
they were unable to
potentiate electrostimuli along the Schaffer Collateral-
CA1 pathway to the same extent as normal hippo-
campal slices in vitro (Qi et al. 1996). Additionally, in
a process known as long-term depression (LTD),
sustained low-frequency stimulation (LFS) results in
desensitization of the synapses in normal hippocampal
slices, however, Cb1 null synapses were not subject to
this phenomenon (Qi et al. 1996). Given the nature of
these defects, and the tissue affected by Cb1 mutation,
a role for PKA in contextual learning becomes more
apparent.

K/K

K/K

K/K

Additional evidence for the role of PKA in learning
and memory is found in mice harboring mutations that
ablate all three splice variants of Cb (Prkacb
).
Prkacb
mice carry a targeted deletion of exon 2,
which is shared among splice variants, and results in
phenotypically normal mice (Howe et al. 2002).
Although the basal activity for PKA was signiﬁcantly
decreased in the amygdala, hippocampus, and cortex of
mice, loss of Cb resulted in a compensa-
Prkacb
tory increase in Ca expression, causing the activation
potential for PKA in the brain to remain largely
unaffected (Howe et al. 2002). Activation of PKA in
both the amygdala and the hippocampus is known to
play a role in learning and memory formation. Despite
compensatory up-regulation of Ca, Prkacb
mice
were less affected by cued fear conditioning, although
these observations appear to be strain speciﬁc (Howe
K/K
et al. 2002). Nevertheless, given that Prkacb[b1]
mice have impaired hippocampal synapse potentiation
and Prkacb
animals display learning defects
despite compensation by Ca, it is apparent that the
activation of the speciﬁc isoforms of PKA catalytic
subunits is essential for proper molecular signaling
during learning and memory (Table 1).

K/K

K/K

K/K

To further address the role of PKA activation per
total in the mouse, complete KO mice for both Ca
subunits and Cb1 were generated (Huang et al. 2002).
K/K
Complete KO of the catalytic subunits (Prkaca
;
Prkacb[b1]
) resulted in early embryonic lethality;
however, when one allele of either Ca (including
both splice variants) or Cb1 remained unaffected
K/K
(Prkaca
;
Prkacb[b1]
), there were signiﬁcant defects in neural
leading to spina biﬁda and/or
tube development

;Prkacb[b1]

Prkaca

C/K

K/K

C/K

or

www.endocrinology-journals.org

777

L S Kirschner et al.: Mouse models of PKA

Table 1 Phenotype of protein kinase A (PKA)-C subunit knockout mice

Genotype

Prkaca

K/K

Prkacb[b1]

K/K

Prkacb

K/K

Prkaca
Prkaca
Prkaca

K/K
C/K
K/K

;Prkacb[b1]
;Prkacb[b1]
;Prkacb[b1]

K/K
K/K
C/K

Phenotype

Reference

Growth deﬁciencies
Male infertility
Phenotypically normal
Deﬁciencies in neuronal signaling in hippocampus
Phenotypically normal
Cued learning deﬁciencies (strain speciﬁc)
Embryonically lethal
Spinal neural tube defects (100%)
Embryonically lethal
Spinal neural tube defects (75%)
Spinal neural tube defectsCexencephaly (25%)

Skalhegg et al. (2002)

Qi et al. (1996)

Howe et al. (2002)

Huang et al. (2002)
Huang et al. (2002)
Huang et al. (2002)

C/K

K/K

K/K

K/K

K/K

K/K

C/K

C/K

;Prkacb[b1]

;Prkacb[b1]

and Prkaca

exencephaly. Although Prkaca
animals survived birth, all of them exhibited severe
spina biﬁda resulting from failure of vertebral arch
fusion at the dorsal midline between the forelimbs and
hindlimbs. No Prkaca
animals
survived gestation, and all of them exhibited severe
neural tube defects leading to spina biﬁda. A small
percentage (25%) of these animals had additional
cranial defects that led to exencephaly, although this
C/K
phenotype was not observed in Prkaca
;
Prkacb[b1]
pups (Huang et al. 2002). Intriguingly,
C/K
both Prkaca
;Prkacb[b1]
;
Prkacb[b1]
embryos were histologically indis-
tinguishable when looking at neural tube defects in
early development. Also, both genotypes displayed
morphological defects in dorsal root ganglia organiz-
ation, with increased apoptosis and regression by
embryonic day 12.5. Altogether, these observations
point to an essential role for proper PKA activation that
cannot be compensated regardless of the subunit
affected. Furthermore, molecular analysis of these
models suggests that during neural tube development,
the role of PKA in suppressing Sonic hedgehog signaling
is paramount for cells to undergo patterning and
differentiation into the proper neural precursors that
make up the adult spinal column (Huang et al. 2002).
It is clear in the cases of PKA catalytic subunit KO
mice that precise on/off regulation of the enzyme is
imperative for proper development of many of tissues.
As mentioned above, in the testis it is essential that
PKA is not activated during spermatogenesis, but its
activity is vital to the function of mature spermato-
cytes. Furthermore, not only is on/off regulation
important, but so is the regulation of the proper
subunits in speciﬁc tissues. The Cb KO mice are a
perfect example of how compensation by the Ca
subunit is not enough to rescue the neuronal signaling
deﬁcits seen in these animals. Moreover,
in the
combinatorial KOs where a single allele of either Ca

or Cb1 is unaffected, the loss of the other three alleles
cannot be compensated by the one remaining WT
allele, regardless of the isoform. Altogether,
these
studies are highly insightful, and they elegantly
exemplify the true complexities involved in PKA
regulation during development and adulthood.

PKA regulatory subunit KO mouse models

Study of the PKA regulatory subunit KO models has
reinforced prior knowledge, but has also led to new
insights into the function of these gene products.
Although described in detail below,
this data is
summarized in Table 2.

Prkar1a KOs
As noted above, PRKAR1A/Prkar1a is the most
highly and widely expressed regulatory subunit of
PKA. When the gene was knocked out from mice
by replacing exon 3 of the gene with a Neomycin
resistance cassette, homozygous null embryos died
early during gestation due to a failure of normal
(Amieux et al. 2002).
mesodermal development
Speciﬁcally,
there was a failure of circulatory
structures including the heart tube and other structures
of the primitive vasculature. There was also a marked
reduction in the size of axial and paraxial mesoderm,
implying a generalized defect in mesodermal differen-
tiation. Biochemical
the mutant
embryos revealed an enhanced basal PKA activity
with a reduction in total PKA, consistent with the
previous observation that free PKA has reduced
stability within the cell (Hemmings 1986). Intrigu-
ingly, introduction of null alleles for Prkaca substan-
K/K
tially improved the phenotype of Prkar1a
embryos, although it did not restore post-embryonic
viability. This observation was interpreted to signify
that the majority of the developmental effects were due
to excess unregulated PKA activity. These same

investigation of

778

www.endocrinology-journals.org

C/K

K/K

developmental defects were observed in mice
homozygous for a different null allele for Prkar1a,
generated by removal of exon 2 from the Prkar1a gene
(Kirschner et al. 2005).
Although Prkar1a

mice were not viable,
heterozygotes (Prkar1a
mice) did survive and
were predicted to be a good genetic model for studying
tumorigenesis associated with the CNC tumor predis-
position (Kirschner et al. 2000a,b). Although the initial
characterization of the animals did not indicate early
signs of tumorigenesis (Amieux et al. 2002), more
lengthy follow-up conﬁrmed the tumorigenic nature of
this genetic change. In an analysis of 17 animals up to
19 months of age, Veugelers et al. reported tumors in
12 mice (57%) consisting primarily of sarcomas and
some hepatocellular carcinomas. In an analysis of a
larger group of mice up to 2 years old, our group
described a somewhat different pattern of tumors, with
a spectrum much more similar to those observed
in patients with CNC (Kirschner et al. 2005). Speci-
ﬁcally, we observed osteochondromyxomas in over
80% of mice, schwannomas in 33%, and thyroid
tumors in about 10% of animals. Unlike the pigmented
schwannomas observed in CNC, the mouse schwanno-
mas were not pigmented, but exhibited classical
features of mouse Schwann cell tumors.

Because both alleles studies were well-deﬁned nulls,
it seems unlikely that the differences in the models
related to residual Prkar1a activity. Rather, it is more
likely that the discrepancy is due to strain-speciﬁc
differences between the models. Also, it appears that
some of the tumors characterized by Veugelers et al. as
calvarial ‘sarcomas with myxomatous differentiation’
may be the same tumors which we have classiﬁed
as osteochondromyxomas by a combination of
histological and immunohistochemical analysis
(Pavel et al. 2008). Taken together,
the complex

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

C/K

mice indicates that these
phenotype of the Prkar1a
animals serve as an excellent genetic model for human
patients with CNC.

Prkar1b KOs
In contrast to the Prkar1a KOs, mice lacking Prkar1b
are viable and fertile, and grossly normal in appearance
(Brandon et al. 1995). Measurements of PKA activity
from the brains of these animals did not reveal
signiﬁcant changes from WT, likely due to compensa-
tory increases in levels of the Prkar1a protein (Amieux
et al. 1997). Because of the well-described association
of PKA dysregulation with disruption in synaptic long-
term potentiation (LTP; Abel & Nguyen 2008),
K/K
memory processes were studied in the Prkar1b
mice. This analysis revealed defective hippocampal
function, which
pathways.
Prkar1b
animals exhibited deﬁcient LTD at both
the Shaffer collateral-CA1 synapse on pyramidal cells
and the lateral perforant path-dentate synapse on
granule cells. Also, depotentiation at CA1 synapse
was also signiﬁcantly reduced in mutant mice. It was
concluded from these studies that Prkar1b is speci-
ﬁcally required in the brain for LTD and depotentia-
tion, as well as for LFS-induced LTD and may play a
role in the long-term effects involving synaptic
plasticity (Brandon et al. 1995). These ﬁndings that
complemented the observations from the Cb1 KO
animals conﬁrmed the role of this pathway in long-
term memory affecting the CA3 pathway (Huang &
Kandel 1996).

affected multiple

K/K

Prkar2a KOs
Similar to the observations made with the Prkar1b null
animals, mice lacking Prkar2a were healthy appearing
and had no obvious phenotype (Burton et al. 1997). As
in the Prkar1a
mice, total levels of PKA activity

K/K

Table 2 Phenotype of protein kinase A (PKA)-R subunit knockout mice

Phenotype

Reference

Embryonic lethal by e10.5, failure of mesodermally-derived structures,

notably heart and vasculature

Amieux et al. (2002) and
Kirschner et al. (2005)

Partial rescue of phenotype, with restoration of mesodermal speciﬁcation

Amieux et al. (2002)

and heart formation. Retains embryonic lethality but at a later date

Partial rescue of Prkar1a
C/C

K/K

K/K

;Prkrca

Prkar1a

and Prkar1a
Deﬁcient long-term memory pathways
No clear phenotype
Lean, resistant to diet-induced obesity. Impaired motor coordination

;Prkaca

phenotype, but intermediate between

K/K

K/K

Genotype

Prkar1a

K/K

Prkar1a

K/K

;Prkaca

K/K

Prkar1a

K/K

;Prkaca

C/K

Prkar1b
Prkar2a
Prkar2b

K/K
K/K
K/K

Prkar2b
Prkar2b
Prkar2b

K/K
K/K
K/K

K/K

;Ucp1
;Lepob/ob
;Ay

Lean phenotype retained
Rescue of obese phenotype
Rescue of obese phenotype

www.endocrinology-journals.org

Amieux et al. (2002)

Brandon et al. (1995)
Burton et al. (1997)
Cummings et al. (1996) and

Brandon et al. (1998)

Nolan et al. (2004)
Newhall et al. (2005)
Czyzyk et al. (2008)

779

L S Kirschner et al.: Mouse models of PKA

K/K

model,

were reduced in the Prkar2a
likely
associated with post-transcript decreases in PKAC
and increases in Prkar1a. Although it was hypothesized
that disruption of Prkar2a would disrupt the interaction
between PKA and the L-type calcium channels,
signiﬁcant changes in the relative subcellular distri-
butions were not observed, suggesting that other PKAR
subunits could substitute for this function of Prkar2a.
To speciﬁcally probe the role of Prkar2a on CNS
function, Prkar2a
mice were analyzed for LTP and
LTD in the visual cortex by studying ocular dominance
plasticity (Rao et al. 2004). This analysis showed
that mutant mice exhibited speciﬁc defects in LTP (but
not LTD) with a resultant effect on visual cortex
plasticity, indicating a unique role for Prkar2a in this
process.

K/K

Prkar2b KOs
Mice lacking Prkar2b appeared morphologically
normal and were fertile, although it was noted
that
the mice exhibited decreased adipose tissue
(Cummings et al. 1996, Brandon et al. 1998). As in
the other PKAR subunit KO models, levels of total
PKA activity were reduced in the brains of these
animals, resulting from compensation by up-regulation
of Prkar1a (Amieux et al. 1997). Because previous
analyses had suggested that Prkar2b is the major
PKAR subunit in the striatum, efforts were made to
characterize the brain function of Prkar2b
mice,
particularly in regard to function of the dopaminergic
system. Prkar2b
mice showed an impaired ability
to coordinate motor output while performing the
rotarod task, and they exhibited increased locomotor
sensitization to chronic amphetamine administration.
Speciﬁc molecular changes were also observed in the
brains of these animals, including reductions in both
c-fos and dynorphin mRNAs. Overall, the CNS defects
in Prkar2b
mice are attributable to a combination
of relative PKA deﬁciency and the absence of correct
subcellular localization (Brandon et al. 1998). These
defects were proposed to affect dopamine-mediated
gene expression changes, although acute locomotor
effects were preserved.

K/K

K/K

K/K

K/K

In the adipose tissue, where Prkar2b is abundant, it
was shown that RIIb-containing holoenzyme has an
important role in energy balance and adiposity. The
Prkar2b
mice, even if apparently healthy and
fertile, have markedly diminished white adipose tissue
despite normal food intake. These mice do not develop
diet-induced obesity or fatty livers, and consistently
exhibit a lean phenotype (Cummings et al. 1996). The
explanation for this observation is thought to lie in the

rate of metabolic uncoupling,

fact that the isozyme switch to type 1 PKA induces a
higher
leading to
elevations of metabolic rate and body temperature,
with enhanced energy utilization. Not only were these
mice resistant to changes in body weight, but they also
resisted diet-induced development of type 2 diabetes.
Study of these animals showed that the RIIb KO mice
have lower body weight,
low insulin levels and
improved total-body glucose disposal as compared
with the WT controls, leading to the conclusion that
loss of Prkar2b protects mice from diet-induced
obesity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia (Schreyer
et al. 2001).

K/K

K/K

K/K

;Ucp1

A more detailed study in adipose tissue looked at the
uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) in Prkar2b
mice.
UCP1 is primarily responsible for adaptive thermo-
genesis in response to sympathetic stimulation of the
brown adipose tissue. Mice lacking Prkar2b exhibit
nocturnal hyperactivity in addition to the increased
oxygen consumption at rest. This study also analyzed
Prkar2b
double KO mice, which
retained the lean phenotype. This observation demon-
strated that induction of UCP1 and increased resting
oxygen consumption are not the cause of leanness in
the Prkar2b
mice (Nolan et al. 2004). In addition
to this, experiments using leptin-deﬁcient Lepob/ob
the KO of Prkar2b provided
mice showed that
substantial rescue of the obese phenotype. Basal
oxygen consumption and nocturnal locomotor activity
were increased, whereas body weight gain and food
consumption decreased in the double mutant lacking
both leptin and RIIb (Newhall et al. 2005). A similar
ﬁnding was made for Agouti lethal yellow (Ay) mice,
another model of mouse obesity caused by ectopic
expression of the MC4R antagonist Agouti protein
(Czyzyk et al. 2008).

K/K

Other generalized KO models affecting PKA
signaling

K/K

PKI KOs
Surprisingly, mice carrying a KO of Pkia (Pkia
)
showed a fairly modest phenotype, with decreased
basal and stimulated gene expression, which was
attributed to a compensatory increase in Pkar1a levels
(Gangolli et al. 2000). The Pkib gene is highly
expressed in the testes, and was predicted thought to
have a strong reproductive phenotype. Again, KO of
this gene produced a minimal phenotype, with normal
reproductive ability in both males and females, either
in isolation, or when crossed with the Pkia null mice.
(Belyamani et al. 2001). Pkig has not been knocked
out to date.

780

www.endocrinology-journals.org

interest

AKAP KOs
Given the recent
in the role of PKA
localization, it is perhaps not surprising that the roles
of the AKAPs are now being studied using KO mouse
models (Mauban et al. 2009). In 2002, Akap4 was
knocked out of mice (Miki et al. 2002). This X-linked
AKAP is primarily expressed in the ﬁbrous sheath of
sperm; not surprisingly, these mice exhibited male
infertility due to abnormal motility and structure. In
2005, one of the splice variants of Akap6 (mAKAP)
was ablated by removing an alternatively spliced
0
5
-exon of the gene, leading to loss of the brain-
predominant mAKAPa isoform of the protein (Michel
et al. 2005). Mice lacking this exon expressed normal
mAKAPb in the heart, but were small and had early
mortality. At the biochemical level, there was a loss of
PDK1 localization, with evidence for loss of down-
stream activation of p90RSK in the mutant animals.

Recent reports have included KO models for Akap1
(Newhall et al. 2006), Akap5 (Hall et al. 2007, Lu et al.
2007, Navedo et al. 2008, Schnizler et al. 2008,
Tunquist et al. 2008), Akap8 (Yang et al. 2006), and
Akap10 (Tingley et al. 2007), and Akap12. In each of
these reports, ablation of the speciﬁc AKAPs has
demonstrated important effects on PKA signaling in
speciﬁc tissues, including ﬁndings in oocyte matu-
ration (Akap1), cardiac function (Akap10), and most
prominently in neuronal function (Akap5). These
studies conﬁrm the importance not only of PKA
subunit abundance, but also of proper localization
within the cell (Mauban et al. 2009).

Understanding the function of PKA
subunits by targeted gene KO models

the utility of

With use of global gene KO mouse models,
the
function of each different PKA subunit has been
intensively explored in the process of development
and physiology, and particularly in tumorigenesis
(Brandon et al. 1995, Cummings et al. 1996, Burton
et al. 1999, Amieux et al. 2002, Rao et al. 2004,
Veugelers et al. 2004, Kirschner et al. 2005).
However,
these conventional KO
mouse models was limited in observing phenotypes
due to embryonic or neonatal lethality that prevented
analysis of the impact of PKA subunits in postnatal
and adult life. The emergence of the Cre-loxP system
has overcome this disadvantage. The Cre (Causes
recombination) protein of bacteriophage P1 directs
recombination between loxP (locus of crossover P1)
sites and deletes gene sequences that are ﬂanked
by two 34-bp loxP sites (ﬂoxed genes; Sauer &
Henderson 1988). By using the Cre-loxP system,

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

researchers can investigate the role of a target gene at
a speciﬁc tissue and/or at speciﬁc stages of develop-
ment. Because conventional KO of Prkar1b, Prkar2a,
or Prkar2b is viable and fertile (see above), it has not
been necessary to pursue a conditional KO strategy
for these genes. However, conditional KO of the
Prkar1a gene has proven a valuable model
for
understanding the relationship of mutation of this
gene in tumorigenesis (Jones et al. 2008, Yin et al.
2008a,b). The Prkaca gene KOs also exhibit
signiﬁcant morbidity and early mortality; however,
conditional KO alleles for this gene have not yet been
described.

Tissue-speciﬁc R subunit mouse modeling

Heart-speciﬁc ablation of Prkar1a causes failure of
heart development and myxomagenesis
As described above, mutations of PRKAR1A with
consequent dysregulation of PKA activity are the cause
of CNC in at least 50% of cases (Kirschner et al.
2000a,b) or even higher at 65% from a recent analysis
of a cohort of 51 CNC probands (Veugelers et al.
2004), in which cardiac myxomas presents as one of its
cardinal features. Approximately 30–60% of CNC
patients will develop cardiac myxomas (Bertherat
2006), and cardiac myxomas are responsible for the
death of more than 50% of patients (Stratakis et al.
2001). These tumors cannot be recapitulated by
K/K
conventional Prkar1a KO mice because Prkar1a
mice die by e9.5 without the development of heart tube
(Amieux et al. 2002, Kirschner et al. 2005), whereas
heterozygotes do not exhibit a cardiac phenotype
(Veugelers et al. 2004, Kirschner et al. 2005). In order
to better understand the tumorigenesis of cardiac
myxoma, we generated heart-speciﬁc Prkar1a KO
(Prkar1a-CKO) by utilizing the
mouse model
Cre-loxP system (Yin et al. 2008a,b),
in which
a-myosin heavy chain (a-MHC) was used as the
promoter to drive the expression of cre recombinase.
The Prkar1a-CKOs exhibited marked thinning of
ventricular walls, characterized by both hypoplasia of
the compact layer and severely reduced trabeculation,
and died embryonically at e11.5 (Fig. 2A and B).
Strikingly, the Prkar1a-CKO hearts exhibited disor-
ganization of the sarcomeres by ultrastructural analysis
of cardiomyocyte architecture at 11.5. Z disks were
easily seen, but they were not properly assembled, and
myoﬁlaments appeared loose and disarrayed. Most
likely,
the disorganized Z disks and myoﬁlaments
contribute to poor cardiac contraction and heart failure,
causing demise of the growing embryo.

www.endocrinology-journals.org

781

L S Kirschner et al.: Mouse models of PKA

Figure 2 Pathology in tissue-speciﬁc Pkar1a knockouts. (A) Normal mouse heart at e11.5 stained for myosin to identify
cardiomyocytes. (B) Dilated heart in cardiac-speciﬁc Prkar1a KO. (C and D) Myxomatous changes in the septa of Prkar1a–CKO
heart, shown with H and E staining (C) or by Alcian blue staining for extracellular matrix (D). (E) Pitiuitary microadenoma in a
Prkar1a-PitKO mouse. (F) Higher power photomicrograph of the tumor showing mitotic Figures (arrows). (G) Gross appearance of
tumors in a TEC3KO mouse. (H) Cyclin D1 staining of a schwannoma showing overexpression of this protein. See text for details of
each of these models.

At the cellular level, the thinning of ventricular walls
was caused by the reduction of cardiomyocyte
proliferation. In concordance with the reduced levels
of the R1a regulatory subunit, hearts from Prkar1a-
CKO mice exhibited enhancement of both free and
total PKA activity, similar to the observation in
Prkar1a
mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts in vitro
(Nadella & Kirschner 2005). However, ablation of
Prkar1a did not cause compensation by the other
regulatory subunits.

K/K

In Prkar1a-CKO hearts, there was signiﬁcant down-
regulation of all cardiac transcription factors investi-
gated, including Srf, Nkx2–5, Gata4, and myocardin
(Myocd), and also downstream targets, such as the
cardiac structural proteins b-MHC and actins A1 (Acta1)
and A2 (Acta2). The defective expression of Acta1 and
Acta2 likely underlies the ultrastructural defect of
sarcomeres. These effects of reduction in multiple
transcription factors may be due to a direct effect of
excess PKA activity on some gene transcription factors
(via CREB) or may be an indirect effect on other
transcription factors because PKA has previously been
demonstrated to interfere with Srf activity (Davis et al.
2003, Nguyen et al. 2004). In addition, Srf can interact
with Nkx2-5, GATA factors and Myocd to synergisti-
cally activate various transcriptional
target genes
(Bruneau 2002). The fact
transcription factors
function in combination and in hierarchical networks
(Durocher et al. 1997, Bruneau 2002) may explain why a
reduction in multiple proteins, as observed here, causes
synergistic and deleterious effects during cardiogenesis.
Very interestingly, w50% of Prkar1a-CKO hearts
displayed stroma-rich lesions suggestive of human
cardiac myxomas (Fig. 2C and D). At dissection of

that

e11.5 mice, typical myxoid material was frequently
noted in the endocardial cushion. This structure is
composed of a subset of cells that undergo remodel-
ing to form the valvular structures and membranous
septa of the mature heart after cardiac looping (Person
et al. 2005). This observation may help explain the
observation that myxomas arise predominantly in
the interatrial septum (Reynen 1995). With regard to
the histogenesis of cardiac myxomas,
this ﬁnding
supports the hypothesis that cardiac myxomas
originate from primitive pluripotent mesenchymal
cells (Kinsella & Fitzharris 1980, Person et al.
2005). Histologically, the majority of Prkar1a-CKO
hearts exhibited the characteristic features of cardiac
myxomas, including the presence of small numbers of
polygonal or stellate cells surrounded by abundant
loose stroma rich in acid mucopolysaccharides. Most
strikingly, they also exhibit epithelium- or gland-like
changes, which are rare but diagnostic features of
human cardiac myxomas (Goldman et al. 1987,
Johansson 1989). Finally,
the tumors showed evi-
dence of nuclear polymorphism and cellular atypia, as
is typically seen only in neoplastic cells. Thus, the
evidence is convincing that
this mouse model
develops early phases in the development of cardiac
myxoma.

Although Prkar1a-CKO mice did not survive long
enough to develop bona ﬁde myxomas, they may still
serve as the ﬁrst good model with which to study the
formation of cardiac myxomas. By applying an
inducible Cre mouse line strategy, cardiac myxomas
in close analogy to human patients may be generated in
the future.

782

www.endocrinology-journals.org

C/K

Pituitary-speciﬁc ablation of Prkar1a causes pituitary
tumorigenesis
Pituitary tumors are fairly common neoplasms in the
population. A recent meta-analysis estimated the
prevalence rate of pituitary adenomas to be w17%
(Ezzat et al. 2004). Given the high frequency of
pituitary adenomas and their potentially serious effects,
the early diagnosis and treatment is very important for
patients. However, little is known about the precise
environmental and genetic factors involved in pituitary
tumorigenesis. In CNC, GH-producing pituitary ade-
nomas are observed in w10% of patients (Stratakis
et al. 2001), and prolactinomas have also been reported
in CNC kindreds (Stergiopoulos et al. 2004). In both of
the Prkar1a
mouse models described (Veugelers
et al. 2004, Kirschner et al. 2005), pituitary pathology
was not observed. Therefore, it was hypothesized that
haploinsufﬁciency of Prkar1a might not be sufﬁcient to
promote tumorigenesis and that complete loss of
Prkar1a is necessary for tumor formation in the
pituitary. To conﬁrm this hypothesis, we used the rat
GHRH receptor promoter to generate mice, which
express the cre recombinase in pituitary cells of the
Pit-1 lineage, which includes cells that produce GH,
prolactin (PRL), and TSH (Yin et al. 2008a,b). These
mice were then crossed with Prkar1a conditional null
animals (Kirschner et al. 2005) to produce pituitary-
speciﬁc KO (Prkar1a-pitKO) mice (Yin et al. 2008a,b).
mice, the
Prkar1a-pitKOs developed pituitary tumors with high
frequency (48%) compared with controls (18%;
P!0.05), although not until
the advanced age of
18 months (Fig. 2E and F). Given the fact that it took
the mice an extended period of time to develop
tumors, it is possible that loss of Prkar1a alone is
not sufﬁcient for tumorigenesis, and that a second
genetic hit is required for tumor formation. Although
prolactinomas were observed both in control and
Prkar1a-PitKO mice, non-prolactinomas exhibited
much higher incidence rate in the Prkar1a-pitKOs
(29%) compared with the controls (4%, P!0.05).
Characterization of these tumors demonstrated they
were composed of cells of the Pit1 lineage that
stained for GH, PRL, and TSH.

In contrast to the studies of Prkar1a

C/K

Interestingly, as is seen in CNC patients, Prkar1a-
pitKO animals exhibited markedly elevated GH levels
in serum compared with controls (P!0.01), regardless
of the presence of frank tumors. This may be of
particular relevance given that there is a substantial
portion of human patients with acromegaly that are
not surgically cured of their disease. This model
may therefore serve as a good model not only for the

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

pituitary tumorigenesis but also as a model to test new
therapies aimed at acromegaly in human patients.

C/K

In a Prkar1a

Tissue-speciﬁc ablation of Prkar1a in neural crest
causes Schwannomas
Schwannomas are observed in w14% of CNC patients
(Stratakis et al. 2001) and have been designated as
psammomatous melanotic schwannomas for their
histopathologic appearance and high degree of
pigmentation (Carney 1990, Martin-Reay et al. 1991).
mouse model, schwannomas were
observed in w33% of animals, and facial neural crest-
speciﬁc KO of the Prkar1a gene recapitulated Schwann
cell tumorigenesis (Kirschner et al. 2005). However, the
role of Prkar1a ablation on the pathways leading to
Schwann cell tumorigenesis was unclear. To address this
question, the TEC3 line was developed to express cre
under the control of the enhancer-less Tyrosinase
promoter, which enables transgene expression in a
limited subset of facial neural crest derivatives (Tonks
et al. 2003). This cre line was then crossed with mice
carrying a conditional null allele of Prkar1a (Kirschner
et al. 2005) to generate tissue-speciﬁc KO mice (TEC3;
Prkar1aloxP/loxP, hence-forth called TEC3KO animals).
Observation of a cohort of 35 animals revealed that
the penetrance of the tumor phenotype was w50% by
18 weeks and nearly 80% by 40 weeks (Fig. 2G and H;
Jones et al. 2008). Histopathologically, these hetero-
geneous neoplasms were clinically classiﬁed as
Genetically Engineered Mouse Schwannoma, grades
II and III (Stemmer-Rachamimov et al. 2004).

Because schwannomas are also a cardinal feature of
the inherited neuroﬁbromatosis (NF) tumor syndromes,
we studied the proteins responsible for both NF1
in Prkar1a-
(Neuroﬁbromin) and NF2 (Merlin)
associated tumors. In TEC3KO schwannomas,
the
most striking observation was the marked down-
regulation of both Neuroﬁbromin and Merlin in the
tumors, shown both by immunoﬂuorescence and by
Western blot analysis, despite the fact that transcript
levels of the NF1 and NF2 genes were increased,
implying post-transcriptional regulation. It was pre-
viously reported that there are interactions between
PKA and the NF proteins, as PKA is known to
phosphorylate neuroﬁbromin (Izawa et al. 1996,
Tokuo et al. 2001), and loss of neuroﬁbromin
up-regulate cAMP levels, which would presumably
increase PKA activity (Kim et al. 2001). There is also
data indicating that PKA-mediated phosphorylation of
the NF2 protein Merlin can affect its tumor suppressor
function. (Alfthan et al. 2004, Laulajainen et al. 2008)
function. We also observed down-regulation of Merlin

www.endocrinology-journals.org

783

L S Kirschner et al.: Mouse models of PKA

in TEC3KO tumors (Jones et al. 2008), although the
mechanism remains under investigation. These ﬁnd-
ings suggest that PKA may play a role in regulating the
function and stability of the NF proteins.

Surprisingly, this unique model of Schwann cell
tumorigenesis occurs in the absence of Ras (and
therefore extracellular signal-regulated kinase, ERK or
Akt) pathway activation, in contrast to Schwannomas
caused by the ablation of neuroﬁbromin. In the latter, loss
of neuroﬁbromin causes up-regulation of Ras signaling,
thereby leading to activation of downstream effectors
such as ERK and Akt (Cichowski et al. 2003, Dasgupta
& Gutmann 2005, Johannessen et al. 2005, 2008,
Guilding et al. 2007). These results mimic earlier
ﬁndings from our laboratory in Prkar1a KO MEFs,
which also showed that
immortalization occurred
independently of ERK or Akt activation (Nadella &
Kirschner 2005). Furthermore, in TEC3KO schwanno-
mas, only Rac1 exhibited signiﬁcant activation among
the small G proteins of Rho family, which is known to
be involved in NF signaling (Pelton et al. 1998). There
is good evidence that PKA can speciﬁcally affect the
activity of Rac and Rho in cell type- and condition-
speciﬁc pattern (Howe 2004). In particular, PKA directly
phosphorylates Rho at S188 and negatively regulates
its activity (Ellerbroek et al. 2003), whereas Rac lacks
a direct PKA phosphorylation site. Nevertheless, the
effects of the activation of Rho and Rac on the pathway
of TEC3KO tumorigenesis need to be further explored.
In summary, PKA may have multiple roles in
it
promoting Schwann cell
seems to modulate the stability of the NF proteins,
such that dysregulation of PKA leads to post-
transcriptional loss of these proteins during tumorigen-
esis. Secondly, PKA seems to signal, either directly or
indirectly, to the same downstream effectors activated
by mutations in the NF genes. However, unlike
activation of Schwann cell
tumorigenesis by NF
mutations, PKA seems to promote tumorigenesis by a
mechanism that excludes activation of Ras, ERK, and
Akt. Thus, PKA promotes Schwann cell tumors by
mechanisms that overlap but are distinct from those
seen in NF associated tumorigenesis.

tumorigenesis. First,

Transgenic approaches to studying PKA
signaling in the mouse

Generalized transgenics

Because of
the well-known association between
activated G-proteins (such as in the MAS) and PKA
signaling, efforts have been made to generate a
transgenic mouse carrying an activated Gnas1 gene.

Similar to the observations from human patients, mice
carrying activated Gnas1 in all tissues do not survive
gestation (Lee Weinstein, personal communication).
This observation speaks to the requirement for control
of PKA signaling during embryogenesis.

As a means to analyze the effect of loss of the
Prkar1a gene, Stratakis et al. generated a mouse
containing an anti-sense transgene targeted to the
Prkar1a gene (Grifﬁn et al. 2004a,b). This was placed
under the control of a doxycycline-suppressible
promoter to circumvent any problems with embryonic
lethality. Despite the fact that Prkar1a null mice exhibit
embryonic lethality (Amieux et al. 2002, Kirschner
et al. 2005), the Prkar1a-antisense mice exhibited
normal development. As they aged, the mice developed
a variety of neoplastic lesions, including lymphomas,
thyroid follicular adenomas, and mesenchymal tumors.
Although the mouse demonstrated enhanced PKA
activity (Grifﬁn et al. 2004a,b), the connection between
this observation and tumorigenesis was not completely
clear, due to the potential presence of non-speciﬁc
effects mediated by the anti-sense mRNA.

Transgenic approaches targeted to speciﬁc
tissues

Thyroid-speciﬁc transgenic models
Determination of the role of PKA signaling in the mouse
thyroid has been a topic that has been studied extensi-
vely. There is signiﬁcant interest in understanding the
connection between PKA signaling and human thyroid
cancer because of recent studies indicating an increased
risk of thyroid cancer associated with elevated TSH
levels (Haymart et al. 2008a,b). The classic approach to
activating PKA signaling in the mouse thyroid relies
on treatment of mice with anti-thyroidal agents, thus
raising TSH and driving PKA signaling. This process
is more complex, though, as the TSH-R may signal
through multiple G-protein pathways, including Gs,
Gi, and Gq (Postiglione et al. 2002).

Transgenic approaches to studying PKA signaling
by genetically manipulated mouse models have
included various means of activating PKA signaling
directly in the thyroid. To date, there are three genetic
models that have studied the activation of the PKA
signaling pathway in the thyroid. The earliest of these
was the generation of transgenic mice carrying the
A2-adenosine receptor in the thyroid gland by using
the bovine thyroglobulin (bTg) promoter to drive its
expression (Ledent et al. 1992). This receptor signals
essentially exclusively through Gs, and were generated
to mimic constitutive signaling through the TSHR.
These mice became signiﬁcantly hyperthyroid with

784

www.endocrinology-journals.org

large thyroid goiters, and the mice died around
9 months of age from heart failure as a result of their
severe hyperthyroidism. Although the glands were
hyperplastic, no evidence of thyroid malignancy was
observed, even when mice were treated with anti-
thyroidal agents to prolong their lifespan.

Next, a transgenic line was generated by introducing
a constitutively active mutant of the alpha subunit of
the stimulatory G protein (GNASR201H) into the thyroid
by means of the same bTg promoter (Michiels et al.
1994). The mutation, which is one of the mutations
causing constitutive activation of the GNAS signaling,
in MAS, causes unregulated production of cAMP.
Despite their hyperthyroidism, these mice survived
better than the bTG-A2R transgenics, and the thyroid
was studied up to 16 months of age. Overall, the
thyroid phenotype was again similar, with toxic goiters
developing, but no cancers. Finally, the most recent
model, still dating back over 10 years ago, was the
generation of mice carrying the Cholera toxin (CT) A1
subunit under the control of the rat Tg promoter
(Zeiger et al. 1997). This CT-A1 subunit causes
irreversible activation of Gs by catalyzing its ADP-
ribosylation. Three Tg-CT lines were developed, with
varying copy numbers of the transgene, leading to
varying levels of cAMP production. In each of these
lines, the mice eventually developed hyperthyroidism
and hypertrophy, but again, no cancers. Additionally, a
similar phenotype can be produced pharmacologically
by the use of the anti-thyroid agents. In this case, the
drug is given to make the mice profoundly hypo-
thyroid, in which they develop marked TSH elevation
and thyroid goiters. This model is considered a model
of excess TSH stimulation, although unlike the models
described above, the mice are hypothyroid, rather than
hyperthyroid. When this treatment has been carried out
for extended periods, thyroid cancers have not been
observed (Jemec 1977).

Heart-speciﬁc transgenic models
Studies of PKA action in the heart have identiﬁed both
positive and negative roles of PKA signaling in normal
cardiac function. In the heart, cAMP production is
classically mediated by the b1- and b2-adrenergic
receptors (Lohse & Engelhardt 2001), although other
receptors also utilize this same second messenger
system (Mendez & LaPointe 2005). PKA has multiple
well-deﬁned target proteins in the heart, including key
functional proteins such as cardiac Troponin I (cTnI),
the Ryanodine receptor 2 (Ryr2) and the sarcoplasmic
-ATPase. These effects modulate the actions of
Ca
catecholamines on cardiac function. Up-regulation

CC

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

of PKA activity has been posited to occur in the
failing heart, as there is increased phosphorylation of
PKA targets (Marx & Marks 2002, Reiken et al. 2003),
providing an explanation for the beneﬁcial effects of
b-blockade in these patients.

From a genetic point of view, dysregulation of the
PKA system has been associated with abnormalities of
heart function in mouse models (Lohse & Engelhardt
2001), although corresponding human syndromes are
generally unknown. Speciﬁc studies using transgenic
mice to target the heart include the use of WT or mutant
b-adrenergic receptors, present either at normal levels or
overexpressed and thus constitutively active. In general,
these studies have shown that chronic overexpression
the b1-adrenergic receptors leads to cardio-
of
myopathy and eventual heart failure (Engelhardt et al.
1999, Bisognano et al. 2000). This same phenotype was
observed with expression of activated Gnas1 (Vatner
et al. 1998) or of the b-adrenergic receptor kinase (Koch
et al. 1995), conﬁrming the detrimental effects on
chronic stimulation of this pathway. The data for the
b2-adrenergic receptor are a little more complicated,
with moderate level expression of this receptor being
tolerated, but high level expression causing signiﬁcant
cardiomyopathy (Liggett et al. 2000).

However,

the situation is not quite so straight-
forward, as shown in studies with the type VI AC.
When this protein was overexpressed in mice with
cardiomyopathy-induced by overexpression of Ga-q
enhancement of cyclase increased survival, possibly by
a mechanism that
involves enhanced response to
catecholamines (Roth et al. 1999, Rebolledo et al.
2006). However, transgenic expression of the same
gene did not cause signiﬁcant effects on heart rate or
basal function (Roth et al. 2003), although it did
improve survival in a coronary artery ligation model
(Takahashi et al. 2006).

In a direct model, the PKAC subunit was intro-
duced into the heart under the control of the a-MHC
promoter (Antos et al. 2001). Similar to the obser-
vations in the Prkar1a cardiac KO animals (Yin et al.
2008a,b), the mice developed dilated cardiomyopathy
which correlated with the degree of
transgene
expression. These mice exhibited enhanced phos-
phorylation of the Ryr2 and the calcium handling
protein phospholamban,
in accordance with prior
studies of heart failure.

An additional approach that has recently been studied
is the effect of disrupting PKA localization in the heart.
In this approach, a fragment of the AKAP AKAP13/
AKAP-Lbc, termed Ht-31 (Vijayaraghavan et al. 1997),
is overexpressed in the cell. Owing to the competition
for binding to PKA, primarily via the type 2 regulatory

www.endocrinology-journals.org

785

L S Kirschner et al.: Mouse models of PKA

subunits, subcellular localization is disrupted. When Ht-
31 was expressed under an adenoviral control system,
minimal effects were observed at baseline; however,
stimulation with high doses of adrenergic agnostic led to
reductions in phosphorylation of cTnI and caused
enhanced b-adrenergic dependent cardiac contractility
(McConnell et al. 2009).

An alternative approach to studying PKA signaling
has been the use of a mutated form of the CREB
transcription factor, which lacks the site for PKA (and
other kinase) phosphorylation sites at S133. Targeting
expression of this protein to the heart also produced
dilated cardiomyopathy and electrophysiological
changes (Fentzke et al. 1998, Zhu & Saba 2003),
again highlighting that either over- or under-activation
of the PKA pathway produces deleterious changes.

Brain-speciﬁc transgenic models
One of the striking observations from PKAR subunit
conventional KOs has been the general subtlety of
the phenotypes. After careful investigation, CNS effects
were observed in KO models for R1b (Brandon et al.
1995, Huang et al. 1995), R2a (Rao et al. 2004), and R2b
(Brandon et al. 1998), as well as catalytic subunit KOs
(Huang et al. 1995, Qi et al. 1996, Howe et al. 2002).

These observations parallel closely an extensive
literature regarding the effects of PKA dysregulation in
the CNS. The importance of PKA function for proper
cognition in the mouse dates back to the late 90’s when
Abel et al. generated mice with a dominant negative
form of the PKAR1 subunit known as R(AB), which
has mutations in the cAMP-binding sites (Clegg et al.
1987). Transgenic mice expressing this cDNA under
the control of the brain-directed CAMKII promoter
exhibited defects in LTP, and important component of
long-term memory (Abel et al. 1997). This system has
formed the basis for extensive investigation on the
genetics and biochemistry of memory associated with
disruption of PKA, either by genetic means or by
pharmacologic measures in isolated brain slices. This
ﬁeld has been recently reviewed extensively (Abel &
Nguyen 2008), and will not be discussed in detail, other
than to note that all studies indicate the importance of
proper PKA regulation in the establishment and
maintenance of long-term memory, not only in mice,
but in lower organisms as well.

Neural crest models
The McKnight group recently reported the develop-
ment of a cre-inducible form of the R(AB) dominant
negative Prkar1a protein. In this model, the expression
of R(AB) is blocked by a translational stop codon that

is excised by cre-mediated recombination. When mice
carrying this construct were crossed with mice
expressing cre in the neural crest, the progeny exhibited
lethal intestinal pseudo-obstruction, which was traced
to a defect in the enteric ganglia (Howe et al. 2006).
Although this allele of a dominant negative PKA has
not yet been used extensively, it will provide another
tool for further dissection PKA signaling pathways.

Summary and future directions

The cAMP-PKA signaling system has been known for
over 40 years, and extensive work has gone into
characterizing how stimulation or inhibition of this
pathway affects cell function. Until recently, most of
these studies were carried out in the context of immor-
talized tissue culture cells. Aside from problems
associated with the presence of multiple genetic
mutations that enable these cells to survive in culture,
the use of a homogenous cell population in which inter-
cellular communication is of minimal importance may
undervalue the true role of this system, which appears to
be involved in intercellular signaling in most tissues.

For this reason, the use of mouse models, which
enable the assessment of genetic changes in the setting
of an entire organism, allows a much better appreci-
ation of the importance of this signaling system. The
use of PKA subunit KOs has revealed the essential
role of the Prkar1a regulatory subunit and the near-
essential role of the Prkaca catalytic subunit. The
role of the other subunits in physiologic processes is
much more subtle, with the exception of the Prkar2b
subunit, which clearly has major roles in regulating
both CNS function and fat metabolism.

As the study of PKA action moves forward, the tools
are now in place to assess how these alterations affect
signaling at the tissue level. Despite the fact that mice
lacking Prkar1a in Schwann cells develop tumorigen-
esis, this occurs independently of pathways thought to
in vivo for tumor formation. As the
be important
signaling pathways affected by each of these KOs is
traced at the molecular level, we should expect to gain
important insights into direct signaling mechanisms, as
well as how these pathways participate in important
cross talk interactions.

Although this knowledge will be important for its
own sake, the ultimate goal of these investigations will
be to use the information for therapeutic purposes.
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors, which prolong the
cAMP-dependent signal, are already in use in clinical
practice (sildenaﬁl,
tadalaﬁl, etc.) and others have
been tried (rolipram). Although disappointing so far,
the study of the CNS functional alterations may lead to

786

www.endocrinology-journals.org

new therapies for disorders such as depression or for
movement disorders. As we better understand how
dysregulation of PKA causes tumors in the CNC, in the
thyroid, and in other organs (e.g. pituitary) this same
approach may be used to affect tumor behavior and
thereby lessen the impact of these diseases.

The availability of mouse models for these studies
marks an important advance, which may lead to new
developments in many of these ﬁelds. Stay tuned.

Declaration of interest

The authors declare that there is no conﬂict of interest that
could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the
research reported.

Funding

This work was supported by the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development (grant number HD01323),
the National Cancer Instutue (grant numbers CA112268 and
CA16058), the US Army Medical Research and Materiel
Command (grant number NF043067), and the Children’s
Tumor Foundation (grant number 2006-01-026).

References

Abel T & Nguyen PV 2008 Regulation of hippocampus-
dependent memory by cyclic AMP-dependent protein
kinase. Progress in Brain Research 169 97–115.

Abel T, Nguyen PV, Barad M, Deuel TA, Kandel ER &

Bourtchouladze R 1997 Genetic demonstration of a role
for PKA in the late phase of LTP and in hippocampus-
based long-term memory. Cell 88 615–626.

Alfthan K, Heiska L, Gronholm M, Renkema GH & Carpen O

2004 Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase phosphor-
ylates merlin at serine 518 independently of p21-activated
kinase and promotes merlin-ezrin heterodimerization.
Journal of Biological Chemistry 279 18559–18566.
Amieux PS, Cummings DE, Motamed K, Brandon EP,

Wailes LA, Le K, Idzerda RL & McKnight GS 1997
Compensatory regulation of RIalpha protein levels in
protein kinase A mutant mice. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 272 3993–3998.

Amieux PS, Howe DG, Knickerbocker H, Lee DC, Su T,

Laszlo GS, Idzerda RL & McKnight GS 2002 Increased
basal cAMP-dependent protein kinase activity inhibits the
formation of mesoderm-derived structures in the devel-
oping mouse embryo. Journal of Biological Chemistry
277 27294–27304.

Angelo R & Rubin CS 1998 Molecular characterization of an
anchor protein (AKAPCE) that binds the RI subunit (RCE)
of type I protein kinase A from Caenorhabditis elegans.
Journal of Biological Chemistry 273 14633–14643.

Antos CL, Frey N, Marx SO, Reiken S, Gaburjakova M,
Richardson JA, Marks AR & Olson EN 2001 Dilated

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

cardiomyopathy and sudden death resulting from con-
stitutive activation of protein kinase A. Circulation
Research 89 997–1004.

Barlier A, Gunz G, Zamora AJ, Morange-Ramos I, Figarella-

Branger D, Dufour H, Enjalbert A & Jaquet P 1998
Pronostic and therapeutic consequences of Gs alpha
mutations in somatotroph adenomas. Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology and Metabolism 83 1604–1610.

0

Barradeau S, Imaizumi-Scherrer T, Weiss MC & Faust DM
-exons of the mouse cAMP-dependent

2000 Alternative 5
protein kinase subunit RIalpha gene are conserved and
expressed in both a ubiquitous and tissue-restricted
fashion. FEBS Letters 476 272–276.

Beene DL & Scott JD 2007 A-kinase anchoring proteins take

shape. Current Opinion in Cell Biology 19 192–198.

Belyamani M, Gangolli EA & Idzerda RL 2001 Reproductive

function in protein kinase inhibitor-deﬁcient mice.
Molecular and Cellular Biology 21 3959–3963.
Bertherat J 2006 Carney complex (CNC). Orphanet

Journal of Rare Diseases 1 1–6.

Bertherat J, Groussin L, Sandrini F, Matyakhina L, Bei T,

Stergiopoulos S, Papageorgiou T, Bourdeau I, Kirschner LS,
Vincent-Dejean C et al. 2003 Molecular and functional
analysis of PRKAR1A and its locus (17q22–24) in sporadic
adrenocortical tumors: 17q losses, somatic mutations, and
protein kinase A expression and activity. Cancer Research
63 5308–5319.

Bisognano JD, Weinberger HD, Bohlmeyer TJ, Pende A,

Raynolds MV, Sastravaha A, Roden R, Asano K,
Blaxall BC, Wu SC et al. 2000 Myocardial-directed
overexpression of the human beta(1)-adrenergic
receptor in transgenic mice. Journal of Molecular and
Cellular Cardiology 32 817–830.

Brandon EP, Zhuo M, Huang YY, Qi M, Gerhold KA, Burton

KA, Kandel ER, McKnight GS & Idzerda RL 1995
Hippocampal long-term depression and depotentiation are
defective in mice carrying a targeted disruption of the
gene encoding the RI beta subunit of cAMP-dependent
protein kinase. PNAS 92 8851–8855.

Brandon EP, Logue SF, Adams MR, Qi M, Sullivan SP,

Matsumoto AM, Dorsa DM, Wehner JM, McKnight GS
& Idzerda RL 1998 Defective motor behavior and neural
gene expression in RIIbeta-protein kinase A mutant mice.
Journal of Neuroscience 18 3639–3649.

Bruneau BG 2002 Transcriptional regulation of vertebrate

cardiac morphogenesis. Circulation Research 90 509–519.

Budovskaya YV, Stephan JS, Deminoff SJ & Herman PK

2005 An evolutionary proteomics approach identiﬁes
substrates of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase. PNAS
102 13933–13938.

Burton KA, Johnson BD, Hausken ZE, Westenbroek RE,

Idzerda RL, Scheuer T, Scott JD, Catterall WA &
McKnight GS 1997 Type II regulatory subunits are not
required for the anchoring-dependent modulation of Ca2C
channel activity by cAMP-dependent protein kinase.
PNAS 94 11067–11072.

www.endocrinology-journals.org

787

L S Kirschner et al.: Mouse models of PKA

Burton KA, Treash-Osio B, Muller CH, Dunphy EL &

Desseyn JL, Burton KA & McKnight GS 2000 Expression of

Mcknight GS 1999 Deletion of type llalpha regulatory
subunit delocalizes protein kinase A in mouse sperm
without affecting motility or fertilization. Journal of
Biological Chemistry 274 24131–24136.

Burton KA, McDermott DA, Wilkes D, Poulsen MN,

Nolan MA, Goldstein M, Basson CT & McKnight GS
2006 Haploinsufﬁciency at the protein kinase A RI
alpha gene locus leads to fertility defects in male mice
and men. Molecular Endocrinology 20 2504–2513.
Carney JA 1990 Psammomatous melanotic schwannoma.

A distinctive, heritable tumor with special associations,
including cardiac myxoma and the Cushing syndrome.
American Journal of Surgical Pathology 14 206–222.

Cetani F, Tonacchera M, Pinchera A, Barsacchi R, Basolo F,
Miccoli P & Pacini F 1999 Genetic analysis of the TSH
receptor gene in differentiated human thyroid carcinomas.
Journal of Endocrinological Investigation 22 273–278.

Cichowski K, Santiago S, Jardim M, Johnson BW & Jacks T

2003 Dynamic regulation of the Ras pathway via
proteolysis of the NF1 tumor suppressor. Genes and
Development 17 449–454.

Clegg CH, Correll LA, Cadd GG & McKnight GS 1987

Inhibition of intracellular cAMP-dependent protein
kinase using mutant genes of the regulatory type I subunit.
Journal of Biological Chemistry 262 13111–13119.

Conkright MD, Guzman E, Flechner L, Su AI, Hogenesch JB

& Montminy M 2003 Genome-wide analysis of CREB
target genes reveals a core promoter requirement for
cAMP responsiveness. Molecular Cell 11 1101–1108.

Corbin JD, Sugden PH, Lincoln TM & Keely SL 1977

0

0

:5

0

0

Compartmentalization of adenosine 3
-monophosphate-dependent protein
and adenosine 3
kinase in heart tissue. Journal of Biological Chemistry
252 3854–3861.

-monophosphate

:5

Cummings DE, Brandon EP, Planas JV, Motamed K,

Idzerda RL & McKnight GS 1996 Genetically lean
mice result from targeted disruption of the RII beta
subunit of protein kinase A. Nature 382 622–626.

Czyzyk TA, Sikorski MA, Yang L & McKnight GS 2008
Disruption of the RIIbeta subunit of PKA reverses the
obesity syndrome of Agouti lethal yellow mice. PNAS
105 276–281.

a nonmyristylated variant of the catalytic subunit of
protein kinase A during male germ-cell development.
PNAS 97 6433–6438.

Diviani D, Baisamy L & Appert-Collin A 2006 AKAP-Lbc: a
molecular scaffold for the integration of cyclic AMP and
Rho transduction pathways. European Journal of Cell
Biology 85 603–610.

Dodge-Kafka KL, Soughayer J, Pare GC, Carlisle Michel JJ,

Langeberg LK, Kapiloff MS & Scott JD 2005 The
protein kinase A anchoring protein mAKAP coordinates
two integrated cAMP effector pathways. Nature 437
574–578.

Dodge-Kafka KL, Bauman A & Kapiloff MS 2008 A-kinase

anchoring proteins as the basis for cAMP signaling.
Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology 186 3–14.

Durocher D, Charron F, Warren R, Schwartz RJ &
Nemer M 1997 The cardiac transcription factors
Nkx2-5 and GATA-4 are mutual cofactors. EMBO
Journal 16 5687–5696.

Ellerbroek SM, Wennerberg K & Burridge K 2003 Serine

phosphorylation negatively regulates RhoA in vivo.
Journal of Biological Chemistry 278 19023–19031.

Engelhardt S, Hein L, Wiesmann F & Lohse MJ 1999

Progressive hypertrophy and heart failure in
beta1-adrenergic receptor transgenic mice. PNAS 96
7059–7064.

Ezzat S, Asa SL, Couldwell WT, Barr CE, Dodge WE, Vance
ML & McCutcheon IE 2004 The prevalence of pituitary
adenomas: a systematic review. Cancer 101 613–619.

Feliciello A, Gottesman ME & Avvedimento EV 2001 The

biological functions of A-kinase anchor proteins.
Journal of Molecular Biology 308 99–114.

Fentzke RC, Korcarz CE, Lang RM, Lin H & Leiden JM

1998 Dilated cardiomyopathy in transgenic mice
expressing a dominant-negative CREB transcription
factor in the heart. Journal of Clinical Investigation 101
2415–2426.

Fuhrer D, Holzapfel HP, Wonerow P, Scherbaum WA &
Paschke R 1997a Somatic mutations in the thyrotropin
receptor gene and not in the Gs alpha protein gene in 31
toxic thyroid nodules. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology
and Metabolism 82 3885–3891.

Dasgupta B & Gutmann DH 2005 Neuroﬁbromin regulates

Fuhrer D, Wonerow P, Willgerodt H & Paschke R 1997b

neural stem cell proliferation, survival, and astroglial
differentiation in vitro and in vivo. Journal of
Neuroscience 25 5584–5594.

Davis A, Hogarth K, Fernandes D, Solway J, Niu J, Kolenko V,

Browning D, Miano JM, Orlov SN & Dulin NO 2003
Functional signiﬁcance of protein kinase A activation by
endothelin-1 and ATP: negative regulation of SRF-
dependent gene expression by PKA. Cellular Signalling 15
597–604.

Dell’Acqua ML, Smith KE, Gorski JA, Horne EA, Gibson ES
& Gomez LL 2006 Regulation of neuronal PKA signaling
through AKAP targeting dynamics. European Journal of
Cell Biology 85 627–633.

Identiﬁcation of a new thyrotropin receptor germline
mutation (Leu629Phe) in a family with neonatal onset of
autosomal dominant nonautoimmune hyperthyroidism.
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 82
4234–4238.

Gangolli EA, Belyamani M, Muchinsky S, Narula A,

Burton KA, McKnight GS, Uhler MD & Idzerda RL
2000 Deﬁcient gene expression in protein kinase
inhibitor alpha Null mutant mice. Molecular and
Cellular Biology 20 3442–3448.

Gao X, Jin C, Ren J, Yao X & Xue Y 2008 Proteome-wide

prediction of PKA phosphorylation sites in eukaryotic
kingdom. Genomics 92 457–463.

788

www.endocrinology-journals.org

Goldman BI, Frydman C, Harpaz N, Ryan SF & Loiterman D
1987 Glandular cardiac myxomas. Histologic, immuno-
histochemical, and ultrastructural evidence of epithelial
differentiation. Cancer 59 1767–1775.

Grifﬁn KJ, Kirschner LS, Matyakhina L, Stergiopoulos S,

Robinson-White A, Lenherr S, Weinberg FD, Claﬂin E,
Meoli E, Cho-Chung YS et al. 2004a Down-regulation
of regulatory subunit type 1A of protein kinase A leads
to endocrine and other tumors. Cancer Research 64
8811–8815.

Grifﬁn KJ, Kirschner LS, Matyakhina L, Stergiopoulos SG,
Robinson-White A, Lenherr SM, Weinberg FD, Claﬂin
ES, Batista D, Bourdeau I et al. 2004b A transgenic
mouse bearing an antisense construct of regulatory
subunit type 1A of protein kinase A develops endocrine
and other tumours: comparison with Carney complex
and other PRKAR1A induced lesions. Journal of
Medical Genetics 41 923–931.

Gronholm M, Vossebein L, Carlson CR, Kuja-Panula J,

Teesalu T, Alfthan K, Vaheri A, Rauvala H, Herberg FW,
Tasken K et al. 2003 Merlin links to the cAMP neuronal
signaling pathway by anchoring the RIbeta subunit of
protein kinase A. Journal of Biological Chemistry 278
41167–41172.

Guilding C, McNair K, Stone TW & Morris BJ 2007

Restored plasticity in a mouse model of neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1 via inhibition of hyperactive ERK and CREB.
European Journal of Neuroscience 25 99–105.

Guthrie CR, Skalhegg BS & McKnight GS 1997 Two novel
brain-speciﬁc splice variants of the murine Cbeta gene of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 272 29560–29565.

Hall DD, Davare MA, Shi M, Allen ML, Weisenhaus M,
McKnight GS & Hell JW 2007 Critical role of cAMP-
dependent protein kinase anchoring to the L-type calcium
channel Cav1.2 via A-kinase anchor protein 150 in
neurons. Biochemistry 46 1635–1646.

Harada A, Teng J, Takei Y, Oguchi K & Hirokawa N 2002
MAP2 is required for dendrite elongation, PKA anchoring
in dendrites, and proper PKA signal transduction.
Journal of Cell Biology 158 541–549.

Haymart MR, Glinberg SL, Liu J, Sippel RS, Jaume JC &

Chen H 2008a Higher serum TSH in thyroid cancer
patients occurs independent of age and correlates with
extrathyroidal extension. Clinical Endocrinology [in press].

Haymart MR, Repplinger DJ, Leverson GE, Elson DF,

Sippel RS, Jaume JC & Chen H 2008b Higher serum
thyroid stimulating hormone level in thyroid nodule
patients is associated with greater risks of differentiated
thyroid cancer and advanced tumor stage. Journal of
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 93 809–814.

Hemmings BA 1986 cAMP mediated proteolysis of the
catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase.
FEBS Letters 196 126–130.

Higuchi H, Yamashita T, Yoshikawa H & Tohyama M 2003

PKA phosphorylates the p75 receptor and regulates

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

its localization to lipid rafts. EMBO Journal 22
1790–1800.

Hino S, Tanji C, Nakayama KI & Kikuchi A 2005
Phosphorylation of beta-catenin by cyclic AMP-
dependent protein kinase stabilizes beta-catenin through
inhibition of its ubiquitination. Molecular and Cellular
Biology 25 9063–9072.

Hoang T, Fenne IS, Cook C, Borud B, Bakke M, Lien EA &

Mellgren G 2004 cAMP-dependent protein kinase
regulates ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated degradation
and subcellular localization of the nuclear receptor
coactivator GRIP1. Journal of Biological Chemistry 279
49120–49130.

Horvath A, Boikos S, Giatzakis C, Robinson-White A,

Groussin L, Grifﬁn KJ, Stein E, Levine E, Delimpasi G,
Hsiao HP et al. 2006 A genome-wide scan identiﬁes
mutations in the gene encoding phosphodiesterase 11A4
(PDE11A) in individuals with adrenocortical hyperplasia.
Nature Genetics 38 794–800.

Horvath A, Giatzakis C, Tsang K, Greene E, Osorio P,

Boikos S, Libe R, Patronas Y, Robinson-White A,
Remmers E et al. 2008 A cAMP-speciﬁc phosphodi-
esterase (PDE8B) that is mutated in adrenal hyperplasia is
expressed widely in human and mouse tissues: a novel
PDE8B isoform in human adrenal cortex. European
Journal of Human Genetics 16 1245–1253.

Howe AK 2004 Regulation of actin-based cell migration
by cAMP/PKA. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1692
159–174.

Howe DG, Wiley JC & McKnight GS 2002 Molecular

and behavioral effects of a null mutation in all PKA C
beta isoforms. Molecular and Cellular Neurosciences 20
515–524.

Howe DG, Clarke CM, Yan H, Willis BS, Schneider DA,
McKnight GS & Kapur RP 2006 Inhibition of protein
kinase A in murine enteric neurons causes lethal intestinal
pseudo-obstruction. Journal of Neurobiology 66 256–272.
Huang YY & Kandel ER 1996 Modulation of both the early
and the late phase of mossy ﬁber LTP by the activation of
beta-adrenergic receptors. Neuron 16 611–617.

Huang YY, Kandel ER, Varshavsky L, Brandon EP, Qi M,

Idzerda RL, McKnight GS & Bourtchouladze R 1995
A genetic test of the effects of mutations in PKA on mossy
ﬁber LTP and its relation to spatial and contextual
learning. Cell 83 1211–1222.

Huang W, Zhou X, Lefebvre V & de Crombrugghe B 2000

Phosphorylation of SOX9 by cyclic AMP-dependent
protein kinase A enhances SOX9’s ability to transactivate
a Col2a1 chondrocyte-speciﬁc enhancer. Molecular and
Cellular Biology 20 4149–4158.

Huang Y, Roelink H & McKnight GS 2002 Protein kinase A
deﬁciency causes axially localized neural tube defects in
mice. Journal of Biological Chemistry 277 19889–19896.

Huang SY, Tsai ML, Chen GY, Wu CJ & Chen SH 2007

A systematic MS-based approach for identifying in vitro
substrates of PKA and PKG in rat uteri. Journal of
Proteome Research 6 2674–2684.

www.endocrinology-journals.org

789

L S Kirschner et al.: Mouse models of PKA

Izawa I, Tamaki N & Saya H 1996 Phosphorylation of

neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 gene product (neuroﬁbromin) by
cAMP-dependent protein kinase. FEBS Letters 382 53–59.
Jarnaess E & Tasken K 2007 Spatiotemporal control of cAMP

signalling processes by anchored signalling complexes.
Biochemical Society Transactions 35 931–937.

Jemec B 1977 Studies of the tumorigenic effect of two

goitrogens. Cancer 40 2188–2202.

Johannessen CM, Reczek EE, James MF, Brems H, Legius E
& Cichowski K 2005 The NF1 tumor suppressor critically
regulates TSC2 and mTOR. PNAS 102 8573–8578.

Johannessen CM, Johnson BW, Williams SM, Chan AW,

Reczek EE, Lynch RC, Rioth MJ, McClatchey A, Ryeom S
& Cichowski K 2008 TORC1 is essential for NF1-
associated malignancies. Current Biology 18 56–62.
Johansson L 1989 Histogenesis of cardiac myxomas. An

immunohistochemical study of 19 cases, including one with
glandular structures, and review of the literature. Archives
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine 113 735–741.

Jones GN, Tep C, Towns WH, Mihai G, Tonks ID, Kay GF,
Schmalbrock P, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Yoon SO &
Kirschner LS 2008 Tissue-speciﬁc ablation of Prkar1a
causes Schwannomas by suppressing NF protein
production. Neoplasia 10 1213–1221.

Kaltsas GA, Kola B, Borboli N, Morris DG, Gueorguiev M,

Swords FM, Czirjak S, Kirschner LS, Stratakis CA,
Korbonits M et al. 2002 Sequence analysis of the
PRKAR1A gene in sporadic somatotroph and other
pituitary tumours. Clinical Endocrinology 57 443–448.

Kim HA, Ratner N, Roberts TM & Stiles CD 2001 Schwann
cell proliferative responses to cAMP and Nf1 are mediated
by cyclin D1. Journal of Neuroscience 21 1110–1116.

Kinsella MG & Fitzharris TP 1980 Origin of cushion tissue in

the developing chick heart: cinematographic recordings
of in situ formation. Science 207 1359–1360.

Kirschner LS, Carney JA, Pack SD, Taymans SE, Giatzakis C,
Cho YS, Cho-Chung YS & Stratakis CA 2000a Mutations
of the gene encoding the protein kinase A type I-alpha
regulatory subunit in patients with the Carney complex.
Nature Genetics 26 89–92.

Kirschner LS, Sandrini F, Monbo J, Lin JP, Carney JA &

Stratakis CA 2000b Genetic heterogeneity and spectrum of
mutations of the PRKAR1A gene in patients with the
Carney complex. Human Molecular Genetics 9 3037–3046.

Kirschner LS, Kusewitt DF, Matyakhina L, Towns WH II,
Carney JA, Westphal H & Stratakis CA 2005 A mouse
model for the Carney complex tumor syndrome develops
neoplasia in cyclic AMP-responsive tissues. Cancer
Research 65 4506–4514.

Koch WJ, Rockman HA, Samama P, Hamilton RA, Bond RA,
Milano CA & Lefkowitz RJ 1995 Cardiac function in mice
overexpressing the beta-adrenergic receptor kinase or a
beta ARK inhibitor. Science 268 1350–1353.

Lania AG, Mantovani G, Ferrero S, Pellegrini C, Bondioni S,

Peverelli E, Braidotti P, Locatelli M, Zavanone ML,
Ferrante E et al. 2004 Proliferation of transformed

somatotroph cells related to low or absent expression of
protein kinase a regulatory subunit 1A protein. Cancer
Research 64 9193–9198.

Laulajainen M, Muranen T, Carpen O & Gronholm M 2008

Protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation of the NF2
tumor suppressor protein merlin at serine 10 affects the
actin cytoskeleton. Oncogene 27 3233–3243.

Ledent C, Dumont JE, Vassart G & Parmentier M 1992

Thyroid expression of an A2 adenosine receptor transgene
induces thyroid hyperplasia and hyperthyroidism. EMBO
Journal 11 537–542.

Liggett SB, Tepe NM, Lorenz JN, Canning AM, Jantz TD,

Mitarai S, Yatani A & Dorn GW II 2000 Early and
delayed consequences of beta(2)-adrenergic receptor
overexpression in mouse hearts: critical role for
expression level. Circulation 101 1707–1714.

Lohse MJ & Engelhardt S 2001 Protein kinase a

transgenes: the many faces of cAMP. Circulation
Research 89 938–940.

Lu Y, Allen M, Halt AR, Weisenhaus M, Dallapiazza RF,
Hall DD, Usachev YM, McKnight GS & Hell JW 2007
Age-dependent requirement of AKAP150-anchored PKA
and GluR2-lacking AMPA receptors in LTP. EMBO
Journal 26 4879–4890.

Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, Hunter T & Sudarsanam S
2002 The protein kinase complement of the human genome.
Science 298 1912–1934.

Martin-Reay DG, Shattuck MC & Guthrie FW Jr 1991

Psammomatous melanotic schwannoma: an additional
component of Carney’s complex. Report of a case.
American Journal of Clinical Pathology 95 484–489.

Marx SO & Marks AR 2002 Regulation of the ryanodine receptor

in heart failure. Basic Research in Cardiology 97 I49–I51.
Mason HS, Latten MJ, Godoy LD, Horowitz B & Kenyon JL

2002 Modulation of Kv1.5 currents by protein kinase A,
tyrosine kinase, and protein tyrosine phosphatase requires an
intact cytoskeleton. Molecular Pharmacology 61 285–293.
Mauban JR, O’Donnell M, Warrier S, Manni S & Bond M

2009 AKAP-scaffolding proteins and regulation of
cardiac physiology. Physiology 24 78–87.

Mayr B & Montminy M 2001 Transcriptional regulation by

the phosphorylation-dependent factor CREB. Nature
Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology 2 599–609.

McConnachie G, Langeberg LK & Scott JD 2006 AKAP
signaling complexes: getting to the heart of the matter.
Trends in Molecular Medicine 12 317–323.

McConnell BK, Popovic Z, Mal N, Lee K, Bautista J, Forudi F,
Schwartzman R, Jin JP, Penn M & Bond M 2009 Disruption
of protein kinase A interaction with A-kinase-anchoring
proteins in the heart in vivo: effects on cardiac contractility,
protein kinase A phosphorylation, and troponin I proteol-
ysis. Journal of Biological Chemistry 284 1583–1592.

Mendez M & LaPointe MC 2005 PGE2-induced hypertrophy

of cardiac myocytes involves EP4 receptor-dependent
activation of p42/44 MAPK and EGFR transactivation.
American Journal of Physiology. Heart and Circulatory
Physiology 288 H2111–H2117.

790

www.endocrinology-journals.org

Michel JJ & Scott JD 2002 AKAP mediated signal

transduction. Annual Review of Pharmacology and
Toxicology 42 235–257.

Michel JJ, Townley IK, Dodge-Kafka KL, Zhang F, Kapiloff

MS & Scott JD 2005 Spatial restriction of PDK1
activation cascades by anchoring to mAKAPalpha.
Molecular Cell 20 661–672.

Michiels FM, Caillou B, Talbot M, Dessarps-Freichey F,

Maunoury MT, Schlumberger M, Mercken L, Monier R &
Feunteun J 1994 Oncogenic potential of guanine
nucleotide stimulatory factor alpha subunit in thyroid
glands of transgenic mice. PNAS 91 10488–10492.

Miki K, Willis WD, Brown PR, Goulding EH, Fulcher KD &

Eddy EM 2002 Targeted disruption of the Akap4 gene
causes defects in sperm ﬂagellum and motility.
Developmental Biology 248 331–342.

Montminy M 1997 Transcriptional regulation by cyclic
AMP. Annual Review of Biochemistry 66 807–822.

Nadella KS & Kirschner LS 2005 Disruption of protein kinase
a regulation causes immortalization and dysregulation of
D-type cyclins. Cancer Research 65 10307–10315.
Navedo MF, Nieves-Cintron M, Amberg GC, Yuan C,

Votaw VS, Lederer WJ, McKnight GS & Santana LF
2008 AKAP150 is required for stuttering persistent Ca2C
sparklets and angiotensin II-induced hypertension.
Circulation Research 102 e1–e11.

Neuberger G, Schneider G & Eisenhaber F 2007 pkaPS:

prediction of protein kinase A phosphorylation sites with the
simpliﬁed kinase-substrate binding model. Biology Direct 2 1.

Newhall KJ, Cummings DE, Nolan MA & McKnight GS

2005 Deletion of the RIIbeta-subunit of protein kinase A
decreases body weight and increases energy expenditure
in the obese, leptin-deﬁcient ob/ob mouse. Molecular
Endocrinology 19 982–991.

Newhall KJ, Criniti AR, Cheah CS, Smith KC, Kafer KE,

Burkart AD & McKnight GS 2006 Dynamic anchoring of
PKA is essential during oocyte maturation. Current
Biology 16 321–327.

Nguyen GH, French R & Radhakrishna H 2004 Protein
kinase A inhibits lysophosphatidic acid induction of
serum response factor via alterations in the actin
cytoskeleton. Cellular Signalling 16 1141–1151.

Nolan MA, Sikorski MA & McKnight GS 2004 The role

of uncoupling protein 1 in the metabolism and adiposity
of RII beta-protein kinase A-deﬁcient mice. Molecular
Endocrinology 18 2302–2311.

Noveen A, Jiang TX & Chuong CM 1996 cAMP, an activator

of protein kinase A, suppresses the expression of sonic
hedgehog. Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications 219 180–185.

Oksvold MP, Funderud A, Kvissel AK, Skarpen E, Henanger

H, Huitfeldt HS, Skalhegg BS & Orstavik S 2008
Epidermal growth factor receptor levels are reduced in
mice with targeted disruption of the protein kinase A
catalytic subunit. BMC Cell Biology 9 16.

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

Araujo Vilar D, Argueso R, Barca O, Botana M et al.
2008 Prevalence of mutations in TSHR, GNAS,
PRKAR1A and RAS genes in a large series of toxic
thyroid adenomas from Galicia, an iodine-deﬁcient area
in NW Spain. European Journal of Endocrinology 159
623–631.

Parma J, Duprez L, Van Sande J, Cochaux P, Gervy C,

Mockel J, Dumont J & Vassart G 1993 Somatic mutations
in the thyrotropin receptor gene cause hyperfunctioning
thyroid adenomas. Nature 365 649–651.

Parma J, Duprez L, Van Sande J, Hermans J, Rocmans P, Van
Vliet G, Costagliola S, Rodien P, Dumont JE & Vassart G
1997 Diversity and prevalence of somatic mutations in the
thyrotropin receptor and Gs alpha genes as a cause of
toxic thyroid adenomas. Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology and Metabolism 82 2695–2701.

Pavel E, Nadella K, Towns WH II & Kirschner LS 2008

Mutation of Prkar1a causes osteoblast neoplasia driven by
dysregulation of protein kinase A. Molecular
Endocrinology 22 430–440.

Pelton PD, Sherman LS, Rizvi TA, Marchionni MA, Wood P,
Friedman RA & Ratner N 1998 Rufﬂing membrane, stress
ﬁber, cell spreading and proliferation abnormalities in
human Schwannoma cells. Oncogene 17 2195–2209.

Person AD, Klewer SE & Runyan RB 2005 Cell biology of

cardiac cushion development. International Review of
Cytology 243 287–335.

Postiglione MP, Parlato R, Rodriguez-Mallon A, Rosica A,

Mithbaokar P, Maresca M, Marians RC, Davies TF,
Zannini MS, De Felice M et al. 2002 Role of the
thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor signaling in
development and differentiation of the thyroid gland.
PNAS 99 15462–15467.

Qi M, Zhuo M, Skalhegg BS, Brandon EP, Kandel ER,

McKnight GS & Idzerda RL 1996 Impaired hippocampal
plasticity in mice lacking the Cbeta1 catalytic subunit of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase. PNAS 93 1571–1576.

Qiao J, Huang F & Lum H 2003 PKA inhibits RhoA

activation: a protection mechanism against endothelial
barrier dysfunction. American Journal of Physiology.
Lung Cellular and Molecular Physiology 284 L972–L980.
Rannels SR, Cobb CE, Landiss LR & Corbin JD 1985 The
regulatory subunit monomer of cAMP-dependent protein
kinase retains the salient kinetic properties of the native
dimeric subunit. Journal of Biological Chemistry 260
3423–3430.

Rao Y, Fischer QS, Yang Y, McKnight GS, LaRue A & Daw
NW 2004 Reduced ocular dominance plasticity and long-
term potentiation in the developing visual cortex of
protein kinase A RII alpha mutant mice. European
Journal of Neuroscience 20 837–842.

Rebolledo B, Lai NC, Gao MH, Takahashi T, Roth DM,

Baird SM & Hammond HK 2006 Adenylylcyclase gene
transfer increases function of the failing heart. Human
Gene Therapy 17 1043–1048.

Palos-Paz F, Perez-Guerra O, Cameselle-Teijeiro J, Rueda-

Reiken S, Gaburjakova M, Guatimosim S, Gomez AM,

Chimeno C, Barreiro-Morandeira F, Lado-Abeal J,

D’Armiento J, Burkhoff D, Wang J, Vassort G, Lederer WJ

www.endocrinology-journals.org

791

L S Kirschner et al.: Mouse models of PKA

& Marks AR 2003 Protein kinase A phosphorylation
of the cardiac calcium release channel (ryanodine
receptor) in normal and failing hearts. Role of phospha-
tases and response to isoproterenol. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 278 444–453.

Reynen K 1995 Cardiac Myxomas. New England Journal of

Medicine 333 1610–1617.

Robinson-Steiner AM, Beebe SJ, Rannels SR & Corbin JD

1984 Microheterogeneity of type II cAMP-dependent
protein kinase in various mammalian species and tissues.
Journal of Biological Chemistry 259 10596–10605.
Rolli-Derkinderen M, Sauzeau V, Boyer L, Lemichez E,

Baron C, Henrion D, Loirand G & Pacaud P 2005
Phosphorylation of serine 188 protects RhoA from
ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated degradation in vascular
smooth muscle cells. Circulation Research 96 1152–1160.

Rosenberg D, Groussin L, Jullian E, Perlemoine K,

Bertagna X & Bertherat J 2002 Role of the PKA-regulated
transcription factor CREB in development and
tumorigenesis of endocrine tissues. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences 968 65–74.

Roth DM, Gao MH, Lai NC, Drumm J, Dalton N, Zhou JY,
Zhu J, Entrikin D & Hammond HK 1999 Cardiac-directed
adenylyl cyclase expression improves heart function in
murine cardiomyopathy. Circulation 99 3099–3102.

Roth DM, Drumm JD, Bhargava V, Swaney JS, Gao MH &

Hammond HK 2003 Cardiac-directed expression of
adenylyl cyclase and heart rate regulation. Basic
Research in Cardiology 98 380–387.

Ruehr ML, Russell MA & Bond M 2004 A-kinase anchoring
protein targeting of protein kinase A in the heart. Journal
of Molecular and Cellular Cardiology 37 653–665.

Russo D, Arturi F, Schlumberger M, Caillou B, Monier R,
Filetti S & Suarez HG 1995 Activating mutations of the
TSH receptor in differentiated thyroid carcinomas.
Oncogene 11 1907–1911.

San Agustin JT & Witman GB 2001 Differential expression
of the C(s) and Calpha1 isoforms of the catalytic subunit
of cyclic 3
protein kinase testicular cells. Biology of Reproduction
65 151–164.

-adenosine monophosphate-dependent

0

0

,5

Sandrini F, Kirschner LS, Bei T, Farmakidis C, Yasufuku-
Takano J, Takano K, Prezant TR, Marx SJ, Farrell WE,
Clayton RN et al. 2002a PRKAR1A, one of the Carney
complex genes, and its locus (17q22–24) are rarely altered
in pituitary tumours outside the Carney complex.
Journal of Medical Genetics 39 e78.

Sandrini F, Matyakhina L, Sarlis NJ, Kirschner LS,

Farmakidis C, Gimm O & Stratakis CA 2002b Regulatory
subunit type I-alpha of protein kinase A (PRKAR1A): a
tumor-suppressor gene for sporadic thyroid cancer.
Genes, Chromosomes and Cancer 35 182–192.

Sauer B & Henderson N 1988 DNA recombination in

mammalian cells by the Cre recombinase of bacterio-
phage P1. PNAS 85 5166–5170.

YM 2008 Protein kinase A anchoring via AKAP150 is
essential for TRPV1 modulation by forskolin and
prostaglandin E2 in mouse sensory neurons. Journal of
Neuroscience 28 4904–4917.

Schreyer SA, Cummings DE, McKnight GS & LeBoeuf RC
2001 Mutation of the RIIbeta subunit of protein kinase A
prevents diet-induced insulin resistance and dyslipidemia
in mice. Diabetes 50 2555–2562.

Shenker A, Weinstein LS, Sweet DE & Spiegel AM 1994

An activating Gs alpha mutation is present in ﬁbrous
dysplasia of bone in the McCune–Albright syndrome.
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 79
750–755.

Skalhegg BS & Tasken K 2000 Speciﬁcity in the cAMP/PKA

signaling pathway. Differential expression, regulation,
and subcellular localization of subunits of PKA. Frontiers
in Bioscience 5 D678–D693.

Skalhegg BS, Huang Y, Su T, Idzerda RL, McKnight GS &
Burton KA 2002 Mutation of the Calpha subunit of PKA
leads to growth retardation and sperm dysfunction.
Molecular Endocrinology 16 630–639.

Solberg R, Sandberg M, Natarajan V, Torjesen PA, Hansson V,

Jahnsen T & Tasken K 1997 The human gene for the
0
, 5
-
regulatory subunit RI alpha of cyclic adenosine 3
monophosphate-dependent protein kinase: two distinct
promoters provide differential regulation of alternately
spliced messenger ribonucleic acids. Endocrinology
138 169–181.

0

Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Louis DN, Nielsen GP,

Antonescu CR, Borowsky AD, Bronson RT, Burns DK,
Cervera P, McLaughlin ME, Reifenberger G et al. 2004
Comparative pathology of nerve sheath tumors in mouse
models and humans. Cancer Research 64 3718–3724.

Stergiopoulos SG, Abu-Asab MS, Tsokos M & Stratakis CA

2004 Pituitary pathology in Carney complex patients.
Pituitary 7 73–82.

Stratakis CA, Kirschner LS & Carney JA 2001 Clinical and

molecular features of the Carney complex: diagnostic
criteria and recommendations for patient evaluation.
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 86
4041–4046.

Sun F, Hug MJ, Bradbury NA & Frizzell RA 2000 Protein
kinase A associates with cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator via an interaction with ezrin.
Journal of Biological Chemistry 275 14360–14366.

Sutherland EW & Rall TW 1958 Fractionation and

characterization of a cyclic adenine ribonucleotide
formed by tissue particles. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 232 1077–1091.

Takahashi T, Tang T, Lai NC, Roth DM, Rebolledo B,

Saito M, Lew WY, Clopton P & Hammond HK 2006
Increased cardiac adenylyl cyclase expression is
associated with increased survival after myocardial
infarction. Circulation 114 388–396.

Tamaki H 2007 Glucose-stimulated cAMP-protein kinase A

Schnizler K, Shutov LP, Van Kanegan MJ, Merrill MA,

Nichols B, McKnight GS, Strack S, Hell JW & Usachev

pathway in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Journal of
Bioscience and Bioengineering 104 245–250.

792

www.endocrinology-journals.org

The I, Hannigan GE, Cowley GS, Reginald S, Zhong Y,

Vijayaraghavan S, Goueli SA, Davey MP & Carr DW 1997

Endocrine-Related Cancer (2009) 16 773–793

Gusella JF, Hariharan IK & Bernards A 1997 Rescue of a
Drosophila NF1 mutant phenotype by protein kinase A.
Science 276 791–794.

Thevelein JM, Bonini BM, Castermans D, Haesendonckx S,

Kriel J, Louwet W, Thayumanavan P, Popova Y,
Rubio-Texeira M, Schepers W et al. 2008 Novel
mechanisms in nutrient activation of the yeast protein
kinase A pathway. Acta Microbiologica et Immunologica
Hungarica 55 75–89.

Tingley WG, Pawlikowska L, Zaroff JG, Kim T, Nguyen T,

Young SG, Vranizan K, Kwok PY, Whooley MA & Conklin
BR 2007 Gene-trapped mouse embryonic stem cell-derived
cardiac myocytes and human genetics implicate AKAP10
in heart rhythm regulation. PNAS 104 8461–8466.

Tokuo H, Yunoue S, Feng L, Kimoto M, Tsuji H, Ono T,

Saya H & Araki N 2001 Phosphorylation of neuroﬁ-
bromin by cAMP-dependent protein kinase is regulated
via a cellular association of N(G),N(G)-dimethylarginine
dimethylaminohydrolase. FEBS Letters 494 48–53.

Tonks ID, Nurcombe V, Paterson C, Zournazi A, Prather C,

Mould AW & Kay GF 2003 Tyrosinase-Cre mice for
tissue-speciﬁc gene ablation in neural crest and neuro-
epithelial-derived tissues. Genesis 37 131–138.

Tunquist BJ, Hoshi N, Guire ES, Zhang F, Mullendorff K,

Langeberg LK, Raber J & Scott JD 2008 Loss of
AKAP150 perturbs distinct neuronal processes in mice.
PNAS 105 12557–12562.

Uhler MD, Carmichael DF, Lee DC, Chrivia JC, Krebs EG &
McKnight GS 1986a Isolation of cDNA clones coding for
the catalytic subunit of mouse cAMP-dependent protein
kinase. PNAS 83 1300–1304.

Uhler MD, Chrivia JC & McKnight GS 1986b Evidence for a

second isoform of the catalytic subunit of cAMP-
dependent protein kinase. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 261 15360–15363.

Vallar L, Spada A & Giannattasio G 1987 Altered Gs and

adenylate cyclase activity in human GH-secreting
pituitary adenomas. Nature 330 566–568.

Vanﬂeteren JR & De Vreese A 1997 Modulation of kinase

activities in dauers and in long-lived mutants of
Caenorhabditis elegans. Journals of Gerontology.
Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 52
B212–B216.

Vatner DE, Asai K, Iwase M, Ishikawa Y, Wagner TE,

Shannon RP, Homcy CJ & Vatner SF 1998 Over-
expression of myocardial Gsalpha prevents full
expression of catecholamine desensitization despite
increased beta-adrenergic receptor kinase. Journal of
Clinical Investigation 101 1916–1922.

Veugelers M, Wilkes D, Burton K, McDermott DA, Song Y,

Goldstein MM, La Perle K, Vaughan CJ, O’Hagan A,
Bennett KR et al. 2004 Comparative PRKAR1A geno-
type–phenotype analyses in humans with Carney complex
and prkar1a haploinsufﬁcient mice. PNAS 101
14222–14227.

Protein kinase A-anchoring inhibitor peptides arrest
mammalian sperm motility. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 272 4747–4752.

0

,5

0

Walsh DA, Perkins JP & Krebs EG 1968 An adenosine
-monophosphate-dependant protein kinase from

3
rabbit skeletal muscle. Journal of Biological Chemistry
243 3763–3765.

Weinstein LS, Shenker A, Gejman PV, Merino MJ, Friedman E

& Spiegel AM 1991 Activating mutations of the
stimulatory G protein in the McCune–Albright syndrome.
New England Journal of Medicine 325 1688–1695.

Weinstein LS, Yu S, Warner DR & Liu J 2001 Endocrine

manifestations of stimulatory G protein alpha-subunit
mutations and the role of genomic imprinting. Endocrine
Reviews 22 675–705.

Woodford TA, Correll LA, McKnight GS & Corbin JD 1989

Expression and characterization of mutant forms of the
type I regulatory subunit of cAMP-dependent protein
kinase. The effect of defective cAMP binding on
holoenzyme activation. Journal of Biological Chemistry
264 13321–13328.

Yamasaki H, Mizusawa N, Nagahiro S, Yamada S, Sano T,
Itakura M & Yoshimoto K 2003 GH-secreting pituitary
adenomas infrequently contain inactivating mutations
of PRKAR1A and LOH of 17q23–24. Clinical
Endocrinology 58 464–470.

Yang Y, Mahaffey CL, Berube N & Frankel WN 2006

Interaction between ﬁdgetin and protein kinase
A-anchoring protein AKAP95 is critical for
palatogenesis in the mouse. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 281 22352–22359.

Yin Z, Jones GN, Towns WH II, Zhang X, Abel ED,

Binkley PF, Jarjoura D & Kirschner LS 2008a
Heart-speciﬁc ablation of Prkar1a causes failure of
heart development and myxomagenesis. Circulation
117 1414–1422.

Yin Z, Williams-Simons L, Parlow AF, Asa S & Kirschner

LS 2008b Pituitary-speciﬁc knockout of the Carney
complex gene Prkar1a leads to pituitary tumorigenesis.
Molecular Endocrinology 22 380–387.

Yin Z, Williams-Simons L, Rawahneh L, Asa S &

Kirschner LS 2008c Development of a pituitary-speciﬁc
cre line targeted to the Pit-1 lineage. Genesis 46 37–42.

Yonemoto W, McGlone ML & Taylor SS 1993

N-myristylation of the catalytic subunit of cAMP-
dependent protein kinase conveys structural stability.
Journal of Biological Chemistry 268 2348–2352.

Zeiger MA, Saji M, Gusev Y, Westra WH, Takiyama Y,
Dooley WC, Kohn LD & Levine MA 1997 Thyroid-
speciﬁc expression of cholera toxin A1 subunit causes
thyroid hyperplasia and hyperthyroidism in transgenic
mice. Endocrinology 138 3133–3140.

Zhu W & Saba S 2003 Cardiac electrophysiologic

abnormalities in the CREBA133 transgenic mouse model
of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Journal of
Cardiovascular Electrophysiology 14 982–989.

www.endocrinology-journals.org

793

