CONFERENCE REPORT

CTF Meeting 2012: Translation of the Basic
Understanding of the Biology and Genetics of NF1,
NF2, and Schwannomatosis Toward the
Development of Effective Therapies
Brigitte C. Widemann,1 Maria T. Acosta,2 Sylvia Ammoun,3 Allan J. Belzberg,4 Andre Bernards,5
Jaishri Blakeley,4 Antony Bretscher,6 Karen Cichowski,7 D. Wade Clapp,8 Eva Dombi,1
Gareth D. Evans,9 Rosalie Ferner,10,11 Cristina Fernandez-Valle,12 Michael J. Fisher,13
Marco Giovannini,14 David H. Gutmann,15 C. Oliver Hanemann,3 Robert Hennigan,16 Susan Huson,9
David Ingram,8 Joe Kissil,17 Bruce R. Korf,18 Eric Legius,19 Roger J. Packer,2 Andrea I McClatchey,5
Frank McCormick,20 Kathryn North,21 Minja Pehrsson,22 Scott R. Plotkin,5 Vijaya Ramesh,5
Nancy Ratner,16 Susann Schirmer,23 Larry Sherman,24 Elizabeth Schorry,16 David Stevenson,25
Douglas R. Stewart,26 Nicole Ullrich,27 Annette C. Bakker,28* and Helen Morrison23
1Pediatric Oncology Branch, NIH—National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
2Children’s National, Gilbert NF Institute, Washington, District of Columbia
3Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth University, Plymouth, UK
4Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
5Department of Neurology and Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
6Cornell University, New York, New York
7Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
8Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana
9St. Mary’s Hospital, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
10Guy’s and St. Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
11Department of Clinical Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, UK
12University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida
13Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
14House Research Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California
15Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
16Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio
17Scripps Research Institute—Florida, Jupiter, Florida
18University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama
19Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
20University of California, San Francisco, California
21The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, Australia

Grant sponsor: National Institutes of Health Grant Award; Grant number: 1R13NS070505-01; Grant sponsor: Center for Cancer Research;
Grant sponsor: National Cancer Institute.

Correspondence to:
Annette C. Bakker, Children’s Tumor Foundation, 95 Pine Street, New York, NY 10005.
E-mail: abakker@ctf.org, widemanb@mail.nih.gov
Article first published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com): 17 January 2014
DOI 10.1002/ajmg.a.36312

Ó 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

563

564

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

22Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
23Leibniz Institute for Age Research, Jena, Germany
24Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon
25University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah
26Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, Maryland
27Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
28Children’s Tumor Foundation, New York, New York

Manuscript Received: 26 June 2013; Manuscript Accepted: 17 July 2013

The neuroﬁbromatoses (NF) are autosomal dominant genetic
disorders that encompass the rare diseases NF1, NF2, and
schwannomatosis. The NFs affect more people worldwide
than Duchenne muscular dystrophy and Huntington’s disease
combined. NF1 and NF2 are caused by mutations of known
tumor suppressor genes (NF1 and NF2, respectively). For
schwannomatosis, although mutations in SMARCB1 were iden-
tiﬁed in a subpopulation of schwannomatosis patients, addition-
al causative gene mutations are still to be discovered. Individuals
with NF1 may demonstrate manifestations in multiple organ
systems, including tumors of the nervous system, learning dis-
abilities, and physical disﬁgurement. NF2 ultimately can cause
deafness, cranial nerve deﬁcits, and additional severe morbid-
ities caused by tumors of the nervous system. Unmanageable
pain is a key ﬁnding in patients with schwannomatosis. Although
today there is no marketed treatment for NF-related tumors, a
signiﬁcant number of clinical trials have become available. In
addition, signiﬁcant preclinical efforts have led to a more ratio-
nal selection of potential drug candidates for NF trials. An
important element in fueling this progress is the sharing of
knowledge. For over 20 years the Children’s Tumor Foundation
has convened an annual NF Conference, bringing together NF
professionals to share novel ﬁndings, ideas, and build collabo-
rations. The 2012 NF Conference held in New Orleans hosted
over 350 NF researchers and clinicians. This article provides a
synthesis of the highlights presented at the conference and as
such, is a “state-of-the-ﬁeld” for NF research in 2012.
Ó 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Key words: neurofibromatosis type 1; neurofibromatosis type 2;
NF1; NF2; schwannomatosis;
tumor suppressor; SMARCB1;
merlin neurofibromin; preclinical models

INTRODUCTION

The Neuroﬁbromatosis (NF) Conference, founded and hosted by
the Children’s Tumor Foundation since 1985, is the world’s pre-
mier gathering of scientists and clinicians dedicated to advancing
research and care for individuals living with NF1, NF2, and
schwannomatosis. The conference has grown signiﬁcantly in recent
years, reﬂecting signiﬁcant advances in basic pathogenesis and an
expanded interest in NF research and development. The 2012 NF
Conference was held June 9–12 in New Orleans, LA. The agenda
featured well-balanced sessions on basic science, clinical care, and

How to Cite this Article:
Widemann BC, Acosta MT, Ammoun S,
Belzberg AJ, Bernards A, Blakeley J,
Bretscher A, Cichowski K, Clapp DW,
Dombi E, Evans GD, Ferner R, Fernandez-
Valle C, Fisher MJ, Giovannini M,
Gutmann DH, Hanemann CO, Hennigan
R, Huson S, Ingram D, Kissil J, Korf BR,
Legius E, Packer RJ, McClatchey AI,
McCormick F, North K, Pehrsson M,
Plotkin SR, Ramesh V, Ratner N, Schirmer
S, Sherman L, Schorry E, Stevenson D,
Stewart DR, Ullrich N, Bakker AC,
Morrison H. 2014. CTF meeting 2012:
Translation of the basic understanding of
the biology and genetics of NF1, NF2, and
schwannomatosis toward the development
of effective therapies.

Am J Med Genet Part A 164A:563–578.

clinical trials addressing all NF manifestations (NF1, NF2, and
schwannomatosis).

Unique to this conference were the sessions in which clinicians
and researchers exchanged their ﬁndings and brainstormed togeth-
er on certain speciﬁc disease manifestations. These mixed sessions
aimed at further fostering multi-disciplinary discussions in order to
accelerate the translation of basic NF biology research into better
informed clinical trials.

The overwhelming highlight of the meeting was how quickly the
ﬁeld of NF has transformed itself into a therapeutic one. Multiple
sessions highlighted the identiﬁcation of driver pathways followed
by the preclinical assessment of best in class modulators of these
pathways. This has led to multiple actively recruiting interventional
clinical trials in the United States and abroad. The expectation is
that this number will further increase because of the close collabo-
ration between basic and clinical researchers.

The current report summarizes the work presented at the 2012
NF Conference and as such, an up to date overview of the inspiring
ﬁeld of neuroﬁbromatosis.

KEY NOTE ADDRESSES

Dr. Luis Parada (UTSW, Dallas, TX) demonstrated that the ex-
pression of CXCR4 is increased in Skin Derived Precursors (SKPs)
from neuroﬁbromas and MPNST when compared to WT SKPs.
Knockdown of CXCR4 induced G1/S arrest and attenuated cyclin
D1 expression through the beta catenin network. Following these
observations he validated the therapeutic validity of CXCR4 by
using a known CXCR4 inhibitor (AMD-3100) and showed a
cytostatic effect.

Dr. Rhona Mirsky (University College London) discussed about
the plasticity of Schwann cells and their response to injury.
Dr. Mirsky could show that a single glial transcription factor (c-
Jun) is required to reprogram Schwann cells generating a “repair

WIDEMANN ET AL.

565

in NF1. Using cre-transgenic mouse

cell” essential for regeneration of an injured nerve [Arthur-Farraj
et al., 2012]. Dr. Jan Tuckerman (University of Ulm, Germany)
highlighted the advances in understanding the pathophysiology of
bone disease
lines,
Dr. Tuckermann discovered glucocorticoids inhibit cytokines in-
dependent of GR dimerization and thereby attenuate osteoblast
differentiation, which accounts, in part, for bone loss during GC
therapy [Rauch et al., 2010]. He further presented screening systems
suitable for identifying factors and compounds to enhance osteo-
blast function and thus bone formation, opening up new possibili-
ties to treat bone disorders. Dr. Silvia Cappello (Helmholtz Center
Munich, Germany) demonstrated that the genetic deletion of the
small GTPase RhoA results in migrational disorder in the develop-
ing cerebral cortex. She identiﬁed that alterations in RhoA in radial
glial cells, rather than neurons, caused these migrational defects
[Cappello et al., 2012].

Dr. Rene´ Bernards (The Netherlands Cancer Institute) built a
strong case for the use of functional genetic approaches and serial
tumor biopsies to effectively guide the development of targeted
therapies in cancer and understand mechanisms of resistance. As an
example he described how tumor biopsies in very few patients
identiﬁed that the feedback activation of EGFR mediates resistance
to the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib in patients with BRAF (V600E)
mutated colorectal cancer [Prahallad et al., 2012].

ADVANCEMENT IN NF1
Optic Pathway Tumors
Dr. Uri Tabori (University of Toronto) reviewed aberrant activa-
tion of the MAPK pathway as the main molecular abnormality
noted in non-NF1 pilocytic astrocytoma. The most common
abnormality identiﬁed is the KIAA1549–BRAF fusion, which is
associated with improved progression-free and overall survival
compared with “non-fused” pilocytic astrocytomas [Hawkins
et al., 2011]. Pre-clinical work suggests that the BRAF-induced
growth arrest observed in vitro,
is due to oncogene-induced
senescence, and helps explain how a mutation that results in tumor
formation may also account for its benign behavior [Jacob
et al., 2011]. This has implications for understanding NF1-associ-
ated optic pathway gliomas, which also have active MAPK signal-
ing, rarely transform into higher-grade tumors, and usually
spontaneously stop growing without intervention. Dr. David Gut-
mann (Washington University, St. Louis, MO) emphasized the
importance of the microenvironment (microglia) in the pathogen-
esis of optic pathway gliomas in Nf1 mouse models. In addition, he
demonstrated that neural stem cells from different germinal zones
exhibit differential responses to Nf1 gene inactivation, which may
partly underlie the spatial and temporal distribution of gliomas in
children with NF1 [Solga et al., 2013]. A review of prior, present and
future clinical trials for low-grade astrocytoma was presented by
Dr. Roger Packer (Children’s National Medical Center, Washing-
ton, DC). Carboplatin-based regimens continue to be the gold
standard for NF1-associated low-grade gliomas based on progres-
sion free survival (PFS) rates (5-year PFS of 69% at 5 years) and
relatively low toxicity in comparison to other regimens. Vinblastine
has been shown to be efﬁcacious for recurrent or refractory tumors,
but its efﬁcacy for newly diagnosed tumors has not been adequately

evaluated. The combination of vinblastine with carboplatin was
poorly tolerated because of bone marrow suppression. Other
traditional chemotherapy agents (e.g., temozolomide, procarba-
zine, etc.) are associated with an increased second malignancy risk.
Small studies using bevacizumab with or without irinotecan reveal
both radiographic and visual responses. Dr. Michael Fisher (Child-
ren’s Hospital of Philadelphia) presented an update on the inter-
national, multi-center; retrospective study of visual outcomes
following chemotherapy for NF1-associated optic pathway gliomas
[Fisher et al., 2012]. His recent work reveals that in the 3 years
following treatment, visual acuity remains stable in only 47% of
subjects and 37% require additional therapy during that time. In
addition, patients with normal acuity at the start of treatment were
less likely to have a signiﬁcant decrease in vision or to require
additional treatment in the subsequent 3 years. Dr. Rob Avery
(Children’s National Medical Center) updated his work on the use
of optical coherence tomography (OCT) to measure retinal nerve
ﬁber layer (RNFL) thickness in children with optic pathway glioma.
He previously showed that RNFL thickness correlated with vision in
children >6 years of age. However, the OCT equipment used
required the cooperation of the children to perform. Preliminary
data using hand held OCT for younger and uncooperative children
while they were sedated for MRI scans reveals a correlation between
RNFL thickness and decreased vision. RNFL thickness is therefore a
potential structural marker of visual loss in this population.

NF1 and the Brain
Efforts in the development of biological targeted interventions that
improve quality of life (QOL) in patients with NF1 and of biological
markers that may have utility for the evaluation of current and future
interventions were discussed. Kathryn North (Sydney, Australia)
presented that some aspects of the NF1 cognitive phenotype are
likely due to developmental changes during brain development.
Recent studies in one Nf1 mouse model suggest that both the Ras/
MAPK and dopaminergic pathways are contributing to working
memory deﬁcits in patients with NF1 [Brown et al., 2010]. These
observations and differences in the biological mechanism associated
with cognitive deﬁcits in NF provide a basis for the development of
speciﬁc targeted interventions for cognitive deﬁcits in NF1. Ype
Elgersma (Rotterdam, The Netherlands), using a novel mouse
lacking the neuron-speciﬁc NF1 exon 9a isoform
mutant
(Nf19a /9a 
mice), reported that the hyperpolarization-activated
cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) current (Ih) is selectively attenuated
in hippocampal parvalbumin-expressing interneurons. In addition,
a HCN channel agonist rescued the synaptic plasticity and learning
þ/ 
deﬁcits in Nf19a /9a 
mouse model, conﬁrming the importance of HCN channel dys-
function on cognitive function in NF1. Maria T. Acosta (Children’s
National Medical Center) provided clinical evidence of signiﬁcant
compromise in social cognition in patients with NF1. Autism
spectrum disorder symptoms is associated with NF1 in up to
14% per a recent clinical sample in Washington, DC, and replicated
in a sample in England (Manchester) [Walsh et al., 2013]. This is the
highest frequency reported in NF1 and has important implications
for the evaluation of potential biology related mechanism asso-
ciated with autism spectrum disorder symptoms in NF1. F. Xavier

mice, as well as the commonly used Nf1

566

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

Castellanos (New York University) proposed intrinsic functional
connectivity measured by functional MRI (fMRI) as a potential
biomarker for NF1 cognitive deﬁcits. Synchronous patterns of
intrinsic (spontaneous) low frequency ﬂuctuations in the blood
oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal in brain recapitulate func-
tional brain circuits in a manner that is reliable across time and that is
consistent across labs. Evaluation of BOLD in a small subset of
typically developing children and in children with NF1 demonstrat-
ed that examination of intrinsic functional connectivity might lead
to the discovery of biomarkers useful for dissecting the cognitive
deﬁcits entailed by NF1 [Chabernaud et al., 2012]. David Gutmann
(Washington University) showed evidence that central nervous
system (CNS) axonal
length is determined by cyclic AMP
(cAMP) regulation of Protein Kinase A (PKA)-mediated actin
cytoskeleton dynamics. Using novel Nf1 genetically engineered
mice, he observed that agents which restore striatal dopamine levels
in the brain can reverse the behavioral abnormalities in these mice
[Brown et al., 2010]. He further showed that raclopride positron
emission tomography imaging could be used to reveal dopamine
defects in Nf1 mutant mice [Brown et al., 2011].

Vascular Anomalies in NF1
Jan Friedman (University of British Columbia) reviewed the main
cardiovascular features associated with NF1. Congenital heart
defects are observed in at least 2.4% of patients. The prevalence
of hypertension is not well characterized but is thought to be higher
than expected and may be associated with echocardiographic
changes. Renal artery stenosis and pheochromocytoma are ob-
served infrequently in patients with NF1. Systemic vasculopathy is
often asymptomatic and may present with life-threatening medical
complications or sudden death. Physicians caring for patients with
NF1 should have a high index of suspicion for congenital heart
defects, hypertension and systemic vasculopathy. David Ingram
(Riley Hospital for Children, Indiana University School of Medi-
cine) presented his work using genetically engineered neuroﬁbro-
min-deﬁcient mouse models to study genetic and cellular evidence
for vascular inﬂammation and its contribution to cardiovascular
disease in NF1 patients. His two murine models of NF1 vaso-
occlusive and aneurysm disease closely recapitulate the vascular
disease observed in NF1 patients, and demonstrate that Nf1 het-
erozygous myeloid cells are the critical cellular effectors of both NF1
vaso-occlusive and aneurysm disease. Finally, Dr. Ingram presented
preliminary data demonstrating that statins may inhibit the pro-
gression and/or initiation of NF1 vaso-occlusive or aneurysm
disease in vivo. These data provide insights into potential therapies
for NF1 patients with vascular disease. Nicole Ullrich (Boston
Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School) reviewed cerebro-
vascular disorders in NF1, which represent a serious and under
recognized complication with a putative prevalence rate of 6% for
cerebral vasculopathy. Types of observed vascular changes include
stenoses, occlusions/compressive vasculopathy, moyamoya syn-
drome, aneurismal lesions, major artery ectasia and arteriovenous
ﬁstulae/malformations. Risk factors are thought to include younger
age, known optic pathway glioma and prior cranial irradiation.
Many patients with cerebrovascular arteriopathy are asymptomatic
at time of presentation and vascular changes are thought to be

progressive in 1/3–1/2 of patients. Dr. Ullrich presented data that
suggest early surgical intervention may prevent the development of
future strokes and ﬁxed neurologic deﬁcits. A low threshold for
further vascular imaging is recommended in patients with NF1 who
present with symptoms suggestive of vasculopathy. Edward Smith
(Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School) reported
ﬁndings from a study of children with asymptomatic vascular
changes, which demonstrated variable onset of arteriopathy; how-
ever, once narrowing was detected, slow arterial ﬂow was quickly
followed by radiographic progression in almost 60% within 5 years.
This suggests that there is a narrow window for intervention before
strokes ensue. Dr. Smith also presented a potential method to detect
urinary biomarkers of angiogenesis, including matrix metallopro-
teinases and vascular endothelial growth factor, in children with
moyamoya compared to matched control subjects as well as in
source tissue of the affected blood vessels. These markers may have
utility in the detection of vascular changes as well as in predicting
outcomes after surgical intervention.

NF1 Bone Abnormalities
Dr. Schorry reviewed the clinical bone phenotype including gener-
alized (osteopenia, short stature, and macrocephaly) and focal (tibial
dysplasia/pseudarthrosis, sphenoid wing dysplasia, dystrophic sco-
liosis, non-ossifying ﬁbromas, and pectus deformities of the chest)
osseous abnormalities. Dr. Florent Elefteriou, reviewed that various
mouse models have shown that Nf1 plays a role in regulation of
collagen synthesis and bone mineralization. The Nf1prx / 
mouse
model affects chondrocytes and osteoblasts, and results in abnormal
cartilage formation and deﬁcient bone mineralization, which can be
partially rescued with bone morphogenic protein-2 (BMP2). Cor-
rection of bone mineralization may be needed for better healing of
tibial pseudarthrosis. Potential targets for future therapeutics in-
clude transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 and extracellular
inorganic pyrophosphate. Dr. David Little (Sydney, Australia)
reviewed the medical and surgical management of tibial pseudarth-
rosis, including the importance of excision of the ﬁbrous hamartoma
at the site of fracture, which is thought to have biallelic inactivation of
NF1. The rationale for using a combination of BMP2 and bisphosph-
onates in NF1 tibial pseudarthrosis was presented. Dr. Ndong
(Vanderbilt University) showed that osteoprecursor cells from
Nf1col2 / 
mice have severe defects in mineralization and impaired
differentiation. BMP2 corrected the differentiation defect, but not
the mineralization defect. Interestingly, treatment with a combina-
tion of BMP2 and recombinant human TNSALP (Asfotase) rescued
both the differentiation and mineralization defects. Dr. Kolanczyk
reported on the cortical humerus ﬁndings in his Nf1Prx1 tibial
dysplasia mouse model, which suggest that neuroﬁbromin is re-
quired for normal osteocyte function. Dr. Rhodes discussed the role
of osteoclasts in NF1 pseudarthrosis. Using Nf1ﬂox/þ
;LysMCre mice
there was an increased frequency of osteoclast progenitors, osteo-
clastogenesis, and bone resorption in vitro. To examine the role of
Nf1
osteoclasts on fracture healing in vivo, lethally irradiated
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Col2.3Cre mice were transplanted with bone marrow cells
from wild-type or Nf1ﬂox/þ
;LysMCre mice. Compared to wild-type
bone marrow cells, Nf1ﬂox/þ
;LysMCre bone marrow cell reconsti-
tuted Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Col2.3Cre mice with an induced tibial fracture,

þ/ 

WIDEMANN ET AL.

567

exhibited signiﬁcantly reduced callus bone volume fraction showing
a deﬁcit in fracture repair. Dr. Yang showed that TGF-beta1 serum
levels were higher in Nf1ﬂox/ 
;Col2.3Cre mice compared to wild-type
mice, and that a TGF-beta1 receptor inhibitor rescued some osteo-
porotic and fracture phenotypes in this mouse model. These animal
studies document the rapid progress that has been made using
preclinical mouse models to better understand the pathophysiology
of skeletal abnormalities in NF1 with potential therapeutic targets for
treatment. Dr. Arrington provided a now published detailed case
series of individuals with NF1 with a wide array of skull abnormalities
highlighting that skull abnormalities in NF1 is an understudied area
[Arrington et al., 2013]. Although the primary focus of the session
was on bone abnormalities, muscle–bone interactions are under-
studied in NF1 and Dr. Schindler reported on some interesting
ﬁndings of the effects of conditional double inactivation of NF1 in
skeletal muscle, which lead to a severe muscle myopathy and
abnormal metabolic function. His data demonstrate that muscle
expression of NF1 is critical for viability in mice. Investigation of
muscle and metabolic function in NF1 is a new area of research with
potential for signiﬁcant biologic insights.

NF1 Mouse Models, and Preclinical Studies
Guiding Clinical Trial Development
Alison Lloyd (UC London, UK) presented mouse models, which
demonstrated a central role for the ERK signaling pathway in
controlling Schwann cell behavior in the normal adult peripheral
nervous system. In mature, quiescent myelinating Schwann cells
activation of the ERK signaling was sufﬁcient to drive these cells back
to a progenitor/stem-like state. Moreover, activation of this signal-
ing pathway led to a transcriptional response that, via the secretion
of multiple chemokines, orchestrated the multicellular response
required for nerve repair and implicated in NF1 tumor formation.
Nancy Ratner (Cincinnati Children’s Hospital, USA) presented now
published [Jessen et al., 2013] direct evidence that blocking MEK
signaling was sufﬁcient to profoundly shrink existing neuroﬁbromas
in a mouse model, correlating with modulation of a transcriptional
negative feedback loop. Clinical trials with MEK inhibitors for
plexiform neuroﬁbromas are ongoing or in development and will
allow to evaluate the utility of the mouse model in predicting for
response in humans. In contrast, MEK inhibition was only tran-
siently effective in treatment of MPNST models, in which blockade
of Aurora kinases provided a durable response [Patel et al., 2012].
Yuan Zhu (U. Michigan, USA) extended the analysis of MEK
inhibition to the central nervous system. He found that biallelic,
but not heterozygous, inactivation of Nf1 led to an enlarged corpus
callosum—a manifestation recently linked to cognitive deﬁcits in
individuals with NF1. Treatment with a MEK inhibitor during
neonatal stages rescued the formation of an enlarged corpus cal-
losum in an Nf1-deﬁcient mouse model. Karlyne Reilly (NIH)
highlighted the importance of sex in her presentation of an interac-
tion of sex and genotype on brain tumor (astrocytoma) susceptibil-
ity in an NF1-associated mouse model. She also presented an update
on the development of schweinfurthin as a candidate anti-NF1
therapeutic. Dr. Frank McCormick (UCSF) described a novel
mechanistic connection between NF1 and SPRED1, the gene mu-
tated in Legius syndrome [Stowe et al., 2012]. He showed that the

SPRED1 protein directly interacts with neuroﬁbromin and recruits
it to the membrane, where it can suppress Ras. These ﬁndings not
only provide a satisfying explanation for the overlapping features of
NF1 and Legius syndrome but reveal novel mechanistic insight into
how neuroﬁbromin is regulated. For example, SPRED1 binds
directly to c-kit and M-CSF-receptor, suggesting that neuroﬁbro-
min may regulate Ras in the context of these signaling proteins
speciﬁcally. Dr. McCormick also shared insight into how different
Ras isoforms may differentially function, which will ultimately affect
how we think about NF1 and Ras-driven tumors. Dr. Gideon Bollag
from Plexxikon reported on the development of PLX4032, a potent
and selective inhibitor of oncogenic B-RAF kinase activity. Given
favorable pharmacology properties and improved overall survival
compared to standard-of-care chemotherapy in malignant melano-
ma, PLX4032 was approved by US and European regulatory agen-
cies, but resistance frequently develops on treatment. Next
generation compounds aimed to combat the development of resis-
tance were presented. These studies illustrate of how kinase inhib-
itors that target a Ras effector pathway (BRAF) can be developed as a
cancer therapy. Dr. Bollag also discussed an additional approach to
treat hyperproliferative diseases by targeting the tumor microenvi-
ronment. PLX3397 is a selective inhibitor of FMS and KIT kinases.
FMS is the receptor for CSF-1, which plays a critical role in a variety
of cells within a tumor’s microenvironment. PLX3397 has shown
anti-tumor activity in a variety of in vivo studies, and is currently in
clinical testing in cancer patients. Notably, loss of the NF1 gene and
consequent activation of the Ras pathway in Schwann cells results in
secretion of both CSF-1 and SCF, and macrophages and mast cells,
which are important constituents of neuroﬁbromas. As such the
potential of PLX3397 as a therapeutic for NF1 could be explored in
future studies.

Dr. Chris Moertel, from the University of Minnesota described
the current status of brain tumor immunotherapy and its relevance
to the NF population. An early analysis of the phase I clinical trial
(NCT01171469, IND 13887) utilizing GBM6 and autologous den-
dritic cells was shown, including evidence of immune response in a
subset of patients and radiographic evidence of tumor regression in
one patient. These early results are encouraging and the progress in
the ﬁeld of immunotherapy for cancers may result in the evaluation
of these treatment approaches for patients with NF. Dr. Benjamin
Braun, from UCSF, discussed the preclinical development of signal
transduction therapy for juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
(JMML). This rare but lethal form of leukemia is strongly associated
with NF1 [Loh, 2011]. Sporadic cases in other children are associ-
ated with activating mutations in KRAS, NRAS, and PTPN11.
Dr. Braun described efforts to use Nf1 and Kras JMML mouse
models for preclinical therapeutic studies, in collaboration with
Kevin Shannon and the CTF Preclinical Consortium. The MEK
inhibitor PD0325901 was found to cause disease regression in both
systems, correcting both hyperproliferation of myeloid cells and the
aberrant differentiation that causes anemia [Chang et al., 2011;
Lyubynska et al., 2011]. Importantly, MEK inhibition does not
selectively eradicate mutant stem cells in either mouse model. Thus,
other strategies may be required for a deﬁnitive cure of JMML. To
broaden the search for active agents, the Braun lab has developed a
novel in vitro screening platform using primary myeloid progen-
itors sorted by FACS into multi-well plates allowing the screen of

568

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

hundreds of compounds for selective toxicity against mutant cells.
Dr. Karen Cichowski, from Brigham and Women’s Hospital and
Harvard Medical School described her laboratory’s efforts in
developing new potential therapies for malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors (MPNSTs), the most common lethal feature of NF1.
Her laboratory has shown that the mTOR pathway is critically
deregulated in NF1 mutant MPNSTs. mTOR inhibitors such as
rapamycin suppress the growth of these tumors but do not cause
tumor regression [Johannessen et al., 2005; Johannessen et al.,
2008]. However, when combined with HSP90 inhibitors, potent
tumor regression is observed [De Raedt et al., 2011]. This thera-
peutic combination is currently being evaluated in clinical trials.
Dr. Cichowski also presented a platform by which her laboratory
has been evaluating the combined effects of numerous drug com-
binations in this tumor model, with the goal of identifying more
promising combinations that can be evaluated in NF1 patients.

Clinical Highlights for NF1
Dr. Eva Dombi (Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer
Institute) presented data from a phase II clinical trial of pegylated
interferon alpha 2b (pegintron) in the treatment of plexiform
neuroﬁbromas in NF1 patients. In thirty patients with progressive
plexiform neuroﬁbromas the median PFS using volumetric MRI
analysis on treatment with pegintron was 22.6 months compared
with 10.6 months in a historical placebo control group. Two patients

had a 20% decrease in tumor volume and eight had volume

reduction of 11–16%. It was concluded that the treatment had
activity by prolonging the time to progression of progressive plexi-
form neuroﬁbromas. Dr. Bruce Korf (University of Alabama at
Birmingham) reported the results of a multicenter natural history
study of the rate of growth of unselected plexiform neuroﬁbromas
not receiving treatment directed at the plexiform neuroﬁbroma
using volumetric MRI. A total of 261 patients were enrolled, of which
at least two MRIs were available for 131. Median age at ﬁrst MRI was
13.3 years (range, 2.5–55.5 years) and the median observation period
was 24.1 months (range, 6.4–76.9 months). Plexiform neuroﬁbroma
growth was seen more frequently in younger patients and the growth
rate did not correlate with tumor location or morphology. These
data will be useful in counseling of individuals regarding the
likelihood of growth of plexiform neuroﬁbromas as a function of
age and in the design of future clinical trials for plexiform neuro-
ﬁbromas. Children with NF1 have a high frequency of deﬁcits in
executive function—a set of higher level cognitive abilities such as
working memory, planning and organization that regulate and
control other cognitive functions and behavior. Dr. Kristina Hardy
(The Jennifer and Daniel Gilbert NF Institute, Children’s National
Medical Center/George Washington University School of Medi-
cine) presented results of a pilot study in 10 children with NF1 and
working memory deﬁcits of the feasibility and efﬁcacy of home-
based computerized cognitive training (Cogmed
). Primary out-
comes included compliance as well as change in attention and
working memory scores from baseline to post-intervention. Treat-
ment compliance was high with all participants completing at least
92% of training sessions with no adverse events. Participants
exhibited post-treatment improvement in attention and executive
function on a number of performance-based measures, but not on

1

the parent-rated questionnaire of executive dysfunction. These
preliminary data suggest that home-based computerized training
is feasible for children with NF1 and a larger, randomized clinical
trial to determine efﬁcacy appears warranted. Dr. Rosa Nguyen and
coworkers (University of Maryland and University Hospital Ham-
burg-Eppendorf) retrospectively analyzed clinical and MRI data of
52 NF1 patients with plexiform neuroﬁbromas who had surgery to
debulk the tumors. The aim of the study was to determine tumor
growth rate and identify prognostic features for tumor progression
in post-operative PNFs. Surgical indications included cosmetic

disﬁgurement (n¼ 18),
functional deﬁcits (n¼ 13), and pain
(n¼ 10). Eleven patients (21%, 9 children vs. 2 adults) with residual

tumor had repeated surgery due to tumor progression. Tumor type
was signiﬁcantly associated with tumor progression; speciﬁcally
diffuse plexiform neuroﬁbromas progressed faster than nodular
ones (P < 0.005). Patients aged 21 and younger had the highest
progression rate (P < 0.01). Thirteen plexiform neuroﬁbromas were
visually completely resected and did not recur during observation
(mean 3.7 years, 1.0–7.5). The authors concluded that age, tumor
type, location, and depth may predict progression of partially
resected plexiform neuroﬁbromas, and that patients may beneﬁt
from elective surgery of small and completely removable plexiform
neuroﬁbromas.

Dr. Kent Robertson (Indiana University) presented preliminary
now published results of an open-label, phase 2 study of imatinib in
36 NF1 patients with plexiform neuroﬁbromas [Robertson
et al., 2012]. Of the 23 patients who received imatinib for at least
6 months, 69 plexiform neuroﬁbromas were evaluated and 26% of
these patients had a 20–38% decrease in volume of one or more
plexiform neuroﬁbromas. Pediatric patients tended to have a ﬁrst
measurable response earlier than adults (median 4 vs. 8 months)
suggesting that future trials on these slow growing tumors will
require a minimum of 12 months therapy to accurately assess
response. Increased plasma levels of VEGF and MCP-1 correlated
with non-response to imatinib. Follow up studies are examining the
activity of imatinib, sunitinib, and cabozantinib. The biomarkers
being studied will include measurement of circulating cytokines as
well as ﬂow cytometric analysis of circulating pro-angiogenic
progenitor cells and inﬂammatory monocytes.

ADVANCEMENT IN NF2
Deciphering Pathways of NF2
A signaling-focused session opened with Cristina Fernandez-Valle
(University of Central Florida) describing a pilot NF2 high-
throughput screening campaign of a 1,280 compound library
(LOPAC) using merlin-null mouse Schwann cells to identify probes
that reduced cell viability. Nearly half of the 40 identiﬁed com-
pounds modulate components in merlin-dependent pathways.
These compounds will be validated using multiple assays and
selectivity will be tested using normal mouse Schwann cells.

Merlin interacts with the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4DCAF1 in the
nucleus and inhibits DCAF1. Wei Li (Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center) presented data describing a functional link between
merlin, DCAF1, and YAP, and provided a novel mechanism for
merlin in the activation of the Hippo tumor suppressor pathway [Li
et al., 2010]. Dr. Sylwia Ammoun (University of Plymouth, United

WIDEMANN ET AL.

569

Kingdom) demonstrated a strong overexpression of three TAM
receptors (TAM family receptor tyrosine kinases—Tyro3 (Sky),
Axl, and Mer) and their ligand Gas6 in human schwannomas. Gas6
is mitogenic and increases schwannoma cell–matrix adhesion and
survival acting via Axl. Gas6/Axl signaling stimulates FAK and Src
but not ERK1/2, JNK1/2 or AKT, and converges with IGFBP-1/
integrin b1-mediated signaling in schwannoma toward increased
proliferation [Ammoun et al., 2013]. A speciﬁc antibody targeting
the Axl receptor is currently being used in clinical trials for other
tumors and could potentially be tested for schwannoma and other
NF2-related tumors.

Dr. Susann Schirmer (Leibniz Institute for Age Research,
Germany) described the complex formation between merlin and
p120RasGAP and its inﬂuence in mediating contact inhibition of
growth through restriction of Ras activity. The association between
merlin, p120RasGAP and Ras was characterized and a direct
interaction between merlin and p120RasGAP as well as Ras was
detected. It was shown that p120RasGAP preferentially binds the
active (S518A) but not the inactive (S518D) form of merlin.
Furthermore, p120RasGAP knockdown in Schwann cells leads to
loss of contact-mediated inhibition of growth, mimicking the loss
of merlin phenotype. Future experiments will focus on the func-
tional relationship between merlin and p120RasGAP in vivo,
including analysis of the tumorigenic potential of p120RasGAP-
deﬁcient Schwann cells in vivo.

Dr. Robert Hennigan (Cincinnati Children’s Hospital) reported
on the ﬁndings of his recently published article on the role of merlin
in microtubule-based vesicular transport through control of Rho/
Rac family of GTPases activity [Hennigan et al., 2013]. The decrease
in Rac-dependent anterograde trafﬁcking of exocytic vesicles as a
result of loss of merlin could represent a possible mechanism for the
control of growth factor receptors at the cell surface.

Dr. Nic Tapon (London Research Institute, United Kingdom)
described the generation of a biosensor for Hippo signaling using
the Split-TEV protein–protein interaction reporter system and
application to a genome-wide RNAi screen in Drosophila. This
work uncovered a number of new pathway members as well as a
potential link between nutrient sensing and Hippo signaling [Wehr
et al., 2013].

Dr. Georg Halder (University of Leuven, Belgium) discussed the
role of the merlin-regulated Hippo pathway in cell polarity, show-
ing that when all cells of Drosophila imaginal discs lose epithelial cell
polarity (undergo EMT), they hyperproliferate and form large
tumorous masses due to upregulation of the Hippo pathway
effector Yki, the Drosophila homolog of YAP and TAZ. Strikingly,
when discs also contain normal cells, the mutant cells do not
hyperproliferate nor do they upregulate Yki but rather die by
apoptosis. Therefore, the normal cells act to suppress the tumori-
genic phenotype of mutant cells, elegantly showing how homeo-
static mechanisms can eliminate the abnormal cells to prevent
cancer through regulation of the Hippo pathway [Chen et al., 2012].
Dr. Duojia Pan (Johns Hopkins University) investigated the
feasibility of targeting the Hippo pathway oncoprotein YAP as a
potential therapeutic approach against NF2 and showed that
disruption of the YAP–TEAD complex potently suppresses hepa-
tomegaly/tumorigenesis resulting from Nf2 inactivation in the
mouse liver. Screening of a library of FDA-approved drugs identi-

ﬁed verteporﬁn as a small molecule that inhibits TEAD–YAP
association and YAP-induced liver overgrowth, providing proof
of principle for YAP inhibitors as molecular-targeted therapeutics
for NF2 [Liu-Chittenden et al., 2012].

Concerning Merlin’s regulation of mTORC1 and mTORC2
signaling via the Rheb/TSC1/TSC2 proteins, Dr. Vijaya Ramesh
(Massachusetts General Hospital) proposed that additional muta-
tional events or compensatory mechanisms that may contribute to
tumor growth and progression. Rapamycin differentially affects Akt
signaling in NF2-suppressed arachnoidal and Schwann cells, while
the mTOR kinase inhibitor Torin1 is more effective than rapamycin
in blocking signaling and proliferation in meningioma cells. These
ﬁndings suggest that inhibitors targeting both mTORC1 and
mTORC2 may be more effective than rapamycin alone for treating
NF2-associated tumors [Han et al., 2008; James et al., 2012].

Dr. Joe Kissil (Scripps Research Institute) detailed the identiﬁ-
cation of a novel group of merlin-interacting proteins—the angio-
motins—associated with tight and adherens
junctions and
interactors of several small G-protein modulators. The ﬁndings
presented provide a potential mechanism to explain how merlin
regulates signaling through the Rac and Ras/MAPK pathways from
cell–cell junctions. These studies implicate the angiomotins as
potential therapeutic targets in NF2 [Yi et al., 2011].

Therapeutic Frontiers: Preclinical Use of NF2
Mouse and Cellular Models Guiding Novel
Therapeutics Development
NF research has beneﬁted over the past few years from an array of
progressively more sophisticated genetically engineered mouse
(GEM) models. These models continue to provide an understand-
ing of how the manifestations of NF2 emerge, and should help to
identify new candidate targets for therapeutic interventions.
Several presentations at the conference provided updates on
the characterization and analysis of NF mouse and cellular mod-
els. Dr. Marco Giovannini (House Research Institute) reported on
the use of mouse models of NF2 to identify new candidates to test
in clinical trials. For example, RAD001 (everolimus) limited the
growth of NF2-related schwannomas in his model. House Re-
search Institute is now sponsoring a Phase II clinical trial, evalu-
ating the efﬁcacy of RAD001 in NF2 patients (ClinicalTrials.gov
Identiﬁer: NCT01345136). Dr. Toshifumi Tomoda (City of
Hope) identiﬁed a novel role of merlin tumor suppressor in
autophagy, a cellular catabolic pathway that has been implicated
in tumorigenesis. First, evidence that merlin forms a complex with
autophagy regulating proteins (i.e., LC3, Atg1, Atg16, dynein)
upon autophagy induction was presented. Toshifumi showed that
in Schwann cell cultures as well as in a xenograft model, loss of
merlin caused an accumulation of cellular metabolic stress (i.e.,
hypoxia, DNA damage response), a condition known to accelerate
tumorigenesis. Rapamycin and additional autophagy inducers
were able to suppress this metabolic stress and tumor burden in a
NF2 xenograft model suggesting that the metabolic stress caused
by attenuated autophagy could be targeted as a new therapy
against NF2. Dr. David Parkinson (University of Plymouth,
United Kingdom) presented his novel discovery that the loss of
SOX10, a known transcription factor vital for Schwann cell

570

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

development contributes independently to the phenotype of
schwannoma cells [Doddrell et al., 2013] potentially a key path-
way/modiﬁer to the pathology of merlin-null schwannoma
tumors. Dr. Oliver Hanemann (University of Plymouth, United
Kingdom) discussed the targeting of the PDGFR pathway in NF2
from bench to bedside. He presented the rationale for choosing
PDGFR as a target [Ammoun et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2011] and
showed that targeting PDGFR with Soraﬁnib is more effective
than targeting ErbB2 with lapatinib or MEK alone [Ammoun
et al., 2010a] or in combination with selumetinib [Ammoun et al.,
2010b]. Dr. Hanemann presented the “fast track” concept of
jumping to Phase 0 studies from primary human cells and
illustrated the design of two recruiting Phase 0 studies with
nilotinib and sorafenib. Dr. Andrea McClatchey (Harvard Medi-
cal School) presented new insight into the roles of merlin and the
related protein ezrin in organizing the cell cortex and showed that
their activities are essential for centrosome/mitotic spindle ori-
entation and function during epithelial morphogenesis [Hebert
et al., 2012]. Her group found that an unexpected consequence of
this activity is that NF2-mutant tumor cells are prone to forming
multipolar spindles, which can lead to genome instability.
Dr. Alexander Schulz (Leibniz Institute for Age Research,
Germany) from the Morrison group reported that axons of the
peripheral nervous system predominantly express the less well-
characterized merlin isoform 2, and this speciﬁc type of merlin
impacts on axon structure maintenance [Schulz et al., 2013].
Genetically engineered mice that speciﬁcally lack merlin isoform 2
display abnormal axons and these mice suffer from polyneurop-
athy-like symptoms of axonal origin. This ﬁnding is of clinical
interest since 70% of NF2 patients show signs of polyneuropathy,
often occurring in the absence of nerve damaging tumors [Sper-
feld et al., 2002]. Dr. Jeff Gehlhausen from the Clapp laboratory at
Indiana University presented a new mouse model of schwannoma
formation that utilizes a periostin-Cre transgene to conditionally
delete Nf2 in a subset of the neural crest lineage. These mice
develop multiple schwannomas of the dorsal root ganglia and
peripheral nerves. Most importantly, similar to patients with NF2,
they also exhibit progressive hearing loss. It will be very interesting
to determine whether progressive hearing loss in these mice is
caused by bona ﬁde vestibular schwannomas (VSs), which have
not been seen in other Nf2-mutant mouse models. Moreover this
exciting new mouse model will be an excellent tool to screen new
candidate targets to speed up therapeutic interventions.

Clinical Highlights in NF2
Dr. Ashok Asthagiri (NIH, Bethesda, MD) summarized the data
now published showing longitudinal growth of intracranial tumors
(mostly meningiomas) with MRI volumetric analysis in NF2
patients (mean follow up of 9.5 years) [Dirks et al., 2012]. Three
different growth patterns were seen: saltatory, linear, and exponen-
tial. Over a 10-year period, 50% of the meningiomas identiﬁed by
imaging were de novo tumors. Female sex and younger age were
associated with increased growth rate. Dr. Asthagiri also summa-
rized the data in which hearing loss develops as a result of cochlear
aperture obstruction and accumulation of intra labyrinthine pro-
tein [Asthagiri et al., 2012]. It was proposed, that MRI based

identiﬁcation of elevated intra labyrinthine protein may help
identify the ear at-risk for developing hearing loss. Dr. Mathias
Karajannis (New York University) gave an overview of current trials
in NF2 and presented data on his now published single institution
phase II study with lapatinib in NF2 patients with progressive VS
[Karajannis et al., 2012]. The study design included volumetric MRI
response analysis as a primary endpoint and hearing as a secondary
end point. Four of 17 evaluable patients experienced an objective

volumetric response (reduction in VS volumes from  15.7% to
 23.9%). Four of 13 patients evaluable for hearing met hearing

criteria for response. Median time to overall progression (i.e.,
volumetric progression or hearing loss) was 14 months. Dr. Brad
Welling (Ohio State University) reported the data using AR42, a
novel histone deacetylase inhibitor, and AR12, a PDK1/Akt inhibi-
tor. Dr. Welling showed potency of AR-42 in human schwannoma
and meningioma cultures, in a xenograft model of schwannomas
and in a transgenic schwannoma model (P0Cre;Nf2ﬂox2/ﬂox2
mice) [Giovannini et al., 2000]. Preliminary clinical data of AR-
42 in solid tumor patients suggest that AR-42 is well tolerated and
OSU is planning a phase 0 study in NF2 patients to better under-
stand the pharmacodynamics of AR-42 in NF2-related tumors
[Bush et al., 2011; Jacob et al., 2012].

Diagnosis of NF2 can present a major challenge in individuals
who are affected de novo, that is, without previous family history of
the disorder. Dr. Amanda Bergner and coworkers (Johns Hopkins
Comprehensive NF Center) evaluated the utility of criteria set forth
by Baser et al. [2011] to identify individuals who do not fulﬁll
classical criteria but who may in fact be affected. Among 10 patients
referred for evaluation of NF2 but not meeting classical criteria,
40% had a Baser score indicative of possibly being affected. Use of
the Baser score might thus increase the ability to provide an early
diagnosis and genetic counseling of individuals with NF2 who do
not yet meet classical criteria.

Dr. Jaishri Blakeley (Johns Hopkins, Baltimore) presented on
decision making for patients with NF2. Discussion of experimental
trials is now routinely part of clinic visits for patients with NF2.
Currently, there are nine clinical trials open or in active develop-
ment for patients with NF2. Many additional trials are available for
patients with tumor types associated with NF2. Awareness of
clinical trial options is a priority for all clinicians caring for patients
with NF2. Conversely, clinical scientists should design studies with
consideration of standard clinical care and engage all parties during
treatment with an experimental drug.

Anat Stemmer-Rachamimov’s studies of angiogenesis in NF2-
associated and sporadic schwannomas showed that VEGF pathway
is an important driver of angiogenesis in NF2 schwannomas. This
ﬁnding was further supported by the treatment effect of anti-VEGF
therapy on VSs in NF2 patients [Plotkin et al., 2009]. Analysis of a
series of NF2-associated and sporadic meningiomas with a panel of
immunohistochemical stains directed at the VEGF pathway com-
ponents is ongoing. The results of the VEGF pathway analysis will be
correlated to the microvascular density in these tumors.

Speeding Up Interventions for NF2
This session began with two invited speakers. The ﬁrst Dr. Antony
Bretscher (Cornell University) challenged the current model of

WIDEMANN ET AL.

571

merlin conformations/phosphorylation and how they affect the
regulation of cell growth. He showed data that the tumor suppressor
merlin controls growth in its open state and phosphorylation
converts merlin to a less-active more-closed state [Sher et al.,
2012]. The second speaker, Dr. Samuel Rabkin, introduced new
and different strategies for possibly treating NF2 tumors. Drawing
on his experience in NF research he described how oncolytic viruses,
which selectively replicate in cancer cells, are a novel therapeutic
strategy for cancer. He showed the use of oncolytic herpes simplex
virus (HSV) for the treatment of tumors arising in NF, demonstrat-
ing the efﬁcacy of this strategy, a new orthotopic MPNST model
generated by implanting human NF1 MPNST stem-like cells into
the sciatic nerve of immune-deﬁcient mice was described [Messerli
et al., 2006]. Oncolytic HSV is also efﬁcacious in NF2 meningiomas
and schwannomas. “Arming” oncolytic HSV with therapeutic trans-
genes, such as IL-12, can enhance anti-tumor immunity and inhi-
bition of tumor growth. He also discussed that combinations with
chemotherapeutic drugs can further enhance efﬁcacy.

This following brainstorming session intentionally mixed a
panel of scientists and clinicians with different backgrounds and
interests including clinical experts Drs. Scott R. Plotkin (Harvard
Medical School), Jaishri Blakely (The Johns Hopkins Hospital),
Victor-Felix Mautner (University Clinic Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Germany), and basic researchers: Alison Lloyd (University College
London), Larry Sherman (Oregon Health and Science University),
Filippo Giancotti (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center), and
Samuel Rabkin (Massachusetts General Hospital). The idea was to
initiate questions, foster new ideas, and possibly challenge the
scientiﬁc state-of-the-art.

The panel initiated an interactive discussion with the audience
participation. Dr. Alison Lloyd opened up the discussion by asking
why schwannomas predominantly grow on the eighth cranial nerve.
Apparently there is no general consensus on why this area is so
susceptible to tumor growth, some thoughts were discussed focus-
ing on possible nerve injury susceptibility but the lack of any
appropriate animal models to test any hypothesis would hinder
progress. Also discussed was the merlin pathway “chaos.” An
animated discussion unfolded pointing toward the continual
need to unravel merlin biology. However, most urgently there is
still a high demand to deﬁne the tumor-relevant pathways in NF2
speciﬁc tumors. The recent SYNODOS announcement by the
Children’s Tumor Foundation (http://www.ctf.org/Research/Syn-
odos.html) aims to fund and create such a NF2 consortium with
basic, translational and clinical scientist teams joining forces to ﬁght
NF2. Also Drs. Mautner and. Plotkin presented and discussed the
beneﬁts of sharing NF2 treatment experiences: “Do we need a
platform to share treatment experiences with bevacizumab or other
drugs in NF2 patients?” Bevacizumab has demonstrated activity in
NF2 VSs with hearing improvement and decrease in tumor volume
in case series around the world [Plotkin et al., 2009]. A prospective
study is ongoing to conﬁrm the initial responses observed. The need
for prolonged administration of bevacizumab in patients with NF2
combined with concerns for potential chronic or cumulative
toxicities have resulted in administration of bevacizumab outside
of clinical trials at varying schedules (every 2–3 weeks, use of drug
holidays) and doses (5–10 mg/kg). Experiences with the use of
bevacizumab and its effects on meningiomas and spinal tumors in

addition to VSs were discussed. It was concluded that a platform for
clinical observations during drug treatments outside of clinical
trials could accelerate research in this area.

Microstructural Peripheral Nerve MRI Is a
Powerful Tool to Study NF2-Associated
Neuropathy
Apart from deafness, reduced visual acuity, and neurological
deﬁcits after surgery, NF2 patients are at increased risk of develop-
ing peripheral neuropathy, which is an additional burden for them
[Sperfeld et al., 2002]. Although it is known that nerve compressing
schwannomas can cause NF2 neuropathy, there is often no mass
lesion which can explain the distribution of clinical symptoms of
polyneuropathy frequently involving multiple nerves. Sural biop-
sies have shown that intraneural tumorlets are correlated with NF2-
associated neuropathy. Microstructural peripheral nerve MRI (per-
formed by large coverage T2 sampling) allows the precise localiza-
tion and quantiﬁcation of peripheral nerve pathology. A pilot study
has detected the diffuse presence of fascicular microlesions (diam-

eter < 2 mm) and intermediate lesions (diameter  2 but < 5 mm)

along the entire extremities. This cumulative lesion burden was
found to closely correlate with the clinical severity of the NF2
neuropathy.

ADVANCEMENT IN SCHWANNOMATOSIS
Schwannomatosis Genetics
The current state of knowledge of involvement of SMARCB1/SNF5
INI1 (gene ID 6598) in inherited and sporadic schwannomatosis
and the investigations to identify further mechanisms for causation
of the condition were summarized. Dr. Miriam Smith (University
of Manchester, United Kingdom) described her work in document-
ing the proportion of schwannomatosis due to SMARCB1 in the UK
and then summarized the published literature [Boyd et al., 2008;
Hadﬁeld et al., 2008; Sestini et al., 2008; Smith et al., 2012b,c;
Plotkin et al., 2013]. Dr. Smith also alerted the community to the
relatively high proportion of sporadic mutations (45%) due to
mosaic NF2, highlighting the need to examine more than one tumor
genetically in individuals with multiple non-VSs to distinguish
between mosaic NF2 and schwannomatosis. Dr. Laura Papi (Uni-
versity of Florence, Italy) reported on the SMARCB1 mutational
spectrum in schwannomatosis in Italy. Dr. Papi presented unpub-
lished data on the proportion of families and sporadic cases with
SMARCB1 mutations, which was very similar to the report from the
previous speaker. She then described her laboratory’s work in
undertaking exome sequencing in schwannomatosis families and
cases not due to SMARCB1. Arkadiusz Piotrowski (University of
Alabama) reported that his laboratory has found no convincing
evidence of germline methylation of SMARCB1 as a cause of
schwannomatosis. He also described his laboratory’s work in
undertaking exome sequencing in schwannomatosis families and
cases not due to SMARCB1. Gareth Evans (University of Man-
chester) gave an overview of the clinical and molecular heteroge-
neity of schwannomatosis. He emphasized the need to rule out NF2
as thoroughly as possible by tumor analysis and MRI scanning of the

572

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

head. Even then, there is evidence that VSs may occur in schwan-
nomatosis [Smith et al., 2012a]. Families have recently been de-
scribed with multiple meningiomas, with SMARCB1 mutations
[Christiaans et al., 2011]. However, SMARCB1 is only a minor
contributor to patients and families with meningioma disease
[Hadﬁeld et al., 2010]. At least three undiscovered mechanisms
for schwannomatosis were hypothesized: (1) an undiscovered locus
on chromosome 22q; (2) a gene on a different chromosome; and (3)
a mechanism possibly not transmissible that predisposes to mitotic
recombination. CTF currently offers to sponsor a collaborative
schwannomatosis effort to validate or de-validate the above
hypotheses.

Schwannomatosis Pathophysiology and Pain
Management Approaches Use of Animal Models
of Snf5 loss to Understand Schwannomatosis
Pathophysiology
Dr. Jeremie Vitte (House Research Institute) described the phe-
notypes of mice with conditional loss of Snf5 (gene ID 6598) from
crosses of P0-Cre animals with Snf5-double-ﬂoxed mice. Consti-
tutive homozygous deletion of Snf5 results in embryonic lethality,
while mice with heterozygous loss of Snf5 develop malignant
rhabdoid tumors and do not show any signs of schwannomas.
P0-Cre-mediated deletion of Snf5 results in viable mice; approxi-
mately 80% of these mice die between 1.5 and 4.5 months. These
mice develop tumors in the meninges and various aggressive
peripheral nerve tumors, including the olfactory nerve, trigeminal
nerve, optic nerve, and vestibular nerve. Tumors display a mosaic
pattern of SNF5 expression along with intact NF2 expression, and
activation of the mTOR pathway. The oncogenic interaction of Snf5
and Nf2 was tested using conditional alleles of Snf5 and Nf2 (Snf5ﬂ/

ﬂ Nf2ﬂ/ﬂ) bred with P0-Cre ERT2. These mice do not exhibit any

obvious tumors and pain behavior testing detected no signiﬁcant
difference between the wild-type and mutant mice. By 20–24
months, these mice demonstrate an onion bulb phenotype in the
trigeminal nerve and cauda equina. This feature requires further
characterization. Dr. Larry Sherman (Oregon Health and Science
University) described mice with tamoxifen-inducible disruption of
Snf5 in adult Schwann cells (with Cre recombinase under the
control of the PLP promoter). Tumors do not develop in these
mice nor is there evidence of altered cell cycle progression in
Schwann cells in vivo or in vitro. However, the mice do develop
enhanced thermal sensitivity, accompanied by an increased expres-
sion of the TRPV1 capsaicin receptor in dorsal root ganglion
neurons. TRPV1 expression could be induced in wild-type dorsal
root ganglion cells by conditioned medium from Snf5-null
Schwann cells, indicating that loss of Snf5 induces the expression
of a secreted factor from Schwann cells that in turn increases TRPV1
expression and thermal sensitivity. These ﬁndings suggest a mech-
anism for the systemic pain often experienced by schwannomatosis
patients and have the potential to reveal novel approaches to pain
management for affected patients. Dr. Ganjam Kalpana (Albert
Einstein College of Medicine) presented her ﬁndings on the tran-
scriptional regulation of
inﬂammatory genes by SNF5 [Lee
et al., 2011; Smith et al., 2011]. SNF5-expressing rhaboid cells

were found to upregulate interferon genes and genes involved in
inﬂammation along with a downregulation of genes involved in
mitosis. Targeting cyclin/Cdk with a combination of fenretinide
and ﬂavopiridol was found to be effective in treating Snf5ﬂox/þ
mice
bearing malignant tumors. These ﬁndings highlight a novel thera-
peutic strategy for tumors with loss of Snf5.

Surgery, Therapeutic Opportunities, and Non-
Operative Approaches to Manage
Schwannomatosis-Associated Pain
The current approach for managing the pain experienced by
patients with schwannomatosis is either surgery or analgesics.
Dr. Allan Belzberg (Johns Hopkins University) presented the
available data on the efﬁcacy of surgery for both successful surgical
resection of schwannomas and pain control. He observed that the
tumors seen in schwannomatosis are often more complicated than
the sporadic schwannomas, and hence require specialty care to
ensure successful resection without nerve injury. Although the
resection frequently results in dramatic improvement in pain, in
a handful of patients, the more tumors resected, the less effective
surgery is for pain control. There have been some anecdotal reports
by both patients and their physicians that a secondary form of whole
body pain develops, especially after a patient has been through
multiple tumor resections. It is not clear how often this occurs and if
the development of diffuse pain is related to the number of surgeries
a patient has had for painful schwannomas. This lack of data is one
example of the relatively limited natural history data available
concerning schwannomatosis. Therefore CTF sponsored the crea-
tion of the International Schwannomatosis Database (ISD). In the
ISD, sites around the world can register their patients in a de-
identiﬁed manner to allow global collaboration to better address
natural history questions about schwannomatosis.

Dr. Sanjog Pangarkar of UCLA spoke about the currently
available strategies to address pain in general and neuropathic
pain in particular. There are no available data on the types of
medications that are most effective for the types of pain associated
with schwannomatosis. However, there are several general pain
management strategies that can be applied to manage local pain,
diffuse pain, or both. For localized pain (often related to a speciﬁc
tumor and involving one limb), systemic drug options are often the
ﬁrst choice. However, these agents are accompanied by systemic
side effects and therefore some patients will opt for a local therapy.
Local pain control options include regional nerve block, radio
frequency ablation, and spinal cord stimulation. These are invasive
approaches, but can be performed quickly and safely by physicians
experienced in interventional pain management and often result in
regional pain relief at least temporarily. It is important to note that
placement of a spinal cord stimulator can limit future MRI and
hence should be considered carefully in light of this limitation. For
diffuse pain, there are multiple medications that are intended to
treat neuropathic-like pain. These include antidepressants (such as
amitriptyline, nortriptyline, duloxetine), calcium channel alpha 2-
delta ligands (such as gabapentin, pregabalin), and medications
that address inﬂammation (such as meloxicam or celecoxib). Used
alone or in combination, these agents may be effective at managing

WIDEMANN ET AL.

573

the pain associated with schwannomatosis. Another class of drugs
that can be considered is opiates, which act in both the peripheral
and central nervous systems to decrease the perception of pain.
However, opiates have several concerning side effects and proper-
ties that limit their usefulness as a long-term pain management
strategy. Importantly, chronic use of opiates can result in habitua-
tion and in some cases addiction. Hence, in general, it was recom-
mended to use opiate-based medications only intermittently for
“breakthrough” pain. In some cases, the pain associated with
schwannomatosis is resistant to all non-opiate therapies and
long-term opiate use is required. In these cases, long-acting forms
of opiate medications, such as methadone, levorphanol, fentanyl,
and possibly ketamine-NMDA antagonist (in bolus dosing daily for
1 week), are recommended. Maximal beneﬁt with minimized harm
is likely to be accomplished with a thoughtful multidisciplinary
team approach that is customized to the individual patient. A
promising advancement in the last 4 years has been the develop-
ment and optimization of whole-body magnetic resonance imaging
(WBMRI) for the assessment of schwannomas in the setting of
schwannomatosis. Cai et al. [2009] showed that WBMRI with 3D
segmentation was feasible in patients with NF1, NF2, and schwan-
nomatosis and that details of tumor burden and distribution were
readily available with this technique. This has subsequently been
applied to evaluate tumor burden in schwannomatosis. Dr. Scott R.
Plotkin (Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School)
presented the evolving data available on WBMRI and how WBMRI
can be integrated into the management of schwannomatosis
patients [Plotkin et al., 2012]. Speciﬁcally, given that patients
with schwannomatosis often have tumors distributed throughout
their bodies, it becomes impractical to obtain multiple regional
MRIs over time. Absence of WBMRI leads to inconsistent data
acquisition with each serial evaluation, marring both clinical deci-
sion-making and the learning about tumor behavior over time in
general. WBMRI uses standard MRI scanners with commercially
available software to create a single DICOM image that extends
from head to ankle in most patients in under an hour. Dr. Plotkin
presented his team’s data on the patients with schwannomatosis
imaged to date. WBMRI was found to identify internal nerve sheath
tumors in 71% of patients. For patients with tumors, the median
tumor count was determined to be 4 (range: 1–27 tumors) and the
median whole-body tumor volume was reported as 39.4 ml (range:
7.0–1,371.5 ml). Hence, WBMRI can reliably detect internal tumors
in patients with schwannomatosis with a short scan time. An
important limitation to recognize is the limited resolution for
spine lesions. Therefore, if a nerve root lesion or myelopathy is
clinically suspected, dedicated spine MRI is recommended. How-

ever, WBMRI could reliably detect lesions  2 cm outside of the

spine and skull. Thus, this is a technology that should be considered
for increased clinical application for patients with schwannoma-
tosis to allow more consistent tumor surveillance and potentially as
a tool to measure the effects of therapies as new drugs are developed
speciﬁcally targeting schwannomatosis-associated schwannomas.
Dr. Vanessa Merker and coworkers (Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA) presented a retrospective analysis of the
clinical features of 87 patients who fulﬁlled either research or
clinical diagnostic criteria for Schwannomatosis [Merker et al.,
2012]. The most common presentation was pain unassociated with

a mass (46%). Peripheral schwannomas were present in 89%
patients, spinal schwannomas in 74%, and intracranial meningio-
mas in 5%. Chronic pain was the most common symptom (68%)
and usually persisted despite aggressive surgical and medical man-
agement, and was often associated with anxiety and depression.
These ﬁndings support a proactive surveillance plan in which
neurological symptoms and signs are actively investigated by
MRI to identify tumors. Early referral to specialty care and active
pain management is warranted.

Schwannomatosis Clinical Highlights
Dr. Anat Stemmer-Rachamimov (MGH, Boston, MA) summarized
data on a correlative study of immunohistochemical staining of
schwannomas with INI1/SMARCB1 and mutation analysis of the
SMARCB1 gene. A mosaic pattern of INI1 expression was seen in
the great majority of tumors from familial schwannomatosis and
NF2 patients, in about half of the tumors from sporadic schwan-
nomatosis, and only in 5% of solitary, sporadic schwannomas [Patil
et al., 2008]. These ﬁndings (based on protein expression) show a
much higher rate of SMARCB1 involvement in schwannomatosis
than the rate reported when the gene is analyzed by mutation
analyses (30% in familial schwannomatosis; 15% in sporadic
schwannomatosis). This discrepancy may be due to differences
in the tumor sets studied or in differences in the sensitivity of the
methods used; but it may also reﬂect epigenetic changes or loss of
other proteins that interact with SMARCB1. A study that analyzes a
series of schwannomas by both immunohistochemistry and muta-
tion analyses is underway.

LATEST ADVANCES IN BASIC AND CLINICAL
SCIENCE IN NF

Dr. Rebecca Dodd from David Kirsch’s laboratory at Duke Uni-
versity presented her ﬁndings on the anti-tumor activity of MEK
and mTOR inhibitors in a new mouse model of soft tissue sarcoma.
Injecting adenovirus-Cre into the sciatic nerve or the musculature
of NF1ﬂ/ﬂ;Ink4aﬂ/ﬂ mice generates either MPNSTs or a spectrum of
high-grade myogenic sarcomas. Cell lines from these tumors and
tumor allografts were found to be sensitive to MEK or mTOR
inhibition, with combination therapy demonstrating the greatest
response. The MEK inhibitor PD0325901 delayed tumor growth
without inducing apoptosis, thus implying a cytostatic mechanism
and identifying MEK as a potential therapeutic target in NF1-
associated sarcomas. Current CTF Young Investigator Award
recipient Dr. Maryam Jahanshahi from Cathie Pﬂeger’s laboratory
at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine presented her screen for
novel Hippo pathway effectors. Using an in vitro expression cloning
approach, she identiﬁed the Cdh1/fzr inhibitor Rae1 as a novel Wts
substrate and presented genetic evidence implicating Rae1 in
mitosis and organ size homeostasis. Dr. James Walker from the
Bernards laboratory at Massachusetts General Hospital presented
results of a genetic screen aimed at identifying modiﬁers of a
Drosophila NF1 organismal growth defect. The screen identiﬁed
Ras and cAMP/PKA pathway components, as well as several genes
implicated in synaptic functioning. Additional gene proﬁling and
metabolomic analyses revealed aberrant expression of the glucagon

574

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

ortholog adipokinetic hormone in the brain of dNf1 mutants,
resulting in altered trehalose and triglyceride levels. Interestingly,
among the genes identiﬁed in the size modiﬁer screen, genetic or
pharmacological inhibition of Drosophila Alk was also found to
restore the dNf1 learning deﬁcit, implicating the human ortholog of
this neuronal receptor tyrosine kinase as a potential therapeutic
target.

2011 CTF Young Investigator Awardee, Dr. Adrienne Watson
from David Largaespada’s laboratory (University of Minnesota),
presented another novel mouse model of MPNST. She used the
Sleeping Beauty transposon technology to identify genetic modi-
ﬁers of neuroﬁbroma formation in mice expressing both activated
p53 and Egfr transgenes. Transposase activation was found to lead to
an increase in the onset, frequency, and malignant behavior of
tumors in this model, and in particular, to a large increase in
MPNSTs. Mutation of either the Nf1 or Pten gene was found to be
common in neuroﬁbromas, with MPNSTs frequently exhibiting
mutation of both Nf1 and Pten. Subsequent modeling and preclin-
ical studies support the therapeutic targeting of these pathways in
MPNST.

Next-Generation Sequencing in NF: Massively
Parallel Sequencing—Massively Parallel Results
The precipitous decline in sequencing costs due to massively
parallel or “next-gen” sequencing technologies permits the routine
characterization of NF-associated tumors at the highest possible
resolution (individual base pairs) and the interrogation of the
exomes or genomes of individuals with unusual NF-like pheno-
types that do not arise secondary to mutations in NF1 or NF2.
Dr. Douglas Stewart (National Cancer Institute) and Dr. Eric Legius
(Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium) co-chaired a session
exploring how whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing will
affect diagnosis, prognostication and management
in NF.
Dr. Melinda Merchant (National Cancer Institute) discussed the
promises, pitfalls and progress in molecularly targeted treatment.
Treatment decisions need to be made promptly, however signiﬁ-
cant hurdles remain in the timely processing, analysis and inter-
pretation of large-scale genomics data from a tumor biopsy.
Important regulatory issues remain unresolved as detailed in the
recent Institute of Medicine report [Academies, 2012]. Well-
designed, prospective trials will be required to determine the
potential beneﬁt using these approaches. Dr. Stewart then discussed
preliminary efforts in his lab to whole-exome sequence NF1-
associated plexiform neuroﬁbromas and matching germline
DNA. In the discovery stage, DNA from Schwann cell cultures
from plexiform neuroﬁbromas from the laboratory of Dr. Peggy
Wallace [Muir et al., 2001] (plus matching germline DNA) are
sequenced and undergo single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
chip genotyping. Preliminary results from 11 tumor/normal pairs
identiﬁed germline mutations in NF1 in 11/11 (100%) matched
pairs, of which 7/8 (88%) were concordant with previously identi-
ﬁed NF1 mutations. Somatic mutations of NF1 were identiﬁed in 9/
11 (82%) of samples, of which 5/5 (100%) were concordant with
previously identiﬁed NF1 mutations. Dr. Legius then discussed
work in his lab to identify the gene underlying a recently reported
syndrome characterized by multiple orbital neuroﬁbromas, dis-

tinctive face, marafnoid habitus, and painful peripheral nerve
tumors [Babovic-Vuksanovic et al., 2012]. The affected individuals
were sporadic cases. Comprehensive mutation analysis was per-
formed, but no mutations were found in these candidate genes
(NF1, NF2, SMARCB1, RET, PRKAR1A, PTEN). Dr. D. Gareth
Evans (University of Manchester) described the preliminary iden-
tiﬁcation of a familial meningioma gene and echoed many of the
issues raised by Drs. Stewart and Legius. In the identiﬁcation of
novel syndrome variants, the investigator does not want to miss the
single variant that is causing the disorder. Therefore the ﬁltering
process of the sequence reads is less stringent, resulting in many false
positive but also false negative variants. Massively parallel sequenc-
ing permits gene identiﬁcation for rare syndromes given a correct
genetic hypothesis, sufﬁcient coverage of the responsible gene and
no important genetic heterogeneity.

RESPONSE EVALUATION IN NF AND
SCHWANNOMATOSIS (REINS)

Drs. Plotkin and Widemann initiated this international collabora-
tion in 2010 with the goal to develop standardized response criteria
to determine treatment response in clinical trials for patients with
NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis. REiNS working groups are open
to all interested in contributing to the effort. Current REiNS
working groups (and their leaders) include: Tumor size (Brigitte
Widemann, Eva Dombi, NCI, Bethesda, MD), functional outcomes
(Scott R. Plotkin, MGH, Boston, MA), visual outcomes (Michael
Fisher, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia), patient reported out-
comes (Pamela Wolters, NCI, Bethesda, MD), neurocognitive
outcomes (Karen Walsh, CNMC, Washington, DC), whole body
MRI (Jaishri Blakeley, Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD), and bio-
markers (Oliver Hanemann, University of Plymouth, UK). Re-
sponse criteria will continue to be modiﬁed as experience in trials
for NF is gained, and working groups will be added. The hope is that
once published, the consensus criteria will be incorporated into
future clinical trials and will improve the ability to determine and
compare treatment efﬁcacy. The preliminary recommendation of
the tumor size working group is to use volumetric MRI for the
measurement of plexiform neuroﬁbromas, VSs, and meningiomas.
Imaging of these tumors should be performed consistently to allow
for volumetric analysis and cover the entire lesion. The functional
outcomes group focuses on the evaluation of hearing, facial func-
tioning, walking performance and respiratory, bladder and bowel
functions. While much of this work is still in progress, recommen-
dations for hearing evaluation are complete with emphasis on
maximum word recognition score. The visual outcomes working
group supports the use of visual acuity testing by age appropriate
measures as the primary outcome for the evaluation of visual
pathway integrity. Optic pallor should be considered as a contrib-
uting variable. The patient reported outcomes committee is work-
ing on the selection of outcome measures for four areas: general
QOL, disease speciﬁc QOL, pain and functional disability. The
group has so far rated functional disability measures and recom-
mends the Health Assessment Questionnaire-Disability Index and
Child Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ-DI and CHAQ) for
assessment of general functional disability and the Pediatric Out-
comes Data Collection Instrument (PODCI) to assess functional

WIDEMANN ET AL.

575

disability after orthopedic surgery in children. http://www.rein-
scollaboration.org is a web-site where the working groups exchange
ideas and pose updates. Public access will be available in the near
future.

NF MANAGEMENT SERVICES—ENGLAND’S
EXPERIENCE

Dr. Susan Huson (St. Mary’s Hospital/University of Manchester)
and Rosalie Ferner (Guy’s and St. Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust,
United Kingdom) chaired a clinical session on England’s NF
services funded by the National Specialist Commissioning Group
which commissions highly specialized services nationally for the
National Health Service to provide optimal care for children and
adults in England with rare medical conditions. Prof. Ferner stated
that the “complex NF1” service, established in 2009 at Guy’s and St.
Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust London and Central Manchester
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, aims to offer holistic,
standardized, multidisciplinary care for NF1 individuals of all ages
with rare complications that are serious and potentially life-threat-
ening (e.g., extensive, symptomatic, disﬁguring plexiform neuro-
ﬁbromas; neuroﬁbromatous neuropathy; atypical neuroﬁbromas
and MPNST; neurovascular complications; multiple sclerosis;
sphenoid wing dysplasia and pseudarthrosis of the long bones;
atypical phenotypes and a prenatal counseling service for people
with segmental NF1). The remit is to provide access for all patients
to the resources and expertise of the designated national centers and
to ensure regular national audit and succession planning. Karine
Lascelles (Guy’s and St. Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust) noted
that the pediatric service was fully integrated within the adult clinic
and described the role of amputation in the management of
carefully selected children with very extensive, painful plexiform
neuroﬁbromas involving the lower limb. Dr. Guy Leschziner (Guy’s
and St. Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust) reported on a prospective
study of sleep quality and disturbance in 100 consecutive NF1 clinic
patients. There was a high frequency of sleep disturbance, poor sleep
quality, and excessive daytime sleepiness; however, daytime sleepi-
ness and sleep disturbance were not related. Dr. Leschziner postu-
lated that some patients have organic sleep pathology such as sleep
apnea or periodic limb movement disorder causing daytime sleep-
iness, while others might have sleep disturbance due to multiple
factors (anxiety, depression or cognitive status). Dr. Judith Eelloo
(St. Mary’s Hospital, United Kingdom) explained the role of NF1
specialist nurses as advocates and educators of patients and their
families, forming an important link between the patient, national
center, local clinics, allied professionals, the Neuro Foundation, and
the community. The complex NF1 service facilitates a solid infra-
structure of specialist clinicians with expertise in managing rare
NF1 manifestations. The development of robust outcome measures
will allow meticulous evaluation of interventions and provide the
best possible care for patients.

Dr. Huson described England’s national NF2 service, estab-
lished in 2010 and led by Prof. Gareth Evans. Prior to this,
management in a specialist NF2 center was associated with a
signiﬁcant decrease in disease-related mortality [Baser et al.,
2002], although standards of care varied among centers despite
UK consensus NF2 management guidelines published in 2005

[Evans et al., 2005]. The four centers with the largest multidisci-
plinary NF2 experience therefore developed a model for NF2 care
to provide lifelong, holistic care for all of England’s NF2 patients
and their at-risk family members. The centers are located in
Cambridge (lead Mr. Patrick Axon), London (lead Prof. Rosalie
Ferner), Oxford (leads Dr. Allyson Parry and Dr. Dorothy Halli-
day), and Manchester (lead Prof. Gareth Evans). All NF2 radio-
surgery is performed in one national center in Shefﬁeld (lead Mr.
Jeremy Rowe), while auditory brainstem implant insertion is
performed in Cambridge and Manchester. The mainstay of care
is the same-day multidisciplinary out-patient assessment which
commences with a holistic overview and examination by a physi-
cian or nurse specialist. This informs a radiological review meeting
and relevant members of the surgical team then see the patients.
Each center has separate adult and pediatric clinics. National
commissioning also enables rapid implementation of new treat-
ments for which there is adequate evidence. Bevacizumab treat-
ment
is now funded for patients with rapidly growing
schwannomas that threaten hearing or other neurological func-
tions depending on their location. The four centers collect stan-
dard datasets for all aspects of NF2 care.

Clinical nurse specialists liaise with local health care profes-
sionals and families between clinic appointments. They also help
families decide when and in what setting at-risk children will ﬁrst
learn about NF2. There is funding for specialist care of facial nerve
palsies and for patients and their families to attend NF2 courses
organized by Hearing Link, a UK charity assisting people with
adult onset hearing loss. From a research viewpoint, the English
NF2 cohort provides a unique opportunity for monitoring out-
comes of changes in treatment and the natural history of all aspects
of NF2.

DOD NF CLINICAL TRIALS CONSORTIUM

Dr. Roger Packer (CNMC, Washington, DC) updated conference
attendees about the Department of Defense (DOD) NF Clinical
Trials Consortium. In 2012, the Consortium was awarded funding
for an additional 5 years with a goal of running phase 2 trials for
NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis. In order to achieve this goal,
additional sites with expertise in NF2 and schwannomatosis were
recruited to the Consortium through a competitive application
process. In 2013, the Consortium hopes to report the results for
ongoing studies, including STOPN (Phase II Study of the mTOR
Inhibitor sirolimus in NF1 related plexiform neuroﬁbromas) and
STARS (a randomized-placebo controlled study of lovastatin in
children with NF1). The results of a phase II study of RAD001 for
children with NF1 and chemotherapy-refractory progressive low-
grade gliomas will be reported subsequently. Upcoming trials
include a phase 2 study of bevacizumab in children and young
adults with NF2 and progressive VSs and a phase 2 study of bone
morphogenetic protein 2 and pamidronate at surgical treatment of
tibial pseudarthrosis in NF1. A phase 2 study of bevacizumab and
RAD001 for adults with progressive malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor (MPNST), being performed in collaboration with the
Sarcoma Alliance (SARC), will to open in late 2012. Plans are well
underway for one to two studies for NF1 patients with plexiform
neuroﬁbromas.

576

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank all speakers, brain storming session panelists, and attend-
ees who contributed to the 2012 NF Conference and to this
summary and the foundation staff for their outstanding organiza-
tion of the meeting. We also thank the development staff as well as
all donors to the Children’s Tumor Foundation whose enduring
support makes this annual meeting possible. The 2012 NF Confer-
ence was supported in part by National Institutes of Health Grant
Award 1R13NS070505-01 to Drs. Brigitte Widemann and Helen
Morrison. The conference abstract book may be downloaded at
www.ctf.org. Research support was also provided, in part by the
Intramural Research Program of the Center for Cancer Research
and the Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics of the
National Cancer Institute.

REFERENCES

Academies IoMotN. 2012. Evolution of translational omics: Lessons

learned and the path forward. www.iom.edu/translationalomics

Ammoun S, Flaiz C, Ristic N, Schuldt J, Hanemann CO. 2008. Dissecting
and targeting the growth factor-dependent and growth factor-indepen-
dent extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway in human schwan-
noma. Cancer Res 68:5236–5245.

Ammoun S, Cunliffe CH, Allen JC, Chiriboga L, Giancotti FG, Zagzag D,
Hanemann CO, Karajannis MA. 2010a. ErbB/HER receptor activation
and preclinical efﬁcacy of lapatinib in vestibular schwannoma. Neuro
Oncol 12:834–843.

Ammoun S, Ristic N, Matthies C, Hilton DA, Hanemann CO. 2010b.
Targeting ERK1/2 activation and proliferation in human primary
schwannoma cells with MEK1/2 inhibitor AZD6244. Neurobiol Dis
37:141–146.

Ammoun S, Provenzano L, Zhou L, Barczyk M, Evans K, Hilton DA, Haﬁzi
S, Hanemann CO. 2013. Axl/Gas6/NFkappaB signalling in schwannoma
pathological proliferation, adhesion and survival. Oncogene. Advance
online publication 14 January 2013; doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.587

Arrington DK, Danehy AR, Peleggi A, Proctor MR, Irons MB, Ullrich NJ.
2013. Calvarial defects and skeletal dysplasia in patients with neuroﬁ-
bromatosis Type 1. J Neurosurg Pediatr 4:410–416.

Arthur-Farraj PJ, Latouche M, Wilton DK, Quintes S, Chabrol E, Banerjee
A, Woodhoo A, Jenkins B, Rahman M, Turmaine M, Wicher GK, Mitter
R, Greensmith L, Behrens A, Raivich G, Mirsky R, Jessen K. 2012. c-Jun
reprograms Schwann cells of injured nerves to generate a repair cell
essential for regeneration. Neuron 75:633–647.

Asthagiri AR, Vasquez RA, Butman JA, Wu T, Morgan K, Brewer CC, King
K, Zalewski C, Kim HJ, Lonser RR. 2012. Mechanisms of hearing loss in
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. PLoS ONE 7:e46132.

Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Messiaen L, Nagel C, Brems H, Scheithauer B,
Denayer E, Mao R, Sciot R, Janowski KM, Schuhmann MU, Claes
K, Beert E, Garrity JA, Spinner RJ, Stemmer-Rachamimov A, Gavrilova
R, Van Calenbergh F, Mautner V, Legius E. 2012. Multiple orbital
neuroﬁbromas, painful peripheral nerve tumors, distinctive face
and marfanoid habitus: A new syndrome. Eur J Hum Genet 20:
618–625.

Baser ME, Friedman JM, Aeschliman D, Joe H, Wallace AJ, Ramsden RT,
Evans DG. 2002. Predictors of the risk of mortality in neuroﬁbromatosis
2. Am J Hum Genet 71:715–723.

Baser ME, Friedman JM, Joe H, Shenton A, Wallace AJ, Ramsden RT, Evans
DG. 2011. Empirical development of improved diagnostic criteria for
neuroﬁbromatosis 2. Genet Med 13:576–581.

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

Boyd C, Smith MJ, Kluwe L, Balogh A, Maccollin M, Plotkin SR. 2008.
Alterations in the SMARCB1 (INI1) tumor suppressor gene in familial
schwannomatosis. Clin Genet 74:358–366.

Brown JA, Emnett RJ, White CR, Yuede CM, Conyers SB, O’Malley KL,
Wozniak DF, Gutmann DH. 2010. Reduced striatal dopamine underlies
the attention system dysfunction in neuroﬁbromatosis-1 mutant mice.
Hum Mol Genet 19:4515–4528.

Brown JA, Xu J, Diggs-Andrews KA, Wozniak DF, Mach RH, Gutmann
DH. 2011. PET imaging for attention deﬁcit preclinical drug testing in
neuroﬁbromatosis-1 mice. Exp Neurol 232:333–338.

Bush ML, Oblinger J, Brendel V, Santarelli G, Huang J, Akhmametyeva EM,
Burns SS, Wheeler J, Davis J, Yates CW, Chaudhury AR, Kulp S, Chen CS,
Chang LS, Welling DB, Jacob A. 2011. AR42, a novel histone deacetylase
inhibitor, as a potential therapy for vestibular schwannomas and me-
ningiomas. Neuro Oncol 13:983–999.

Cai W, Kassarjian A, Bredella MA, Harris GJ, Yoshida H, Mautner VF,
Wenzel R, Plotkin SR. 2009. Tumor burden in patients with neuroﬁbro-
matosis types 1 and 2 and schwannomatosis: Determination on whole-
body MR images. Radiology 250:665–673.

Cappello S, Bohringer CR, Bergami M, Conzelmann KK, Ghanem A,
Tomassy GS, Arlotta P, Mainardi M, Allegra M, Caleo M, van Hengel
J, Brakebusch C, Gotz M. 2012. A radial glia-speciﬁc role of RhoA in
double cortex formation. Neuron 73:911–924.

Chabernaud C, Mennes M, Kardel PG, Gaillard WD, Kalbﬂeisch ML,
Vanmeter JW, Packer RJ, Milham MP, Castellanos FX, Acosta MT. 2012.
Lovastatin regulates brain spontaneous low-frequency brain activity in
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Neurosci Lett 515:28–33.

Chang T, Krisman K, Harding-Theobald E, Braun BS, Shannon K. 2011.
MEK inhibition modulates the growth of Nf1 mutant hematopoietic cells
and induces clinical improvement in a murine model of juvenile mye-
lomonocytic leukemia (JMML). ASH Annu Meet Abstr 118:797.

Chen CL, Schroeder MC, Kango-Singh M, Tao C, Halder G. 2012. Tumor
suppression by cell competition through regulation of the Hippo path-
way. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:484–489.

Christiaans I, Kenter SB, Brink HC, van Os TA, Baas F, van den Munckhof
P, Kidd AM, Hulsebos TJ. 2011. Germline SMARCB1 mutation and
somatic NF2 mutations in familial multiple meningiomas. J Med Genet
48:93–97.

De Raedt T, Walton Z, Yecies JL, Li D, Chen Y, Malone CF, Maertens O,
Jeong SM, Bronson RT, Lebleu V, Kalluri R, Normant E, Haigis MC,
Manning BD, Wong KK, Macleod KF, Cichowski K. 2011. Exploiting
cancer cell vulnerabilities to develop a combination therapy for ras-
driven tumors. Cancer Cell 20:400–413.

Dirks MS, Butman JA, Kim HJ, Wu T, Morgan K, Tran AP, Lonser RR,
Asthagiri AR. 2012. Long-term natural history of neuroﬁbromatosis
Type 2-associated intracranial tumors. J Neurosurg 117:109–117.

Doddrell RD, Dun XP, Shivane A, Feltri ML, Wrabetz L, Wegner M, Sock E,
Hanemann CO, Parkinson DB. 2013. Loss of SOX10 function contributes
to the phenotype of human Merlin-null schwannoma cells. Brain
136:549–563.

Evans DG, Baser ME, O’Reilly B, Rowe J, Gleeson M, Saeed S, King A,
Huson SM, Kerr R, Thomas N, Irving R, MacFarlane R, Ferner R, McLeod
R, Moffat D, Ramsden R. 2005. Management of the patient and family
with neuroﬁbromatosis 2: A consensus conference statement. Br J
Neurosurg 19:5–12.

Fisher MJ, Loguidice M, Gutmann DH, Listernick R, Ferner RE, Ullrich NJ,
Packer RJ, Tabori U, Hoffman RO, Ardern-Holmes SL, Hummel TR,
Hargrave DR, Bouffet E, Charrow J, Bilaniuk LT, Balcer LJ, Liu GT. 2012.
Visual outcomes in children with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1-associated
optic pathway glioma following chemotherapy: A multicenter retrospec-
tive analysis. Neuro Oncol 14:790–797.

WIDEMANN ET AL.

577

Giovannini M, Robanus-Maandag E, van der Valk M, Niwa-Kawakita M,
Abramowski V, Goutebroze L, Woodruff JM, Berns A, Thomas G. 2000.
Conditional biallelic Nf2 mutation in the mouse promotes manifesta-
tions of human neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Genes Dev 14:1617–1630.

Hadﬁeld KD, Newman WG, Bowers NL, Wallace A, Bolger C, Colley A,
McCann E, Trump D, Prescott T, Evans DG. 2008. Molecular character-
isation of SMARCB1 and NF2 in familial and sporadic schwannomatosis.
J Med Genet 45:332–339.

Hadﬁeld KD, Smith MJ, Trump D, Newman WG, Evans DG. 2010.
SMARCB1 mutations are not a common cause of multiple meningiomas.
J Med Genet 47:567–568.

Li W, You L, Cooper J, Schiavon G, Pepe-Caprio A, Zhou L, Ishii R,
Giovannini M, Hanemann CO, Long SB, Erdjument-Bromage H, Zhou
P, Tempst P, Giancotti FG. 2010. Merlin/NF2 suppresses tumorigenesis
by inhibiting the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4(DCAF1) in the nucleus. Cell
140:477–490.

Liu-Chittenden Y, Huang B, Shim JS, Chen Q, Lee SJ, Anders RA, Liu JO,
Pan D. 2012. Genetic and pharmacological disruption of the TEAD–YAP
complex suppresses the oncogenic activity of YAP. Genes Dev 26:1300–
1305.

Loh ML. 2011. Recent advances in the pathogenesis and treatment of

juvenile myelomonocytic leukaemia. Br J Haematol 152:677–687.

Han S, Witt RM, Santos TM, Polizzano C, Sabatini BL, Ramesh V. 2008.
Pam (protein associated with Myc) functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase
and regulates TSC/mTOR signaling. Cell Signal 20:1084–1091.

Lyubynska N, Gorman MF, Lauchle JO, Hong WX, Akutagawa JK,
Shannon K, Braun BS. 2011. A MEK inhibitor abrogates myeloprolifera-
tive disease in Kras mutant mice. Sci Transl Med 3:76ra27.

Hawkins C, Walker E, Mohamed N, Zhang C, Jacob K, Shirinian M, Alon N,
Kahn D, Fried I, Scheinemann K, Tsangaris E, Dirks P, Tressler R, Bouffet
E, Jabado N, Tabori U. 2011. BRAF-KIAA1549 fusion predicts better
clinical outcome in pediatric low-grade astrocytoma. Clin Cancer Res
17:4790–4798.

Hebert AM, DuBoff B, Casaletto JB, Gladden AB, McClatchey AI. 2012.
Merlin/ERM proteins establish cortical asymmetry and centrosome
position. Genes Dev 26:2709–2723.

Merker VL, Esparza S, Smith MJ, Stemmer-Rachamimov A, Plotkin SR.
2012. Clinical features of schwannomatosis: A retrospective analysis of 87
patients. Oncologist 17:1317–1322.

Messerli SM, Prabhakar S, Tang Y, Mahmood U, Giovannini M, Weis-
sleder R, Bronson R, Martuza R, Rabkin S, Breakeﬁeld XO. 2006.
Treatment of schwannomas with an oncolytic recombinant herpes
simplex virus in murine models of neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Hum
Gene Ther 17:20–30.

Hennigan RF, Moon CA, Parysek LM, Monk KR, Morﬁni G, Berth S, Brady
S, Ratner N. 2013. The NF2 tumor suppressor regulates microtubule-
based vesicle trafﬁcking via a novel Rac, MLK and p38(SAPK) pathway.
Oncogene 32:1135–1143.

Jacob K, Quang-Khuong DA, Jones DT, Witt H, Lambert S, Albrecht S,
Witt O, Vezina C, Shirinian M, Faury D, Garami M, Hauser P, Klekner A,
Bognar L, Farmer JP, Montes JL, Atkinson J, Hawkins C, Korshunov A,
Collins VP, Pﬁster SM, Tabori U, Jabado N. 2011. Genetic aberrations
leading to MAPK pathway activation mediate oncogene-induced
senescence in sporadic pilocytic astrocytomas. Clin Cancer Res 17:
4650–4660.

Jacob A, Oblinger J, Bush ML, Brendel V, Santarelli G, Chaudhury AR, Kulp
S, La Perle KM, Chen CS, Chang LS, Welling DB. 2012. Preclinical
validation of AR42, a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor, as treatment for
vestibular schwannomas. Laryngoscope 122:174–189.

James MF, Stivison E, Beauchamp R, Han S, Li H, Wallace MR, Gusella JF,
Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Ramesh V. 2012. Regulation of mTOR
complex 2 signaling in neuroﬁbromatosis 2-deﬁcient target cell types.
Mol Cancer Res 10:649–659.

Jessen WJ, Miller SJ, Jousma E, Wu J, Rizvi TA, Brundage ME, Eaves D,
Widemann B, Kim MO, Dombi E, Sabo J, Hardiman Dudley A, Niwa-
Kawakita M, Page GP, Giovannini M, Aronow BJ, Cripe TP, Ratner N.
2013. MEK inhibition exhibits efﬁcacy in human and mouse neuroﬁbro-
matosis tumors. J Clin Invest 123:340–347.

Johannessen CM, Reczek EE, James MF, Brems H, Legius E, Cichowski K.
2005. The NF1 tumor suppressor critically regulates TSC2 and mTOR.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:8573–8578.

Johannessen CM, Johnson BW, Williams SM, Chan AW, Reczek EE, Lynch
RC, Rioth MJ, McClatchey A, Ryeom S, Cichowski K. 2008. TORC1 is
essential for NF1-associated malignancies. Curr Biol 18:56–62.

Karajannis MA, Legault G, Hagiwara M, Ballas MS, Brown K, Nusbaum
AO, Hochman T, Goldberg JD, Koch KM, Golﬁnos JG, Roland JT, Allen
JC. 2012. Phase II trial of lapatinib in adult and pediatric patients with
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 and progressive vestibular schwannomas.
Neuro Oncol 14:1163–1170.

Lee S, Cimica V, Ramachandra N, Zagzag D, Kalpana GV. 2011. Aurora A
is a repressed effector target of the chromatin remodeling protein INI1/
hSNF5 required for rhabdoid tumor cell survival. Cancer Res 71:
3225–3235.

Muir D, Neubauer D, Lim IT, Yachnis AT, Wallace MR. 2001. Tumorigenic
properties of neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient neuroﬁbroma Schwann cells. Am J
Pathol 158:501–513.

Patel AV, Eaves D, Jessen WJ, Rizvi TA, Ecsedy JA, Qian MG, Aronow BJ,
Perentesis JP, Serra E, Cripe TP, Miller SJ, Ratner N. 2012. Ras-driven
transcriptome analysis identiﬁes aurora kinase A as a potential malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor therapeutic target. Clin Cancer Res
18:5020–5030.

Patil S, Perry A, Maccollin M, Dong S, Betensky RA, Yeh TH, Gutmann
DH, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO. 2008. Immunohistochemical analysis
supports a role for INI1/SMARCB1 in hereditary forms of schwanno-
mas, but not in solitary, sporadic schwannomas. Brain Pathol 18:
517–519.

Plotkin SR, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Barker FG II, Halpin C, Padera TP,
Tyrrell A, Sorensen AG, Jain RK, di Tomaso E. 2009. Hearing improve-
ment after bevacizumab in patients with neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. N
Engl J Med 361:358–367.

Plotkin SR, Bredella MA, Cai W, Kassarjian A, Harris GJ, Esparza S, Merker
VL, Munn LL, Muzikansky A, Askenazi M, Nguyen R, Wenzel R, Mautner
VF. 2012. Quantitative assessment of whole-body tumor burden in adult
patients with neuroﬁbromatosis. PLoS ONE 7:e35711.

Plotkin SR, Blakeley JO, Evans DG, Hanemann CO, Hulsebos TJ, Hunter-
Schaedle K, Kalpana GV, Korf B, Messiaen L, Papi L, Ratner N, Sherman
LS, Smith MJ, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Vitte J, Giovannini M. 2013.
Update from the 2011 International Schwannomatosis Workshop: From
genetics to diagnostic criteria. Am J Med Genet Part A 161A:405–416.

Prahallad A, Sun C, Huang S, Di Nicolantonio F, Salazar R, Zecchin D,
Beijersbergen RL, Bardelli A, Bernards R. 2012. Unresponsiveness of
colon cancer to BRAF(V600E) inhibition through feedback activation of
EGFR. Nature 483:100–103.

Rauch A, Seitz S, Baschant U, Schilling AF, Illing A, Stride B, Kirilov M,
Mandic V, Takacz A, Schmidt-Ullrich R, Ostermay S, Schinke T, Span-
broek R, Zaiss MM, Angel PE, Lerner UH, David JP, Reichardt HM,
Amling M, Schutz G, Tuckermann JP. 2010. Glucocorticoids suppress
bone formation by attenuating osteoblast differentiation via the mono-
meric glucocorticoid receptor. Cell Metab 11:517–531.

Robertson KA, Nalepa G, Yang FC, Bowers DC, Ho CY, Hutchins GD,
Croop JM, Vik TA, Denne SC, Parada LF, Hingtgen CM, Walsh LE, Yu M,
Pradhan KR, Edwards-Brown MK, Cohen MD, Fletcher JW, Travers JB,

578

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

Staser KW, Lee MW, Sherman MR, Davis CJ, Miller LC, Ingram DA,
Clapp DW. 2012. Imatinib mesylate for plexiform neuroﬁbromas in
patients with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: A phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol
13:1218–1224.

Schulz A, Baader SL, Niwa-Kawakita M, Jung MJ, Bauer R, Garcia C, Zoch
A, Schacke S, Hagel C, Mautner VF, Hanemann CO, Dun XP, Parkinson
DB, Weis J, Schroder JM, Gutmann DH, Giovannini M, Morrison H.
2013. Merlin isoform 2 in neuroﬁbromatosis type 2-associated poly-
neuropathy. Nat Neurosci 4:426–433.

Sestini R, Bacci C, Provenzano A, Genuardi M, Papi L. 2008. Evidence of a
four-hit mechanism involving SMARCB1 and NF2 in schwannomatosis-
associated schwannomas. Hum Mutat 29:227–231.

Sher I, Hanemann CO, Karplus PA, Bretscher A. 2012. The tumor suppres-
sor merlin controls growth in its open state, and phosphorylation converts
it to a less-active more-closed state. Dev Cell 22:703–705.

Smith ME, Cimica V, Chinni S, Jana S, Koba W, Yang Z, Fine E, Zagzag D,
Montagna C, Kalpana GV. 2011. Therapeutically targeting cyclin D1 in
primary tumors arising from loss of Ini1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
108:319–324.

Smith MJ, Kulkarni A, Rustad C, Bowers NL, Wallace AJ, Holder
SE, Heiberg A, Ramsden RT, Evans DG. 2012a. Vestibular schwanno-
mas occur in schwannomatosis and should not be considered an
exclusion criterion for clinical diagnosis. Am J Med Genet Part A 158A:
215–219.

Smith MJ, Walker JA, Shen Y, Stemmer-Rachamimov A, Gusella JF, Plotkin
SR. 2012b. Expression of SMARCB1 (INI1) mutations in familial
schwannomatosis. Hum Mol Genet 21:5239–5245.

Smith MJ, Wallace AJ, Bowers NL, Rustad CF, Woods CG, Leschziner
GD, Ferner RE, Evans DG. 2012c. Frequency of SMARCB1 mutations

in familial
141–145.

and sporadic

schwannomatosis. Neurogenetics 13:

Solga AC, Gianino SM, Gutmann DH. 2013. NG2-cells are not the cell of
origin for murine neuroﬁbromatosis-1 (Nf1) optic glioma. Oncogene.
Advance online publication 14 January 2013; doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.580

Sperfeld AD, Hein C, Schroder JM, Ludolph AC, Hanemann CO. 2002.
Occurrence and characterization of peripheral nerve involvement in
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Brain 125:996–1004.

Stowe IB, Mercado EL, Stowe TR, Bell EL, Oses-Prieto JA, Hernandez H,
Burlingame AL, McCormick F. 2012. A shared molecular mechanism
underlies the human rasopathies Legius syndrome and Neuroﬁbroma-
tosis-1. Genes Dev 26:1421–1426.

Walsh KS, Velez JI, Kardel PG, Imas DM, Muenke M, Packer RJ, Castella-
nos FX, Acosta MT. 2013. Symptomatology of autism spectrum disorder
in a population with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Dev Med Child Neurol
55:131–138.

Wehr MC, Holder MV, Gailite I, Saunders RE, Maile TM, Ciirdaeva E,
Instrell R, Jiang M, Howell M, Rossner MJ, Tapon N. 2013. Salt-inducible
kinases regulate growth through the Hippo signalling pathway in Dro-
sophila. Nat Cell Biol 15:61–71.

Yi C, Troutman S, Fera D, Stemmer-Rachamimov A, Avila JL, Christian N,
Persson NL, Shimono A, Speicher DW, Marmorstein R, Kissil JL. 2011. A
tight junction-associated Merlin-angiomotin complex mediates Merlin’s
regulation of mitogenic signaling and tumor suppressive functions.
Cancer Cell 19:527–540.

Zhou L, Ercolano E, Ammoun S, Schmid MC, Barczyk MA, Hanemann CO.
2011. Merlin-deﬁcient human tumors show loss of contact inhibition
and activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling linked to the PDGFR/Src
and Rac/PAK pathways. Neoplasia 13:1101–1112.

