REVIEWS

THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT 
OF GLIAL CELLS IN PERIPHERAL 
NERVES
Kristjan R. Jessen and Rhona Mirsky
Abstract | During the development of peripheral nerves, neural crest cells generate myelinating 
and non-myelinating glial cells in a process that parallels gliogenesis from the germinal layers of 
the CNS. Unlike central gliogenesis, neural crest development involves a protracted embryonic 
phase devoted to the generation of, first, the Schwann cell precursor and then the immature 
Schwann cell, a cell whose fate as a myelinating or non-myelinating cell has yet to be 
determined. Embryonic nerves therefore offer a particular opportunity to analyse the early 
steps of gliogenesis from transient multipotent stem cells, and to understand how this process 
is integrated with organogenesis of peripheral nerves.

Before the onset of gliogenesis in the spinal cord, neu-
ral crest cells BOX 1 have already given rise to the early 
glial cells that are found among the axons of nascent 
nerves as they work their way through body tissues 
to reach distal targets and establish functional links 
between the CNS and the rest of the body1,2. These early 
embryonic nerves are compact columns built exclu-
sively from axons and tightly associated Schwann cell 
precursors (SCPs). Notably, they have no reinforcing 
connective tissue or protective covering, and do not 
even have their own blood supply. These features 
arise later, at about the time that nerves reach their 
targets (REFS 3,4; A. Kumar, R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished 
observations). 

A surprising finding is that although SCPs are 
intimately associated with the axon bundles of these 
nerves, they are not actually required for the nerve to 
grow and reach its final target fields5–7. Rather, SCPs 
have four main functions. Their most obvious role is, 
of course, as an intermediary precursor stage between 
neural crest stem cells and Schwann cells and, there-
fore, as the immediate source of the Schwann cells 
present in perinatal nerves6,8,9. Another major function 
of these cells is likely to be the provision of essential 
trophic support for sensory and motor neurons — at 
limb levels of the spinal cord most of these neurons 

Department of Anatomy 
and Developmental 
Biology, University College 
London, Gower Street, 
London WC1E 6BT, UK. 
Correspondence to K.R.J. 
e-mail: k.jessen@ucl.ac.uk
doi:10.1038/nrn1746

die in mouse mutants in which SCPs are absent10. In 
addition, SCPs are essential for normal nerve fascicula-
tion10. Finally, SCPs might be the source of not only 
Schwann cells, but also the relatively small population 
of fibroblasts that is found in peripheral nerves11.

This last finding accords with previous work show-
ing that SCPs can generate non-glial lineages, including 
neurons, in vitro (see below). In principle, these observa-
tions on SCPs parallel the recent observation that radial 
glia give rise to CNS neurons during development12,13. 
In both cases, cells that are unambiguously glial-like, 
both in molecular phenotype and also, in the case of 
SCPs, in showing intimate association with axons, seem 
to generate unexpected progenies that were previously 
thought to arise from different lineages. These findings 
are a useful reminder of the tentative nature of many of 
the dogmas that shape the field.

Notwithstanding  these  uncertainties,  recent 
progress in understanding neural crest and Schwann 
cell development has allowed us to generate a coherent 
baseline picture of glial development in early periph-
eral nerves, which we describe in this review. We also 
discuss the molecules that control glial differentiation 
and highlight new data that point to unexpected func-
tions, developmental potential and the fate of early glial 
cells in the PNS.

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE 

 VOLUME 6 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | 671

R E V I E W S

Box 1 | The neural crest

In a process known as neurulation, the neural 
plate, which is found along the dorsal surface of 
an embryo, gradually folds in on itself to 
generate the neural groove. As the neural folds 
fuse to form the neural tube, neural crest cells 
segregate from the tips of the folds. After taking 
up an initial position at the dorsal surface of the 
tube, the crest cells in the trunk region soon 
migrate along one of two major streams: in a 
lateral direction (1) to give rise to melanocytes in 
the skin, and in a ventral direction (2,3) to give 
rise to neurons in dorsal root sensory ganglia 
and glia (2), or glia, autonomic neurons and 
chromaffin cells (3). Neural crest cells in the 
most anterior part of the trunk, the cardiac crest, 
also generate fibroblasts and smooth muscle 
cells, and the cephalic crest in the head region 
forms the cells of cartilage and bone.

The mechanisms that allow the apparently 

homogenous population of crest cells to 
generate such diversity have been intensively 
studied. It is now considered likely that some 
neural crest cells are already committed to 
certain fates, whereas others are multipotent. 
Although some of these cells may enter lineages 
in a stochastic and undirected manner, a 
combination of positive and negative instructive 
signals probably play an important part in 
directing neural crest cell differentiation.
How migrating neural crest cells, which 

initially move through immature connective 
tissue on each side of the nascent neural tube, 
end up as Schwann cell precursors in tight 
association with axons in early embryonic nerves 
is not clear, either in terms of their detailed 
migratory route or the signals that cause these 
cells to adopt an early glial phenotype.

Primitive streak

Neural plate

Neural Fold

Neural
groove

Neural crest
cell

1

2

3

Neural tube

Notochord

Outline of the Schwann cell lineage
Schwann cells in spinal nerves originate from the 
neural crest, although the origin of cells in spinal roots 
is more complex (see below). The end point of Schwann 
cell development is the formation of myelinating and 
non-myelinating cells that ensheath large and small 
diameter axons, respectively, throughout the PNS4,14–20 
(FIG. 1). The other main glial cell types in the PNS are 
described in BOX 2.

Schwann cell formation is preceded by the genera-
tion of two other cell types: SCPs, which are the glial 
cells of embryonic day (E) 14–15 rat nerves (mouse 
E12–13), and immature Schwann cells, which are 
generated from the SCPs from E15 to E17 (mouse 
E13–15). The latter are the glial cells found in rat 
nerves from E17–18 to about the time of birth8,9 (FIG. 2). 
The postnatal fate of immature Schwann cells is deter-
mined by which axons they randomly associate with, 
with myelination being selectively activated in those 
cells that happen to envelop single large diameter 
axons.

These events can be viewed as three main trans-
itions, that is, the transition from migrating neural crest 
stem cells to SCPs, from SCPs to immature Schwann 
cells and, lastly, the divergence of this population to 
form the two mature Schwann cell types. These events 
are strikingly dependent on survival factors, mitogens 
and differentiation signals from the axons with which 
SCPs and Schwann cells continuously associate4,15. 
Another notable feature is plasticity, as much of this 
developmental sequence is readily reversible: mature 
myelinating and non-myelinating cells respond to 
nerve injury by reverting to a phenotype similar to that 
of immature Schwann cells, and SCPs can be diverted, 
at least in vitro, to other neural crest derivatives21–25. 
Only the middle transition — from SCPs to imma-
ture Schwann cells — seems to involve irreversible 
commitment.

Neural crest cells, SCPs and immature Schwann 
cells all proliferate rapidly in vivo, and the onset of 
myelination is the only step of differentiation in the 
entire lineage that is clearly linked to cell cycle exit. 
Even in this case, cessation of proliferation is revers-
ible, because myelinating cells re-enter the cell cycle 
as they start to de-differentiate in response to nerve 
injury24,26.

Numerous molecules have now been implicated 
in the regulation of Schwann cell development. It is 
notable that our knowledge of perinatal events greatly 
exceeds what we know about the control of early steps 
in the differentiation of  the Schwann cell lineage 
(FIG. 3).

Markers of lineage progression
A partially overlapping set of molecular differentia-
tion markers can be used to characterize each stage 
of the Schwann cell lineage. However, each stage can 
also be identified by additional criteria that relate 
to signalling responses and changing relationships to 
other cells and tissues (FIG. 4). Until a few years ago, 
analysis of lineage progression in this system was 
limited by a paucity of markers — only S100 calcium-
binding protein (S100) and glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP) were used, both of which appear late 
in embryonic nerve development. Now, a number 
of markers are emerging that offer insights into the 
intervening developmental steps, allowing new ques-
tions to be asked about the mechanisms that control 
lineage progression.

The markers shown in FIG. 4 fall into 5 main groups: 
(1) those that are present at all developmental stages, 
for example, SRY (sex determining region Y) box 10 
(SOX10); (2) those expressed by neural crest cells and 
SCPs, but downregulated by immature Schwann cells, 
such as activator protein 2α (AP2α); (3) a gene that 
is expressed only by SCPs — at present cadherin 19 
(Cad 19) is the only marker in this category; (4) those 
present on SCPs and immature Schwann cells but not 
on migrating neural crest cells, such as brain fatty 
acid-binding protein (BFABP); and (5) those present 
on immature Schwann cells but absent or at much 
lower levels in SCPs, for example, GFAP and S100.

672 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 

 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

Myelinating
Schwann cell

Pro-myelin
Schwann cell

Axon

Axon

Schwann cell
precursor

Non-myelinating
Schwann cell

Immature 
Schwann cells

Neural crest
cell
Figure 1 | The Schwann cell lineage. Schematic illustration of the main cell types and 
developmental transitions involved in Schwann cell development. Dashed arrows indicate the 
reversibility of the final, largely postnatal transition during which mature myelinating and non-
myelinating cells are generated. The embryonic phase of Schwann cell development involves 
three transient cell populations. First, migrating neural crest cells, which are discussed further 
in BOX 1. Second, Schwann cell precursors (SCPs). These cells express various differentiation 
markers that are not found in migrating neural crest cells, including brain fatty acid-binding 
protein (BFABP), protein zero (P0) and desert hedgehog (DHH) (FIG. 4). At any one time, 
a rapidly developing population of cells — such as the glia of embryonic nerves — will contain 
some cells that are rather more advanced than others. However, the cells23 isolated from 
embryonic day (E) 14 rat nerves by the P07 monoclonal P0 antibody97 (referred to as ‘neural 
crest stem cells’23) are unlikely to be significantly different from the bulk of cells in the nerve, 
which are referred to here as SCPs (for a detailed discussion, see REFS 98,99). Third, immature 
Schwann cells. All immature Schwann cells are considered to have the same developmental 
potential, and their fate is determined by the axons with which they associate. Myelination 
occurs only in Schwann cells that by chance envelop large diameter axons — Schwann cells 
that ensheath small diameter axons progress to become mature non-myelinating cells.

Other differences between the three main stages of 
embryonic Schwann cell development, also shown in 
FIG. 4, include the following. First, SCPs and immature 
Schwann cells, but not migrating neural crest cells, are 
intimately associated with neurons (axons), a charac-
teristic attribute of glial cells (FIGS 2,5). Second, SCPs 
and migrating neural crest cells show numerous differ-
ences in their responses to survival factors4,15,27. Third, 
when compared with migrating neural crest cells, SCPs 
are also relatively insensitive to the neurogenic action 

Box 2 | Glial cells of the peripheral nervous system

The PNS contains a number of distinct glial cells, each of which is intimately 
associated with different parts of the neuron or with specific neuronal cell types94.  
Neuronal cell bodies in dorsal root sensory ganglia and in sympathetic and 
parasympathetic ganglia are covered by flattened sheet-like cells known as satellite 
cells, whereas axons in nerve trunks are ensheathed by non-myelinating or 
myelinating Schwann cells, the best known of all peripheral glia. Unlike 
oligodendrocytes, the myelinating cells of the CNS, each Schwann cell forms myelin 
around one axon only. For reasons that are not understood, only the larger diameter 
(>~1 µm) axons of peripheral nerves are myelinated — smaller axons lie in troughs 
in the surface of non-myelinating Schwann cells. Distinct cells known as olfactory 
ensheathing cells envelop the axons of the olfactory nerve. Axon terminals at the 
skeletal neuromuscular junction are tightly covered by terminal glia (teloglia), 
whereas the terminals of autonomic neurons show only irregular associations with 
processes of non-myelinating Schwann cells. Many sensory nerve endings in the skin 
associate with glial cells that form the innermost part of larger structures, for 
example, the Pacinian corpuscle. Lastly, the complex ganglia of the enteric nervous 
system harbour glial cells, the enteric glia, that are remarkably similar to astrocytes.

R E V I E W S

of bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2), and are 
strongly biased towards Schwann cell generation28,29.

Additional differences between immature Schwann 
cells and SCPs include the presence of a basal lamina, 
which starts to form soon after Schwann cells are gener-
ated (A. Kumar, R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished observa-
tions). But perhaps the most striking difference between 
these cells is the ability of Schwann cells to ensure their 
own survival through the help of autocrine survival 
circuits30. These are missing in SCPs, leaving these cells 
wholly dependent on survival signals from axons, which 
are probably mediated to a large extent by β-neuregulin 
1 (NRG1; see BOX 3 and below).

The control of gliogenesis from the neural crest
It has been suggested that in the CNS, glial differentia-
tion represents a ‘default pathway’ of neural stem cell 
differentiation12,13. We do not yet know whether this is 
a useful way of thinking about glial cell development in 
the PNS. However, the functions of the major signalling 
pathways that have been implicated in the control of 
gliogenesis from the neural crest — those that involve 
NRG1, BMP2 and 4, and Notch — are consistent with 
a default mode. This is because the most obvious func-
tions of these signals in the neural crest are to suppress 
glial development, or to suppress or activate neuronal 
development31–33. It has been hard to prove that these 
factors positively initiate glial differentiation from 
neural crest cells. Similarly, although the transcription 
factor SOX10 is required for glial development, it is 
expressed by all neural crest cells and therefore does 
not seem to be part of a classical inductive signalling 
cascade for the activation of glial development34.

A default model would also provide a relatively sim-
ple hypothesis explaining how, during gangliogenesis, 
neurons and glia could form in the same location. It 
would be sufficient to envisage neurogenic signals acting 
on neural crest cells, tempered by signals from early 
neurons (for example, NRG1 or Delta–Notch signalling; 
see below) that suppress excessive neurogenesis in 
neighbouring cells.

SOX10. Before investigating the often uncertain func-
tion of cell–cell signals in the initiation of glial devel-
opment, we discuss the transcription factor SOX10, 
because Sox10 is the only gene known to be essential for 
the generation of the glial lineage from trunk crest cells. 
SOX10 appears to be present in all migrating neural 
crest cells34,35. Expression persists in developing satellite 
glia in dorsal root sensory ganglia (DRG) and in SCPs 
in spinal nerves, but is downregulated in early neu-
rons. Matching this pattern, satellite glia and SCPs are 
missing in mice in which Sox10 is inactivated, whereas 
neurons are initially generated in normal numbers34. 
In these mutants, early DRGs contain neural crest-like 
cells instead of BFABP+ satellite cells (FIG. 4), and nerve 
trunks also contain a few neural crest-like cells that lack 
BFABP+. This indicates that in the absence of SOX10 
glial specification is blocked, whereas neural crest cells 
thrive and are able to generate neurons. In vitro experi-
ments also support a role for SOX10 in establishing 

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE 

 VOLUME 6 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | 673

R E V I E W S

a  E14

b  E18

Figure 2 | The appearance of early cells in the Schwann cell lineage. a | An electron 
microscopic image of a transverse section of a nerve in the hindlimb of a rat embryo at 
embryonic day (E) 14. Schwann cell precursors (SCPs) branch among the axons inside 
the nerve (big arrow) and are also found in close apposition to axons at the nerve surface. 
One precursor cell is undergoing mitosis (small arrow). Extracellular connective tissue 
space (turquoise), which contains mesenchymal cells, surrounds the nerve but is 
essentially absent from the nerve itself. These nerves are also free of blood vessels and the 
axons are of smaller and more uniform diameter than those seen in mature nerves. 
Magnification, ×2000. b | Schwann cells in a transverse section of the sciatic nerve of a rat 
embryo at E18, shown at the same magnification. In marked contrast to the nerve at E14, 
connective tissue spaces now branch throughout the nerve among compact bundles of 
immature Schwann cells and their associated axons (‘Schwann cell families’68, for example 
see asterisk). Blood vessels (small arrow) and fibroblasts (for example, directly above the 
vessel) have also appeared inside the nerve. One Schwann cell is undergoing mitosis 
(big arrow). Outside the nerve (in the uppermost part of the picture) connective tissue, 
which contains flattened fibroblasts of the early developing perineurium and two blood 
vessels, can be seen. 

and maintaining a glial phenotype35. One function of 
SOX10 might be to maintain the ability of early glia to 
respond to NRG1, as the neuregulin receptor ErbB3 is 
downregulated in Sox10 mutants34.

Neuregulin 1. In neural crest cell cultures, NRG1 inhib-
its the development of neurons31, a function that might 
lead, indirectly, to increased gliogenesis. It is not clear 
whether NRG1 also restrains neurogenesis in vivo, as 
overproduction of neurons has not been noted in NRG 
mutants. In similar cultures, GFAP+ Schwann cells appear 
readily even without the addition of NRG1 REF. 31, 
and the same is true if the activation of protein zero (P0) 
expression, an earlier SCP marker, is used (N. Kazakova, 
R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished observations). A major 
population of neural crest-derived glia, the satellite 
cells of DRGs, is also apparently unaffected in mouse 
mutants in which NRG1 or the NRG1 receptors ErbB2 
or 3 are missing (although SCPs are lost; see below)10. 
Together, these findings indicate that NRG1 signalling 
is not required for glial differentiation from the neural 
crest. 

The NRG mutants point to two important alternative 
functions for NRG1 in the development of neural crest 
derivatives. First, NRG1 is required for the migration 
of neural crest cells past the location of the DRGs to 
reach the ventral sites of sympathetic gangliogenesis, as 
shown by the finding that sympathetic ganglia are hypo-
plastic in neuregulin mutants36. Second, SCPs and, later, 
Schwann cells are absent or seriously depleted in spinal 
nerve trunks of the mutant animals6,7,37. This probably 
reflects the role of NRG1 as an axon-derived survival 
factor and mitogen for SCPs, and failure of migration of 
precursors from DRGs into spinal nerves might also play 
a part9,38. NRG1 is an essential survival factor for SCPs 
in vitro, and stimulates SCP proliferation. It is also the 
signal by which DRG neurons rescue SCPs from death 
in vitro9. In vivo, NRG1 is present at the right time and 
place to control SCP survival, because it is found in DRG 
and motor neurons at the stage at which SCPs populate 
spinal nerves, and it accumulates along axon tracts39–42. 
SCPs depend on axons for survival in vivo, and the SCP 
death that follows nerve injury can be prevented by the 
application of NRG1 REF. 43. Comparable results have 
been obtained with neonatal Schwann cells and terminal 
glia (known as teloglia)44,45.

All of these observations indicate that NRG1 is an 
essential survival factor for SCPs in embryonic nerves. 
It is likely that the main NRG1 variant responsible for 
this function is the transmembrane type III isoform, 
which is the main neuregulin in DRG and motor neu-
rons. In mice that selectively lack this isoform, SCPs 
initially populate spinal nerves, but their number is 
severely depleted by E14, which shows that the type III 
isoform is necessary for the survival of SCPs in vivo38.
NRG1 also promotes Schwann cell survival and pro-
liferation and is likely to be an important component 
of the axon-associated signal that drives Schwann cell 
division prior to myelination46. There is also evidence 
that NRG1 accelerates the production of Schwann cells 
from SCPs (see below).

674 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 

 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

Adenosine
ATP
Autocrine
  survival factors
β1 integrin
c-Jun
Claw paw
Ets transcription
  factors
IGF
Laminin
NRG1
NT3
SOX2
p38
p75NTR
TGFβ

Immature 
Schwann cells

BDNF
BRN2
cAMP
GDNF
IGF
KROX20/NAB1/2
Laminin
NF-κB
NRG1
OCT6
Progesterone
PI3K–Akt
SKI

Axon

Myelinating
Schwann cell

ATP
c-Jun
Notch
NT3
PAX3
SOX2
TGFβ

SOX-10

NRG1

Notch

FGF2

Axon

Neural crest
cell

BMP2/4

Schwann cell
precursor

Endothelin
AP2α

Figure 3 | Some of the factors that have been implicated in the control of early 
Schwann cell development and myelination. Evidence for molecules shown in bold is 
based on in vivo observations in mutant animals. The other molecules have been implicated 
in vitro. In some cases the in vitro evidence is substantially more complete than in others. 
SRY (sex determining region Y) box 10 (SOX10) is required for the generation of all peripheral 
glia from the neural crest34, whereas bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) inhibit glial 
differentiation32. Axon-derived neuregulin 1 (NRG1), in particular the type III isoform, is necessary 
for the survival of  Schwann cell precursors (SCPs) in embryonic nerves both in vitro and in 
vivo9,10,38. NRG1, fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) and Notch accelerate the SCP–Schwann cell 
transition (REFS 33,55,100,101; A. Woodhoo, R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished observations), 
whereas the transcription factor activator protein 2α (AP2α) and endothelins delay it55. In 
immature Schwann cells, survival is supported by autocrine survival factors, NRG1, Ets 
transcription factors and laminin30,44,45,74,102,103, whereas transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) and 
the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) induce Schwann cell death (REFS 81,82; M. D’Antonio, 
A. Droggiti, R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished observations). In vitro experiments indicate that NRG1 
is an axon-associated Schwann cell mitogen, but proliferation is also supported by TGFβ, 
laminin and various other factors (REFS 46,73,74,104; M. D’Antonio, A. Droggiti, R.M. and K.R.J., 
unpublished observations). The transcription factors SOX2 and c-Jun support proliferation83,86, 
although c-Jun is also required for cell death83. ATP and adenosine, however, inhibit Schwann 
cell division87. NRG1, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), neurotrophin 3 (NT3), insulin-like 
growth factors (IGFs) and the p38 pathway function in Schwann cell migration and/or 
association with axons prior to myelination75–78. Radial sorting is impaired in claw paw, laminin 
and β1 integrin mutants70–72,74. Myelination is promoted by the transcription factors early growth 
response 2 (EGR2, also known as KROX20) with NGFI-A-binding (NAB) proteins, octamer-
binding transcription factor 6 (OCT6) and brain 2 class III POU-domain protein (BRN2)86,91,92, 
and inhibited by c-Jun, paired box gene 3 (PAX3) and SOX2 (REFS 83,85,86; D. B. Parkinson, 
R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished observations). Cell-extrinsic signals that promote myelination 
include glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), NRG1, IGFs, BDNF, progesterone and 
laminin14,42,105–108. Intracellular phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)–Akt 
(v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homologue) and cyclic AMP (cAMP) activated pathways 
also promote myelination, whereas it is blocked by Notch activation, NT3 and ATP (REFS 
4,87,88,107,109; A. Woodhoo, R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished observations). TGFβ also inhibits 
myelination, whereas v-ski sarcoma viral oncogene homologue (SKI), which suppresses TGFβ, 
stimulates it93,110,111. NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB.

Therefore, NRG1 acts in a number of different 
ways to promote the generation and expansion of 
immature Schwann cells. Furthermore, the inhibitory 
effect of NRG1 on neurogenesis31 might act indirectly 
to increase the production of glial cells, by prolonging 
the time available for uncommitted neural crest cells 
to adopt a glial fate. It is likely that the enhancement 

R E V I E W S

of Schwann cell generation by NRG1 that has been 
seen in various in vitro situations occurs through a 
combination of these mechanisms.

Studies on zebrafish indicate that although ErbB2/3 
signalling is not needed for Schwann cell generation, it 
is required for proliferation and migration of Schwann 
cells along the posterior lateral line47.

Notch. In the CNS, enforced Notch activation in vivo 
directly or indirectly promotes the generation of glial 
cells48. In the Schwann cell lineage there are intrigu-
ing similarities between the actions of Notch and 
NRG1. Notch activation inhibits the generation of 
neurons in neural crest cell cultures and increases the 
number of GFAP+ Schwann cells29,33,49. There is also 
evidence that Notch activation, like NRG1 activation, 
stimulates the formation of Schwann cells from SCPs 
(see below) and stimulates Schwann cell proliferation 
(A. Woodhoo, R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished observa-
tions). Cooperative interactions between Notch and 
NRG1 signalling have been noted previously in the 
development of astrocytes50. It is not yet clear whether 
Notch acts instructively on neural crest cells to promote 
gliogenesis. As with NRG1, alternative explanations for 
the Notch-mediated increase in GFAP+ Schwann cells 
in neural crest cultures include indirect effects due to 
inhibition of neurogenesis, stimulation of the SCP–
Schwann cell transition, and stimulation of Schwann 
cell proliferation.

BMP2 and 4. BMPs are important for the generation 
of sympathetic neurons in vivo and stimulate the for-
mation of neurons in neural crest cultures32,51. In vitro, 
BMPs are also powerful blockers of glial differentia-
tion from the neural crest32. Whether this has a role in 
normal neural crest development in vivo remains to be 
determined.

The formation of immature Schwann cells
In rats, SCPs convert to immature Schwann cells 
between E15 and E17 (E13–E15 in mice). This entails 
a coordinated change in molecular expression, and 
response to survival signals and mitogens (FIG. 4). At 
this time connective tissue spaces also open up within 
the nerves, which become vascularized, and a distinct 
layer of developing perineurium appears at the nerve 
surface. The SCP–Schwann cell transition therefore 
correlates with an important step in the organogenesis 
of peripheral nerves.

Control of cell survival also changes at this transi-
tion, because Schwann cells (but not SCPs) can support 
their own survival in an autocrine way by secreting a 
cocktail of survival factors, which, in vitro, has been 
shown to include insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2), 
neurotrophin 3 (NT3), platelet-derived growth factor-β 
(PDGFB), leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and lyso-
phosphatidic acid (LPA)30,52,53. These autocrine survival 
circuits are probably important in maintaining the  
survival of Schwann cells in injured nerves even after 
axons have degenerated. The switch from paracrine 
dependence on axonal signals to autocrine support of 

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE 

 VOLUME 6 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | 675

R E V I E W S

α4 integrin
AP2α
Ncad

ErbB3
L1
p75NTR
SOX10

GFAP§
S100ıı
OCT6‡
O4‡

BFABP
DHH
P0
GAP43*
PMP22*
PLP*

ErbB3
L1
p75NTR
SOX10

BFABP
DHH
P0
GAP43*
PMP22*
PLP*

Cad 19
α4 integrin
AP2α
Ncad

ErbB3
L1
p75NTR
SOX10

Neural crest
cell

Associate with ECM
NRG1-mediated survival
is ECM dependent

Axon

Schwann cell
precursor

Associate with axons
NRG1-mediated survival
is ECM independent

Survival factors include:
FGF + IGF, ET + IGF,
PDGF + NT3 + IGF

Immature 
Schwann cells

Associate with axons
NRG1-mediated survival
is ECM independent

Survival factors include:
FGF + IGF, ET + IGF,
PDGF + NT3 + IGF

Presence of basal lamina 
Autocrine survival circuits

Figure 4 | Changes in phenotypic profile as cells progress through the embryonic  
Schwann cell lineage. Shared profiles are indicated by distinct colours. The boxes above 
the lineage drawing indicate the changes in gene expression that take place during 
embryonic Schwann cell development. The gene expression shown here is based on 
observations of endogenous genes rather than on observations of reporter genes in 
transgenic animals. Note that Cadherin 19 (Cad 19) is exclusively expressed in Schwann 
cell precursors (SCPs)113. Each developmental stage also involves characteristic 
relationships with surrounding tissues, and distinctive cell signalling properties (boxes below 
lineage drawing). For instance, neural crest cells migrate through extracellular matrix. 
By contrast, SCPs and Schwann cells are embedded among neurons (axons) with minimal 
extracellular spaces separating them from nerve cell membranes, a characteristic feature of 
glial cells in the CNS and PNS. Basal lamina is absent from migrating crest cells and SCPs, 
but appears on Schwann cells. In vitro, β-neuregulin 1 (NRG1) only supports neural crest 
survival in the presence of extracellular matrix (ECM), although this is not required for the 
NRG1-mediated survival of SCPs and Schwann cells27. Migrating neural crest cells also fail 
to survive in the presence of several factors that support the survival of SCPs and Schwann 
cells27, including combinations such as fibroblast growth factor (FGF) plus insulin-like 
growth factor (IGF), endothelin (ET) plus IGF, and platelet-derved growth factor (PDGF) plus 
neurotrophin 3 (NT3) and IGF. Schwann cells also have autocrine survival circuits that are 
absent from SCPs30. *Proteins that also appear on neuroblasts/early neurones. ‡Markers 
that are acutely dependent on axons for expression. §Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is 
a late marker of Schwann cell generation, as significant expression is not seen until about 
the time of birth. GFAP is reversibly suppressed in myelinating cells. The early expression of 
GFAP has not yet been carefully examined in mice. ||SCPs have been shown to be S100 
calcium-binding protein (S100)-negative and Schwann cells S100-positive using routine 
immunohistochemical methods — however, low levels of S100 are detectable in many 
mouse SCPs when the sensitivity of the assay is significantly increased. α4 integrin11 
(V. Sahni and K.R.J. unpublished observations); AP2-α, activator protein 2α54; BFABP, brain 
fatty acid-binding protein34; DHH, desert hedgehog114–115; ErbB3, neuregulin receptor10; 
GAP43, growth associated protein 43 REF. 8; L1, L1 adhesion molecule4; N-cad, 
N-cadherin (I. Wanner and K.R.J., unpublished observations); OCT6, octamer-binding 
transcription factor 6 REF. 116; O4, lipid antigen100; PLP, proteolipid protein117; PMP22, 
peripheral myelin protein, 22-kDa22; P0, protein zero118; p75NTR, p75 neurotrophin receptor4; 
SOX10, SRY (sex determining region Y) box 10 REF. 34.

survival makes biological sense. The former provides 
a mechanism for matching the numbers of axons and 
SCPs, whereas the axon-independence of Schwann cell 
survival ensures that if postnatal nerves are injured, 
Schwann cells survive to provide essential support for 
axon regrowth.

Little is known about the transcription factors 
that control the SCP–Schwann cell transition. It has 
been suggested that AP2α provides negative regula-
tion, because this factor is strongly downregulated 
as Schwann cells are generated in vivo, and enforced 
expression in SCPs delays Schwann cell generation 
in vitro54. Another negative regulator of Schwann cell 
generation is endothelin. Endothelins and their recep-
tors are present in embryonic nerves, and in rats with 
defective endothelin B receptors Schwann cells form 
prematurely55. Evidence for positive regulation of the 
SCP–Schwann cell transition comes from in vitro exper-
iments indicating that NRG1 accelerates the conversion 
of SCPs to Schwann cells, as well as promoting SCP sur-
vival and proliferation55. Notch activation also promotes 
the generation of Schwann cells from SCPs in vitro 
(REF. 33; A. Woodhoo, R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished 
observations).

Novel origin of Schwann cells in spinal roots
Most of our detailed knowledge about the develop-
ment of SCPs and immature Schwann cells comes 
from studies on the spinal nerve trunks that innervate 
the limbs. How much of it holds true for Schwann cell 
development in the dorsal and ventral roots of the 
spinal cord? The observation that S100 appears rela-
tively early in the roots had already indicated that the 
developmental schedule, at least, differs between root 
and limb nerves56. Now, a study of the fate of bound-
ary cap cells of the spinal cord has revealed a more 
fundamental difference between these Schwann cell 
populations57. Boundary cap cells originate in the neu-
ral crest and take up positions in clusters where dorsal 
and ventral roots enter and exit the spinal cord. They 
can be identified by the expression of early growth 
response 2 (Egr2, also known as Krox20) long before 
this gene appears in myelinating Schwann cells. When 
the fate of these cells is traced in vivo using Krox20-
driven Cre recombinase, it transpires that these cells 
not only give rise to a small subset of nociceptive neu-
rons and some satellite cells within the DRG, but also 
give rise to all of the Schwann cells in dorsal roots and 
many of the Schwann cells in ventral roots. Therefore, 
boundary cap cells constitute a relatively late reservoir 
of neural precursors that contribute to the generation 
of neurons and glia in the PNS. In spinal nerves, few 
or no boundary cap cell-derived glia were detected. 
Therefore these findings do not affect the classical 
notion that the Schwann cells of limb nerves originate 
in migrating neural crest cells. 

The function of Schwann cell precursors
It is generally believed that glial cells provide trophic 
support for developing neurons. Persuasive in vivo evi-
dence for this mechanism comes from investigations 

676 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 

 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

a  E10–11

b  E14–15 nerve

c  E18–19 nerve

Migrating 
neural crest cell

Schwann cell
precursor

R E V I E W S

Immature 
Schwann cell

Fibroblastic
cell

Axon

Neural tube

Blood
vessel

Endoneurial
fibroblast

Developing
perineurium

Figure 5 | Cell and tissue relationships at key stages of Schwann cell development in rodents. There is a simple 
relationship between the main stages of embryonic Schwann cell development and organogenesis of spinal nerves. a | Migrating 
crest cells move through immature connective tissue before the time of nerve formation. b | Schwann cell precursors (SCPs) are 
tightly associated with axons and are found in early nerves that are still compact and do not yet contain blood vessels or 
connective tissue. c | Immature Schwann cells are found in nerves that have acquired the basic tissue relationships of adult 
nerves. By this time, the developing perineurium defines the endoneurial space that now contains, in addition to axon–Schwann 
cell units, blood vessels, endoneurial fibroblasts and extracellular matrix. 

of embryonic nerve development, in which it has been 
possible to examine what happens when glial cells are 
deleted from a significant part of the nervous system. 
This occurs in the major limb nerves of mouse embryos 
that lack SOX10, isoform III of NRG1, or the NRG1 
receptors ErbB2 or ErbB3, owing to the importance 
of these molecules in gliogenesis and glial survival, as 
discussed above. Strikingly, in these mutants most of 
the DRG neurons and motor neurons that project into 
limb nerves die by E14 and E18 respectively, although 
these cells are initially generated in normal numbers. 
This suggests that one of the functions of SCPs and 
immature Schwann cells is to provide essential sur-
vival signals for developing neurons6,10,34. Impaired 
axon–target contacts probably contribute to sensory 
and motor neuron death in the isoform III neuregulin 
mutants38.

Taken together with the finding that axons control 
the survival of SCPs (see above), these studies identify 
a discrete phase in early nerve development when neu-
rons and glia depend on each other for survival. An 
intriguing possibility is the control of neuronal survival 
by SCPs through back-signalling by the intracellular 
domain of NRG1 REF. 58. If this is the case, mutual sur-
vival of neurons and glia in embryonic nerves would be 
ensured by a bidirectional effect of the same molecular 
interaction, namely the binding of NRG1 to ErbB2 and 
ErbB3 receptors.

An unexpected morphogenetic role has also been 
identified for early glia of ventral roots59. This func-
tion has been seen in a number of mouse lines in 
which these cells are missing. Such lines include Sox10 
mutants, which fail to generate all glial neural crest 

derivatives (of which boundary cap cells are a sub-
set), mice in which the boundary cap cells have been 
selectively killed by diphtheria toxin inserted into the 
Krox20 locus, and paired box gene 6 (Pax6) mutants, 
in which failure of neural crest migration leads to the 
absence of glia in caudal peripheral nerves. In all of 
these animals the cell bodies of motor neurons are 
displaced into ventral roots59. It seems, therefore, that 
one of the functions of boundary cap cells, or the SCPs 
that are derived from them, is to maintain the position 
of motor neurons in the spinal cord.

Another morphogenetic function of neural crest-
derived glia in peripheral nerves is seen in the lateral 
line of the zebrafish, in which developing glial cells con-
trol the formation of secondary neuromasts, organs that 
are specialized for the detection of water movement60,61. 
SCPs and immature Schwann cells are also important 
for normal fasciculation of peripheral nerves7,37.

Recently, a number of classical ideas about develop-
mental potential and lineage restrictions have been 
challenged by unexpected observations. Probably the 
most notable example from the nervous system is the 
finding that neurons can arise from cells that show 
obvious similarities to astrocytic glial cells, both during 
development and in the adult12,62,63.

Another example of a surprising lineage relation-
ship involving glial cells seems to occur in embryonic 
nerves11. In this case, genetic lineage tracing indicates 
that the relatively small population of fibroblasts found 
inside nerves (5–10% of the number of Schwann cells at 
birth) originates from cells in the nerve that are neural 
crest derived and express desert hedgehog (DHH), 
and are, therefore, presumably SCPs (FIG. 4). The idea 

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE 

 VOLUME 6 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | 677

R E V I E W S

Box 3 | Neuregulin 1

a  Type I
N

b  Type II
N

c  Type III

C

C

C

N

C

Immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domain

Domain rich in potential glycosylation sites

Hydrophobic sequence
with similarities to internal
signal sequence

EGF-like domain
Transmembrane domain

Cysteine-rich domain

Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) seems to have exceptionally numerous and varied functions in 
Schwann cell biology. It is involved in neural crest migration, and has been 
implicated in the lineage specification of neural crest cells and shown to be essential 
for the survival of Schwann cell precursors (SCPs). It is also involved in Schwann cell 
generation, proliferation and survival. In postnatal nerves, NRG1 is a positive 
regulator of myelin sheath thickness, but, paradoxically, also appears to drive the 
de-differentiation of myelinating cells in injured nerves. No other signalling 
molecule has been proposed to be so comprehensively involved in the control of 
Schwann cell development.

There are a surprisingly large number (>15) of NRG1 protein isoforms. The 

schematic structures of the main isoforms found in the nervous system are shown in 
the panel. Although splice variants without the transmembrane domain exist for all of 
these isoforms, transmembrane isoforms (as shown here together with the products 
of a proteolytic cleavage in the juxta-membrane area) predominate in the nervous 
system. The epidermal growth factor (EGF) domain is found in all bioactive forms of 
NRG1 and is sufficient for activation of ErbB receptor-kinase activation. The type III 
isoform is expressed in axons and is the main regulator of survival of SCPs and myelin 
sheath thickness. It is thought to have two membrane-spanning domains and to 
undergo proteolytic cleavage that generates a membrane attached protein carrying the 
EGF domain95,96.

NRG1 shows high affinity binding to two receptors, ErbB3 and ErbB4, whereas a 

related protein, ErbB2, acts as a co-receptor in ErbB3–ErbB2 and ErbB4–ErbB2 
complexes. The former is the main NRG1 receptor in peripheral glial cells. The action 
of axonal NRG1 type III on ErbB3–ErbB2 in developing Schwann cells is probably the 
best established molecular signalling pathway between neurons and glia in the PNS.

that SCPs generate some fibroblasts in addition to 
Schwann cells fits well with the observation that both 
cell types appear in the nerve at the SCP–Schwann cell 
transition (A. Kumar, R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished 
observations; also, see above). It is also consistent with 
the principle, established in previous experiments, that 
early PNS glia from rodents and birds can generate 
cells other than Schwann cells. This was first shown 
in the quail, when P0+ cells from embryonic nerves 
were found to generate melanocytes in vitro21,64. More 
recently, chick SCPs expressing the glial-specific pro-
tein SMP (Schwann cell myelin protein) were induced 
to generate melanocytes by exposure to endothelin, a 
signal that also seems to act more broadly to promote 
plasticity of neural crest derivatives25,65. The appear-
ance of melanocytes has even been documented in 
injured nerves of adult mice, particularly in lines that 

are hetero zygous for the neurofibromin 1 gene66. In 
addition, in the rat, P0+ cells from early nerves or DRGs 
have been shown to have the potential to generate 
neurons and fibroblasts22,23.

The generation of fibroblasts from SCPs in vivo, if 
confirmed, would bring the trunk crest lineage in line 
with the cardiac and cephalic crest lineages, which have 
long been known to generate connective tissue67. But 
these observations on the developmental potential of 
SCPs are also in agreement with the emerging concept 
that early glia can act as multipotent progenitors in the 
developing nervous system12,13.

Direct experimental evidence for the more intui-
tive, if prosaic, idea that SCPs generate Schwann cells 
includes the following. It is the simplest explanation 
for the observation that, in spinal nerves of the limbs, 
SCPs disappear as Schwann cells appear at E15–E17, 
with substantial numbers of both cell types being 
present only at E16. Also, in SCP cultures prepared 
from E14 nerves, the gradual appearance of cells 
with the phenotype of Schwann cells can be observed 
directly as SCPs disappear. In vitro, the conversion 
of most of the SCPs to Schwann cells is completed 
in 3–4 days, which is close to the time course of the 
SCP–Schwann cell transition in vivo8,9. Lastly, in 
mouse mutants that lack SCPs, Schwann cells are not 
generated10,34.

A significant narrowing of developmental options 
clearly takes place at the SCP–Schwann cell transi-
tion. Immature Schwann cells have not yet been seen 
to de-differentiate to SCPs and, in vitro, immature 
Schwann cells are resistant to signals, including BMP2 
and fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), that are able to 
induce the generation of other neural crest derivatives 
from SCPs21,23,33. Their only option seems to be the 
reversible generation of myelinating or non-myelinating 
cells, fates that are determined by axon associated 
signals (see above).

Preparing for myelination
The transition of SCPs to Schwann cells coincides with 
a major change in the cellular architecture of peripheral 
nerves. At E14 in rats, limb nerves consist of axons and 
SCPs. The SCPs are found at the outer margin of the 
nerves, and inside them as well, connecting to each 
other through sheet-like processes that communally 
envelop large numbers of axons. These nerves are 
compact structures — there are no significant connec-
tive tissue spaces, the cellular elements are separated 
by  only  minimal  gutters  and  blood  vessels  are 
absent (FIG. 2). By E18, the nerves consist of irregular 
axon–Schwann cell bundles (similar to the ‘families’ 
described in newborn nerves68) that are surrounded 
by connective tissue spaces containing endoneurial 
fibroblasts and blood vessels (A. Kumar, R.M. and 
K.R.J., unpublished observations). This is the basic 
relationship between nervous tissue, connective tissue 
and blood vessels that is seen in adult nerves. We still 
know little about the signals that control these complex 
changes and govern the organogenesis of peripheral 
nerves (FIG. 5).

678 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 

 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

Around E18 in rats, immature Schwann cells are 
found communally ensheathing large groups of axons, 
whereas myelination starts some 3 days later, at birth. 
This requires radial sorting — a process of radical 
change in cellular relationships that allows individual 
Schwann cells to start myelinating single large dia meter 
axons. At the same time, Schwann cell numbers are 
adjusted by controlling survival and proliferation. While 
these events take place, premature myelination seems to 
be prevented by the activity of a number of signalling 
systems that function as ‘myelination brakes’.

Radial sorting. In a process that continues postnatally, 
the Schwann cell families of late embryonic nerves grad-
ually erode as individual Schwann cells, each associated 
with a single large diameter axon, segregate from them 
to form the pro-myelin stage, which is characterized by 
a 1:1 relationship between axons and Schwann cells68. 
The molecular control of this crucial step is poorly 
understood. It is impaired in laminin-defective mutants 
and in the absence of β1 integrin, which is a component 
of Schwann cell laminin receptors, and also in the claw 
paw mutant, which has a defect in myelination69–74.

Various factors affect Schwann cell migration in 
cell culture and it is possible that these signals govern 
Schwann cell movements during radial sorting in vivo. 
They include NRG1, IGFs, NT3 and brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF)75–77. There is also evidence 
that activity in the p38 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) pathway is required prior to myelina-
tion, perhaps to attain the correct alignment between 
axons and Schwann cells78.

The control of Schwann cell numbers. Another challenge 
during the late postnatal period is to match the numbers 
of Schwann cells and axons. Because the period of neuro-
nal death is largely over, this comes down to controlling 
the rates of Schwann cell survival and proliferation.

Evidence that the axons themselves are major 
stimulators of Schwann cell proliferation comes from 
in vitro experiments79, and the idea is supported by the 
observation that, in vivo, Schwann cell proliferation 
decreases as Schwann cells lose contact with axons in 
transected nerves in newborn animals80. Co-culture 
studies using Schwann cells and neurons indicate that 
NRG1 is a major axonal mitogen, but this has not yet 
been confirmed in mammals in vivo46,47.

Another potential Schwann cell mitogen is trans-
forming growth factor-β (TGFβ). This is found in 
embryonic nerves, and excision of the type II TGFβ 
receptor reduces Schwann cell proliferation in E19 
mouse sciatic nerves, which shows that TGFβ is 
directly or indirectly involved in controlling Schwann 
cell division in vivo (M. D’antonio, J. Roes, R.M. and 
K.R.J., unpublished observations). Interactions with 
laminin also promote Schwann cell proliferation in 
developing nerves73,74.

The survival of immature Schwann cells in late 
embryonic and perinatal nerves is probably control-
led by a balance between factors that support survival 
and factors that cause death. Survival support comes 

R E V I E W S

from axon associated NRG1 and autocrine circuits, 
as discussed above, and from laminin associated with 
the basal lamina30,74. Two death signals have been 
identified in vivo. One of these acts through the p75 
neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR), perhaps following 
activation by binding to nerve growth factor (NGF), 
and is required for the elevated Schwann cell death 
that is seen in newborn nerves following injury81. The 
other is likely to be TGFβ, as deletion of type II TGFβ 
receptors suppresses the normal developmental death 
in E18 to newborn nerves. The elevated death that fol-
lows injury in neonates is also suppressed by injection 
of TGFβ-blocking anti bodies (REF. 82; M. D’antonio, 
J. Roes, R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished observations) and 
by deletion of the TGFβ receptor in Schwann cells.

Differentiation brakes. There is now evidence that 
various signalling pathways that inhibit myelin dif-
ferentiation are active in immature Schwann cells, and 
that these pathways are suppressed at the onset of mye-
lination. For instance, the c-Jun-amino (N)-terminal 
kinase (JNK) pathway is active in Schwann cells of E18 
to newborn nerves, where it is required for NRG1 and 
TGFβ signalling83. This pathway is inactivated in indi-
vidual cells as they start to myelinate by a mechanism 
that depends on the myelin-associated transcription 
factor KROX20. If this is prevented, and the JNK path-
way remains active, myelination in neuron–Schwann 
cell co-cultures is blocked and myelin gene expression 
that would normally result from pro-myelin signals, 
such as KROX20 or the elevation of cyclic AMP, is 
inhibited (REF. 84; D. B. Parkinson, A. Bhaskaran, 
R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished observations). Similarly, 
Notch signalling promotes proliferation of immature 
Schwann cells, but is suppressed as cells start to myeli-
nate, and if this is prevented, myelination is blocked 
(A. Woodhoo, R.M. and K.R.J., unpublished obser-
vations). An analogous pattern of action is seen in 
the transcription factors PAX3 and SOX2: these are 
expressed before myelination and are involved in pro-
liferation. They are downregulated in myelinating cells 
and exert a negative effect on myelin differentiation85,86. 
In neuron–Schwann cell co-cultures, axon-derived 
ATP also delays myelination87.

These studies are starting to define the signals that 
determine the immature Schwann cell state. Myelination 
is activated by inhibition of these pathways together 
with activation of pro-myelin pathways, which involve 
the transcription factors KROX20, octamer-binding 
transcription factor 6 (OCT6) and brain 2 class III POU-
domain protein (BRN2), NGFI-A-binding proteins 1 
and 2 (NAB1/2), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) 
signalling and v-ski sarcoma viral oncogene homologue 
(SKI)86,88–93. The mechanism that initiates these switches 
remains unclear.

Summary and perspectives
Some 10 years ago, the first potent molecular regu-
lators of glial development from the neural crest were 
identified, and it was realised that embryonic nerves 
contain a distinct cell type that is positioned between 

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE 

 VOLUME 6 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | 679

R E V I E W S

neural crest cells and Schwann cells. The first tran-
scription factors that control Schwann cell myelina-
tion were also discovered.

Our knowledge of PNS glial development has since 
been transformed. The main transitions from migrating 
neural crest cells to myelinating and non-myelinating 
Schwann cells have been established and each devel-
opmental stage can now be unambiguously defined 
by molecular profile, signalling responses and tissue 
relationships. Although many important cell-intrinsic, 
paracrine and autocrine signals have been identified, 
NRG1, in particular the axon-associated type III iso-
form, has emerged as a signalling molecule of funda-
mental importance and considerable versatility, as it is 
likely to carry out different functions at different stages 
of the lineage. Understanding how the glial lineage 
is established from the neural crest, and the role that 
positive and/or negative inductive signals or default 
mechanisms have in this key event remain challenging 
areas. Another important step will be the clarification 
of the signals that induce myelination.

In many ways our ideas about CNS and PNS glial 
cells have changed along a similar trajectory in recent 
years. In both cases, new and unexpected glial func-
tions have been determined and glial cells have been 
shown to have surprisingly broad developmental 
potential. It is even possible that they are interchange-
able in development, although this has not been tested. 
Both classes of glia are also increasingly recognized 
as sources of signals that are essential for the survival 
and function of neurons and other cells. This key 
function of glial cells is likely to be more tractable in 
peripheral nerves because of their relative simplicity. 
A related issue is the question of to what extent 
glial cells determine and maintain the higher order 
organization of the tissue in a specific environment. 
In peripheral nerves, this issue can be addressed by 
testing the role of glial-derived signals not only in 
organogenesis — namely the processes that estab-
lish correct tissue relationships during development 
— but also in the maintenance of tissue function and 
integrity throughout life.

1.   Reynolds, M. L., Fitzgerald, M. & Benowitz, L. I. GAP-43 

12.   Doetsch, F. The glial identity of neural stem cells. Nature 

26.   Stewart, H. J., Morgan, L., Jessen, K. R. & Mirsky, R. 

expression in developing cutaneous and muscle 
nerves in the rat hindlimb. Neuroscience 41, 201–211 
(1991).

2.   Goodman, C. Mechanisms and molecules that control 

growth cone guidance. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 19, 
341–377 (1996).

3.   Ziskind-Conhaim, L. Physiological and morphological 

changes in developing peripheral nerves of rat embryos. 
Brain Res. 470, 15–28 (1988).

4.   Jessen, K. R. & Mirsky, R. in Myelin Biology and 

Disorders (ed. Lazzarini, R. A.) 329–359 (Elsevier, USA, 
2004).

5.   Grim, M., Halata, Z. & Franz, T. Schwann cells are not 

required for guidance of motor nerves in the hindlimb in 
Splotch mutant mouse embryos. Anat. Embryol. (Berl.) 
186, 311–318 (1992).

6.   Riethmacher, D. et al. Severe neuropathies in mice with 
targeted mutations in the ErbB3 receptor. Nature 389, 
725–730 (1997).
Shows that in mice with a targeted mutation of the 
NRG1 receptor, ErbB3, Schwann cell precursors and 
Schwann cells are absent and there is increased 
non-autonomous cell death of motor and sensory 
neurons.

7.   Woldeyesus, M. T. et al. Peripheral nervous system 

defects in erbB2 mutants following genetic rescue of heart 
development. Genes Dev. 13, 2538–2548 (1999).

8.   Jessen, K. R. et al. The Schwann cell precursor and its 

fate: a study of cell death and differentiation during 
gliogenesis in rat embryonic nerves. Neuron 12, 509–527 
(1994).
Here, the Schwann cell precursor is identified as a 
distinct intermediate in the generation of Schwann 
cells from neural crest cells.

9.   Dong, Z. et al. NDF is a neuron–glia signal and regulates 
survival, proliferation, and maturation of rat Schwann cell 
precursors. Neuron 15, 585–596 (1995).
This study provides evidence that βNRG1 is an 
important neuron–glia signal that supports Schwann 
cell precursor survival and the progression of 
precursors to Schwann cells.

10.   Garratt, A. N., Britsch, S. & Birchmeier, C. Neuregulin, a 
factor with many functions in the life of a Schwann cell. 
Bioessays 22, 987–996 (2000).
A review that provides a comprehensive overview of 
the importance of neuregulin signalling in peripheral 
nerve development.

11.   Joseph, N. M. et al. Neural crest stem cells undergo 

multilineage differentiation in developing peripheral nerves 
to generate endoneurial fibroblasts in addition to 
Schwann cells. Development 131, 5599–5612 (2004).
Using Cre-recombinase technology, this study 
provides evidence that DHH+ cells derived from 
embryonic mouse nerves give rise not only to 
Schwann cells but also to endoneurial fibroblasts.

Neurosci. 6, 1127–1134 (2003).

13.   Gotz, M. Glial cells generate neurons — master 

control within CNS regions: developmental 
perspectives on neural stem cells. Neuroscientist 9, 
379–397 (2003).

14.   Bunge, R. P. Expanding roles for the Schwann cell: 

ensheathment, myelination trophism and regeneration. 
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 3, 805–809 (1993).

15.   Jessen, K. R. & Mirsky, R. Schwann cells and their 

precursors emerge as major regulators of nerve 
development. Trends Neurosci. 22, 402–410 (1999).

16.   Jessen, K. R. & Mirsky, R. Signals that determine 

Schwann cell identity. J. Anat. 200, 367–376 (2002).

17.   Garbay, B., Heape, A. M., Sargueil, F. & Cassagne, C. 

Myelin synthesis in the peripheral nervous system. Prog. 
Neurobiol. 61, 267–304 (2000).

18.   Lobsiger, C. S., Taylor, V. & Suter, U.  The early life of a 

Schwann cell. Biol. Chem. 383, 245–253 (2002).

19.   Corfas, G., Velardez, M. O., Ko, C. P., Ratner, N. & 

Peles, E.  Mechanisms and roles of axon–Schwann cell 
interactions. J. Neurosci. 24, 9250–9260 (2004).
20.   Sherman, D. & Brophy, P. Mechanisms of axon 
ensheathment and myelin growth. Nature Rev. 
Neurosci. 6, 683–690 (2005).

21.   Sherman, L., Stocker, K. M., Morrison, R. & Ciment, G. 
Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) acts intracellularly 
to cause the transdifferentiation of avian neural crest-
derived Schwann cell precursors into melanocytes. 
Development 118, 1313–1326 (1993).

22.   Hagedorn, L., Suter, U. & Sommer, L. P0 and PMP22 
mark a multipotent neural crest-derived cell type that 
displays community effects in response to TGF-β 
family factors. Development 126, 3781–3794 
(1999).

Changes in DNA synthesis rate in the Schwann cell 
lineage in vivo are correlated with the precursor–Schwann 
cell transition and myelination. Eur. J. Neurosci. 5, 
1136–1144 (1993).

27.   Woodhoo, A., Dean, C. H., Droggiti, A., Mirsky, R. & 
Jessen, K. R. The trunk neural crest and its early glial 
derivatives: a study of survival responses, developmental 
schedules and autocrine mechanisms. Mol. Cell. 
Neurosci. 25, 30–41 (2004).

28.   White, P. M. et al. Neural crest stem cells undergo cell-

intrinsic developmental changes in sensitivity to instructive 
differentiation signals. Neuron 29, 57–71 (2001).

29.   Kubu, C. J. et al. Developmental changes in Notch1 and 
numb expression mediated by local cell–cell interactions 
underlie progressively increasing delta sensitivity in 
neural crest stem cells. Dev. Biol. 244, 199–214 
(2002).
When compared directly, migratory neural crest 
cells are less gliogenic than cells isolated from 
embryonic peripheral nerves. The transition is 
correlated with a marked increase in the ratio of 
Notch to Numb (a Notch inhibitor), which indicates 
how the sensitivity to Notch might be regulated 
during peripheral glial development.

30.   Meier, C., Parmantier, E., Brennan, A., Mirsky, R. & 

Jessen, K. R. Developing Schwann cells acquire the 
ability to survive without axons by establishing an 
autocrine circuit involving IGF, NT-3 and PDGF-BB. 
J. Neurosci. 19, 3847–3859 (1999).
The authors show that Schwann cells acquire 
autocrine survival circuits that prevent cell death 
after deprivation of axonal contact, a survival 
mechanism that is crucial for axonal regrowth after 
injury.

23.   Morrison, S. J., White, P. M., Zock, C. & Anderson, D. J. 

31.   Shah, N. M., Marchionni, M. A., Isaacs, I., Stroobant, P. & 

Prospective identification, isolation by flow 
cytometry, and in vivo self-renewal of multipotent 
mammalian neural crest stem cells. Cell 96, 737–749 
(1999).
The authors show that cells isolated from 
peripheral nerves of embryonic rats self-renew, 
are multipotent in culture and on transplantation 
give rise to neurons and glia.

24.   Scherer, S. S. & Salzer, J. in Glial Cell Development 2nd 

edn (eds Jessen, K. R. & Richardson, W. D.) 299–330 
(Oxford Univ. Press, 2001).

25.   Dupin, E., Real, C., Glavieux-Pardanaud, C., Vaigot, P. & 
Le Douarin, N. M. Reversal of developmental restrictions 
in neural crest lineages: transition from Schwann cells to 
glial-melanocytic precursors in vitro. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 100, 5229–5233 (2003).
Shows that endothelin can induce Schwann cells 
derived from quail peripheral nerves to de-
differentiate and give rise to both Schwann cells 
and melanocytes.

Anderson, D. J. Glial growth factor restricts mammalian 
neural crest stem cells to a glial fate. Cell 77, 349–360 
(1994).
An early paper showing that neuregulin inhibits 
neuronal differentiation and permits glial 
differentiation in migrating neural crest cells.

32.   Shah, N. M., Groves, A. K. & Anderson, D. J. Alternative 
neural crest cell fates are instructively promoted by TGFβ 
superfamily members. Cell 85, 331–343 (1996).

33.   Morrison, S. J. et al. Transient Notch activation initiates an 

irreversible switch from neurogenesis to gliogenesis by 
neural crest stem cells. Cell 101, 499–510 (2000).
Shows that in vitro Notch inhibits neurogenesis and 
promotes gliogenesis in cells isolated from 
embryonic rat peripheral nerves.

34.   Britsch, S. et al. The transcription factor Sox10 is a key 

regulator of peripheral glial development. Genes Dev. 15, 
66–78 (2001).
Shows that SOX10 is required for the development 
of all peripheral glia.

680 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 

 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

35.   Paratore, C., Goerich, D. E., Suter, U., Wegner, M. & 

55.   Brennan, A. et al. Endothelins control the timing of 

77.   Yamauchi, J., Chan, J. R. & Shooter, E. M. 

R E V I E W S

Schwann cell generation in vitro and in vivo. Dev. Biol. 227, 
545–557 (2000).  
Shows that endothelin slows down the progression 
of SCPs to Schwann cells, both in vivo and in vitro.

Neurotrophins regulate Schwann cell migration by 
activating divergent signalling pathways dependent on 
Rho GTPases. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 
8774–8779 (2004).

56.   Murphy, P. et al. The regulation of Krox-20 expression 

78.   Fragoso, G. et al. Inhibition of p38 mitogen-activated 

protein kinase interferes with cell shape changes and gene 
expression associated with Schwann cell myelination. Exp. 
Neurol. 183, 34–46 (2003).

79.   Salzer, J. L., Williams, A. K., Glaser, L. & Bunge, R. P. 

Studies of Schwann cell proliferation. II. Characterization 
of the stimulation and specificity of the response to a 
neurite membrane fraction. J. Cell Biol. 84, 753–766 
(1980).

80.   Komiyama, A. & Suzuki, K. Age-related differences in 

proliferative responses of Schwann cells during Wallerian 
degeneration. Brain Res. 573, 267–275 (1992).

81.   Syroid, D. E. et al. Induction of postnatal Schwann cell 

death by the low-affinity neurotrophin receptor in vitro and 
after axotomy. J. Neurosci. 20, 5741–5747 (2000).

82.   Parkinson, D. B. et al. Transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) 

mediates Schwann cell death in vitro and in vivo: 
examination of c-Jun activation, interactions with survival 
signals, and the relationship of TGFβ mediated death to 
Schwann cell differentiation. J. Neurosci. 21, 8572–8585 
(2001).

83.   Parkinson, D. B. et al. Krox-20 inhibits Jun-NH2-terminal 

kinase/c-Jun to control Schwann cell proliferation and 
death. J. Cell Biol. 164, 385–394 (2004). 
Shows that KROX20 inactivates Schwann cell 
proliferation in response to NRG1 and prevents cell 
death in response to TGFβ through inhibition of the 
JNK pathway. KROX20 also induces the expression 
of myelin genes in unrelated fibroblastic cells.

84.   Parkinson, D. B., Bhaskaran, A., Mirsky, R. & Jessen, K. R. 
Regulation of the myelinating phenotype of Schwann cells 
by Krox-20. Medimond International Proceedings, VII 
European Meeting on Glial Cell Function in Health and 
Disease, Amsterdam 139–143 (2005). 

85.   Kioussi, C., Gross, M. K. & Gruss, P. Pax3: a paired 

domain gene as a regulator in PNS myelination. Neuron 
15, 553–562 (1995).

86.   Le, N. et al. Analysis of congenital hypomyelinating 

Egr2Lo/Lo nerves identifies Sox2 as an inhibitor of Schwann 
cell differentiation and myelination. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 102, 2596–2601 (2005).

87.   Fields, R. D. & Stevens, B. ATP: an extracellular signalling 

molecule between neurones and glia. Trends Neurosci. 23, 
625–633 (2000).

88.   Maurel, P. & Salzer, J. L. Axonal regulation of Schwann cell 

proliferation and survival and the initial events of 
myelination requires PI 3-kinase activity. J. Neurosci. 20, 
4635–4645 (2000).

89.   Wegner, M. Transcriptional control in myelinating glia: the 

basic recipe. Glia 29, 118–123 (2000).

90.   Wegner, M. Transcriptional control in myelinating glia: 

flavors and spices. Glia 31, 1–14 (2000).

91.   Topilko, P. & Meijer, D. in Glial Cell Development 

(eds Jessen, K. R. & Richardson, W. D.) 223–244 (Oxford 
Univ. Press, 2001).

92.   Jaegle, M. et al. The POU proteins Brn-2 and Oct-6 share 
important functions in Schwann cell development. Genes 
Dev. 17, 1380–1391 (2003).
Shows that in addition to the requirement for 
transcription factor OCT6 in controlling peripheral 
myelination, the related factor BRN2 also has a role.

93.   Atanasoski, S. et al. The protooncogene Ski controls 

Schwann cell proliferation and myelination. Neuron 43, 
499–511 (2004).

94.  Jessen, K. R. Glial cells. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 36, 

1861–1867 (2004).

95.   Falls, D. Neuregulins: functions, forms and signaling 

strategies. Exp. Cell Res. 284, 14–30 (2003).

96.   Buonanno, A. & Fischbach, G. D. Neuregulin and ErbB 

receptor signaling pathways in the nervous system. Curr. 
Opin. Neurobiol. 11, 287–296 (2001).

97.   Archelos, J. J. et al. Production and characterization of 

monoclonal antibodies to the extracellular domain of P0. 
J. Neurosci. Res. 35, 46–53 (1993).

98.   Jessen, K. R. & Mirsky, R. in Neuroglia 2nd edn 

(eds Kettenmann, H. & Ransom, B.) 85–100 (Oxford Univ. 
Press, 2005).

99.   Mirsky, R. & Jessen, K. R. in Peripheral Neuropathy 

(eds Dyck, P. J. & Thomas, P. K.) 341–376 (Elsevier, USA, 
2005).

100.  Dong, Z. et al. Schwann cell development in embryonic 

mouse nerves. J. Neurosci. Res. 56, 334–348 (1999).

101.  Leimeroth, R. et al. Membrane-bound neuregulin1 type III 

actively promotes Schwann cell differentiation of 
multipotent progenitor cells. Dev. Biol. 246, 245–258 
(2002).

Sommer, L. Survival and glial fate acquisition of neural 
crest cells are regulated by an interplay between the 
transcription factor Sox10 and extrinsic combinatorial 
signalling. Development 128, 3949–3961 (2001).

36.   Britsch, S. et al. The ErbB2 and ErbB3 receptors and their 
ligand, neuregulin-1, are essential for development of the 
sympathetic nervous system. Genes Dev. 12, 1825–1836 
(1998).
Establishes a requirement for NRG1 and its 
receptors ErbB2 and ErbB3 in the migration of 
neural crest cells to regions where sympathetic 
ganglia form.

37.   Morris, J. K. et al. Rescue of the cardiac defect in ErbB2 
mutant mice reveals essential roles of ErbB2 in peripheral 
nervous system development. Neuron 23, 273–283 (1999).
Shows that mouse nerves deficient in ErbB2 receptors 
are deficient in SCPs and show aberrant motor and 
sensory neuron fasciculation and cell death.

38.   Wolpowitz, D. et al. Cysteine-rich domain isoforms of the 

neuregulin-1 gene are required for maintenance of 
peripheral synapses. Neuron 25, 79–91 (2000).
Demonstrates that neuregulin 1 type III isoforms are 
the crucial isoforms required for survival of SCPs, for 
axon fasciculation and for motor and sensory neuron 
survival in peripheral nerves.

39.   Marchionni, M. A. et al. Glial growth factors are 

alternatively spliced ErbB2 ligands expressed in the 
nervous system. Nature 362, 312–318 (1993).

reveals important steps in the control of peripheral glial cell 
development. Development 122, 2847–2857 (1996).

57.   Maro, G. S. et al. Neural crest boundary cap cells 

constitute a source of neuronal and glial cells of the PNS. 
Nature Neurosci. 7, 930–938 (2004).
Shows that KROX20+ boundary cap cells situated at 
dorsal and ventral root entry and exit zones provide 
all the Schwann cells of the dorsal roots and most of 
those in the ventral roots, in addition to some 
nociceptive DRG neurons.

58.   Bao, J., Wolpowitz, D., Role, L. W. & Talmage, D. A. Back 

signaling by the Nrg-1 intracellular domain. J. Cell Biol. 
161, 1133–1141 (2003).

59.   Vermeren, M. et al. Integrity of developing spinal motor 

columns is regulated by neural crest derivatives at motor 
exit points. Neuron 37, 403–415 (2003).

60.   Grant, K. A., Raible, D. W. & Piotrowski, T. Regulation of 
latent sensory hair cell precursors by glia in the zebrafish 
lateral line. Neuron 45, 69–80 (2005).

61.   Lopez-Schier, H. & Hudspeth, A. J. Supernumerary 

neuromasts in the posterior lateral line of zebrafish lacking 
peripheral glia. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 1496–1501 
(2005).

40.   Loeb, J. A., Khurana, T. S., Robbins, J. T., Yee, A. G. & 

62.   Alvarez-Buylla, A. & Lim, D. A. For the long run: 

Fischbach, G. D. Expression patterns of transmembrane 
and released forms of neuregulin during spinal cord and 
neuromuscular synapse development. Development 126, 
781–791 (1999).

41.   Longart, M., Liu, Y., Karavanova, I. & Buonanno, A. 

Neuregulin-2 is developmentally regulated and targeted to 
dendrites of central neurons. J. Comp. Neurol. 472, 
156–172 (2004).

maintaining germinal niches in the adult brain. Neuron 41, 
683–686 (2004).

63.   Gotz, M. & Barde, Y.-A. Defined and major intermediates 
between embryonic stem cells and CNS neurons. Neuron 
46, 369–372 (2005).

64.   Ciment, G. The melanocyte Schwann cell progenitor: a 

bipotent intermediate in the neural crest lineage. 
Comments Dev. Neurobiol. 1, 207–223 (1990).

42.   Michailov, G. V. et al. Axonal neuregulin-1 regulates myelin 

65.   Dupin, E., Glavieux, C., Vaigot, P. & Le Douarin, N. M. 

sheath thickness. Science 304, 688–689 (2004).
The authors provide in vivo evidence of a role for 
βNRG late in development, namely in regulating 
myelin sheath thickness.

43.   Winseck, A. K. et al. In vivo analysis of Schwann cell 

programmed cell death in the embryonic chick: regulation 
by axons and glial growth factor. J. Neurosci. 22, 
4509–4521 (2002).

44.   Grinspan, J. B., Marchionni, M. A., Reeves, M., 

Coulaloglou, M. & Scherer, S. S. Axonal interactions 
regulate Schwann cell apoptosis in developing peripheral 
nerve: neuregulin receptors and the role of neuregulins. 
J. Neurosci. 16, 6107–6118 (1996).
Shows that Schwann cells in neonatal rat peripheral 
nerves are susceptible to apoptosis, which is 
increased by axotomy, and that exogenous 
neuregulin can rescue them from death.

45.   Trachtenberg, J. T. & Thompson, W. J. Schwann cell 
apoptosis at developing neuromuscular junctions is 
regulated by glial growth factor. Nature 379, 174–177 
(1996).

46.   Morrissey, T. K., Levi, A. D., Nuijens, A., Sliwkowski, M. X. 

& Bunge, R. P. Axon-induced mitogenesis of human 
Schwann cells involves heregulin and p185erbB2. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 92, 1431–1435 (1995).

47.   Lyons, D. A. et al. erbb3 and erbb2 are essential for 

Schwann cell migration and myelination in zebrafish. Curr. 
Biol. 15, 513–524 (2005).

48.   Wang, S. & Barres, B. A. Up a Notch: instructing 

gliogenesis. Neuron 27, 197–200 (2000).

49.   Wakamatsu, Y., Maynard, T. M. & Weston, J. A. Fate 

determination of neural crest cells by NOTCH-mediated 
lateral inhibition and asymmetrical cell division during 
gangliogenesis. Development 127, 2811–2821 (2000).

50.   Schmid, R. S. et al. Neuregulin 1-erbB2 signaling is 
required for the establishment of radial glia and their 
transformation into astrocytes in cerebral cortex. Proc. 
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 4251–4256 (2003).

51.   Schneider, C., Wicht, H., Enderich, J., Wegner, M. & 
Rohrer, H. Bone morphogenetic proteins are required 
in vivo for the generation of sympathetic neurons. Neuron 
24, 861–870 (1999).

52.   Dowsing, B. J. et al. Leukemia inhibitory factor is an 

autocrine survival factor for Schwann cells. J. Neurochem. 
73, 96–104 (1999).

53.   Weiner, J. A. & Chun, J. Schwann cell survival mediated by 

the signaling phospholipid lysophosphatidic acid. Proc. 
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96, 5233–5238 (1999).

54.   Stewart, H. J. S. et al. Developmental regulation and 

overexpression of the transcription factor AP-2, a potential 
regulator of the timing of Schwann cell generation. Eur. 
J. Neurosci. 14, 363–372 (2001).

Endothelin 3 induces the reversion of melanocytes to glia 
through a neural crest-derived glial-melanocytic progenitor. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 7882–7887 (2000).
Shows that avian melanocytes can alter their 
differentiation programme in response to endothelin, 
leading them to generate both melanocytes and glia.
66.   Rizvi, T. A. et al. A novel cytokine pathway suppresses glial 
cell melanogenesis after injury to adult nerve. J. Neurosci. 
22, 9831–9840 (2002).

67.   Le Douarin, N. M. & Kalcheim, C. The Neural Crest 

(Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1999).

68.   Webster, H. de F. & Favilla, J. T. in Peripheral Neuropathy 
2nd edn (eds Dyck, P. J., Thomas, P. K., Lambert, E. H. & 
Bunge, R. P.) 329 (W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1984).

69.   Xu, H., Wu, X. R., Wewer, U. M. & Engvall, E. Murine 

muscular dystrophy caused by a mutation in the laminin 
α2 (Lama2) gene. Nature Genet. 8, 297–302 (1994).

70.   Feltri, M. L. et al. Conditional disruption of β 1 integrin in 
Schwann cells impedes interactions with axons. J. Cell 
Biol. 156, 199–209 (2002).
The authors show that conditional ablation of β1 
integrin in developing Schwann cells causes severe 
defects in the process by which Schwann cells and 
axons segregate prior to myelination, although 
proliferation and cell death are unaffected.

71.   Darbas, A. et al. Cell autonomy of the mouse claw paw 

mutation. Dev. Biol. 272, 470–482 (2004).

72.   Pietri, T. et al. Conditional β1-integrin deletion in neural 

crest cells causes severe developmental alterations of the 
peripheral nervous system. Development 131, 3871–3883 
(2004).

73.   Yang, D. et al. Coordinate control of axon defasciculation 

and myelination by laminin-2 and -8. J. Cell Biol. 168, 
655–666 (2005).

74.   Yu, W.-M., Feltri, M. L., Wrabetz, L., Strickland, S. & 

Chen, Z.-L. Schwann cell-specific ablation of laminin γ1 
causes apoptosis and prevents proliferation. J. Neurosci. 
25, 4463–4472 (2005).
Shows that depletion of all laminin isoforms in 
Schwann cells results in failure to extend processes 
and defective axonal sorting prior to myelination, 
which leads to large scale arrest at the promyelinating 
stage. Furthermore, lack of laminin results in 
decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis.

75.   Cheng, H. L., Steinway, M., Delaney, C. L., Franke, T. F. & 
Feldman, E. L. IGF-I promotes Schwann cell motility and 
survival via activation of Akt. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 170, 
211–215 (2000).

76.   Meintanis, S., Thomaidou, D., Jessen, K. R., Mirsky, R. & 
Matsas, R. The neuron–glia signal β-neuregulin promotes 
Schwann cell motility via the MAPK pathway. Glia 34, 39–
51 (2001).

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE 

 VOLUME 6 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | 681

R E V I E W S

102.  Syroid, D. E. et al. Cell death in the Schwann cell lineage 

and its regulation by neuregulin. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
93, 9229–9234 (1996).

103.  Parkinson, D. B., Langner, K., Sharghi-Namini, S., 

Jessen, K. R. & Mirsky, R. β-neuregulin and autocrine 
mediated survival of Schwann cells requires activity of Ets 
family transcription factors. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 20, 
154–167 (2002).

104.  Eccleston, P. A. Regulation of Schwann cell proliferation: 
mechanisms involved in peripheral nerve development. 
Exp. Cell Res. 119, 1–9 (1992).

105.  Koenig, H. L. et al. Progesterone synthesis and myelin 
formation by Schwann cells. Science 268, 1500–1503 
(1995).

106. Stewart, H. J. S. et al. Regulation of rat Schwann cell 

P0 expression and DNA synthesis by insulin-like 
growth factors in vitro. Eur. J. Neurosci. 8, 553–564 
(1996).

107.  Chan, J. R., Cosgaya, J. M., Wu, Y. J. & Shooter, E. M. 

Neurotrophins are key mediators of the myelination 
program in the peripheral nervous system. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 98, 14661–14668 (2001).

108.  Höke, A. et al. Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor 

alters axon Schwann cell units and promotes myelination in 
unmyelinated nerve fibers. J. Neurosci. 23, 561–567 
(2003).

109.  Stevens, B., Ishibashi, T., Chen, J.-F. & Fields, R. D. 

Adenosine: an activity-dependent axonal signal regulating 
MAP kinase and proliferation in developing Schwann cells. 
Neuron Glia Biol. 1, 23–34 (2004).

110.  Einheber, S., Hannocks, M.-J., Metz, C. N., Rifkin, D. B. & 

Salzer, J. L. Transforming growth factor-β 1 regulates 
axon–Schwann cell interactions. J. Cell Biol. 129, 443–458 
(1995).

111.  Guenard, V. et al. Effect of transforming growth factor-β 1 
and -β 2 on Schwann cell proliferation on neurites. Glia 13, 
309–318 (1995).

112.  Jessen, K. R., Morgan, L., Stewart, H. J. S. & Mirsky, R. 

Three markers of adult non-myelin-forming Schwann cells, 
217c (Ran-1), A5E3 and GFAP: development and 
regulation by neuron–Schwann cell interactions. 
Development 109, 91–103 (1990).

113.  Takahashi, M. & Osumi, N. Identification of a novel type II 

classical cadherin: rat cadherin19 is expressed in the 
cranial ganglia and Schwann cell precursors during 
development. Dev. Dyn. 232, 200–208 (2005). 

114.  Bitgood, M. J. & McMahon, A. P. Hedgehog and Bmp genes 
are co-expressed at many diverse sites of cell–cell interaction 
in the mouse embryo. Dev. Biol. 172, 126–138 (1995).

115.  Parmantier, E. et al. Schwann cell-derived Desert 

Hedgehog controls the development of peripheral nerve 
sheaths. Neuron 23, 713–724 (1999).

116.  Blanchard, A. D. et al. Oct-6 (SCIP/Tst-1) is expressed in 
Schwann cell precursors, embryonic Schwann cells, and 
postnatal myelinating Schwann cells: comparison with 
Oct-1, Krox-20, and Pax-3. J. Neurosci. Res. 46, 630–640 
(1996).

117.  Griffiths, I. et al. Current concepts of PLP and its role in 
the nervous system. Microsc. Res. Tech. 41, 344–358 
(1998).

118.  Lee, M. et al. P0 is constitutively expressed in the rat neural 
crest and embryonic nerves and is negatively and positively 
regulated by axons to generate non-myelin-forming and 
myelin-forming Schwann cells, respectively. Mol. Cell. 
Neurosci. 8, 336–350 (1997).

Acknowledgements
The support of the Wellcome Trust is gratefully acknowledged. 
We thank D. Meijer and J. Cohen for comments on the manu-
script and D. Bartram for editorial assistance. We thank members 
of our laboratory and I. Wanner for allowing us to share their 
unpublished observations.

Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

 Online links

DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.
fcgi?db=gene
BMP2 | BRN2 | DHH | Egr2 | GFAP | IGF2 | LIF | NRG1 | OCT6 | 
Pax6 | PDGFB | SOX10

FURTHER INFORMATION
Jessen and Mirsky’s laboratory: http://www.homepages.ucl.
ac.uk/~ucgadjb/rk/rmkrjhome.htm
Access to this interactive links box is free online.

682 | SEPTEMBER 2005 | VOLUME 6 

 www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

