CONFERENCE REPORT

Proceedings From the 2009 Genetic Syndromes of the
Ras/MAPK Pathway: From Bedside to Bench and Back
Katherine A. Rauen,1* Lisa Schoyer,2 Frank McCormick,1 Angela E. Lin,3 Judith E. Allanson,4
David A. Stevenson,5 Karen W. Gripp,6 Giovanni Neri,7 John C. Carey,5 Eric Legius,8 Marco Tartaglia,9
Suzanne Schubbert,10 Amy E. Roberts,11 Bruce D. Gelb,12 Kevin Shannon,1 David H. Gutmann,13
Martin McMahon,1 Carmen Guerra,14 James A. Fagin,15 Benjamin Yu,16 Yoko Aoki,17 Benjamin G. Neel,18
Allan Balmain,1 Richard R. Drake,19 Garry P. Nolan,20 Martin Zenker,21 Gideon Bollag,22
Judith Sebolt-Leopold,23 Jackson B. Gibbs,24 Alcino J. Silva,10 E. Elizabeth Patton,25 David H. Viskochil,5
Mark W. Kieran,26 Bruce R. Korf,27 Randi J. Hagerman,28 Roger J. Packer,29 and Teri Melese1
1University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
2Costello Syndrome Family Network, Altadena, California
3MassGen Hospital for Children, Boston, Massachusetts
4Children’s Hospital Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Canada
5University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah
6Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware
7Universita Cattolica del S. Cuore, Rome, Italy
8Catholic University Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
9Istituto Superiore di Sanita, Rome, Italy
10University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
11Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts
12Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
13Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
14Spanish National Cancer Research Center, Madrid, Spain
15Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York
16University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California
17Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan
18Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Canada
19Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia
20Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California
21University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany
22Plexxikon, Berkeley, California
23Oncovera Therapeutics, Inc., Ann Arbor, Michigan
24AstraZeneca, Waltham, Massachusetts
25Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
26Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
27University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama
28University of California Davis, Davis, California
29Children’s National Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia

Grant sponsor: NIH; Grant numbers: HD048502, HD061140.
*Correspondence to:
Katherine A. Rauen, M.D., Ph.D., UCSF Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, 2340 Sutter Street, Room S429, Box
0808, San Francisco, CA 94115. E-mail: rauenk@peds.ucsf.edu
Published online 11 December 2009 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com)
DOI 10.1002/ajmg.a.33183

Received 24 September 2009; Accepted 17 October 2009

Ó 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

4

RAUEN ET AL.

5

The RASopathies are a group of genetic syndromes caused by
germline mutations in genes that encode components of the Ras/
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Some of
these syndromes are neuroﬁbromatosis type 1, Noonan syn-
drome, Costello syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome,
LEOPARD syndrome and Legius syndrome. Their common
underlying pathogenetic mechanism brings about signiﬁcant
overlap in phenotypic features and includes craniofacial dys-
morphology, cardiac, cutaneous, musculoskeletal, GI and ocular
abnormalities, and a predisposition to cancer. The proceedings
from the symposium ‘‘Genetic Syndromes of the Ras/MAPK
Pathway: From Bedside to Bench and Back’’ chronicle the timely
and typical research symposium which brought together clini-
cians, basic scientists, physician-scientists, advocate leaders,
trainees, students and individuals with Ras syndromes and their
families. The goals, to discuss basic science and clinical issues, to
set forth a solid framework for future research, to direct transla-
tional applications towards therapy and to set forth best practices
for individuals with RASopathies were successfully meet with a
commitment to begin to move towards clinical trials.
Ó 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Key words: cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome; clinical
trial;
Costello syndrome; neuroﬁbromatosis type 1; Noonan syndrome;
Legius
transduction pathway;
RASopathy; therapy

syndrome; Ras/MAPK;

signal

INTRODUCTION

The symposium ‘‘Genetic Syndromes of the Ras/MAPK Pathway:
From Bedside to Bench and Back’’ was held on August 1–2, 2009 in
Berkeley, CA at the Doubletree Hotel & Executive Meeting Center at
the Berkeley Marina. The topic of this timely symposium was the
‘‘RASopathies,’’ a class of developmental disorders caused by
dysregulation of
the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway [Tidyman and Rauen, 2009]. The main focus
of this conference was on ﬁve syndromes associated with the
pathway: Noonan syndrome (NS), Costello syndrome (CS),
cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC), neuroﬁbromatosis type 1
(NF1), and Legius syndrome which share phenotypic features
including distinctive craniofacial features, cardiovascular anoma-
lies, musculoskeletal and cutaneous abnormalities, neurocognitive
delay and, in some syndromes, cancer. This unprecedented NIH-
sponsored symposium (http://cancer.ucsf.edu/raspathway2009/
index.php) was held in conjunction with family conferences spon-
sored by the Noonan Syndrome Support Group (NSSG), the
Costello Syndrome Family Network (CSFN) and the International
Costello Syndrome Support Group (ICSSG), CFC International
and two neuroﬁbromatosis support groups, NF Inc. California and
the Children’s Tumor Foundation (CTF). This symposium brought
together clinicians, basic scientists, physician-scientists, advocate
leaders, trainees, students and individuals with Ras/MAPK syn-
dromes and their families. Nearly 200 registrants participated. The
symposium was supported by an R13 grant (HD061140) obtained
through the National Institutes of Heath with contributing

How to Cite this Article:
Rauen KA, Schoyer L, McCormick F, Lin AE,
Allanson JE, Stevenson DA, Gripp KW, Neri
G, Carey JC, Legius E, Tartaglia M, Schubbert
S, Roberts AE, Gelb BD, Shannon K,
Gutmann DH, McMahon M, Guerra C, Fagin
JA, Yu B, Aoki Y, Neel BG, Balmain A, Drake
RR, Nolan GP, Zenker M, Bollag G, Sebolt-
Leopold J, Gibbs JB, Silva AJ, Patton EE,
Viskochil DH, Kieran MW, Korf BR,
Hagerman RJ, Packer RJ, Melese T. 2010.
Proceedings from the 2009 genetic syndromes
of the Ras/MAPK pathway: From bedside to
bench and back.

Am J Med Genet Part A 152A:4–24.

institutes including the National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, the National Cancer Institute and the
Ofﬁce of Rare Diseases Research. Additional educational funds
were provided by Novo Nordisk, UC Discovery, UCSF Clinical
Translational Science Institute, the UCSF Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, the UCSF Children’s Hospital,
Schering-Plough and GeneDx. The symposium achieved its goal
to provide an open forum for researchers, clinicians and physician-
scientists to share and discuss basic science and clinical issues setting
forth a solid framework for future research, translational applica-
tions directed towards therapy and best practices for individuals
with RASopathies. The purposes of these proceedings are to provide
the clinical and scientiﬁc communities with an executive summary
of the research symposium and to publish the abstracts from the
platform presentations and poster session.

SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS

This inaugural research symposium began with two special keynote
addresses. ‘‘The Road Less Traveled: Our Journey on the Ras/
MAPK Pathway’’ was a composite video presentation created
by parent advocates from the NSSG, the ICSSG/CSFN, NF Inc.
California and CFC International. The presentation provided
perspectives of families with Ras syndromes, sharing the concerns
and issues associated with activities of daily living. The video
presentation also expressed the cautious optimism of the potential
within each individual affected by a Ras/MAPK pathway mutation.
The second keynote address ‘‘New Perspectives on an Ancient
Pathway,’’ by Frank McCormick, provided historical and scientiﬁc
perspectives of Ras and the Ras pathway focusing on the trials and
tribulations of cancer therapeutic development.

Session I, ‘‘The Clinical Consequences of Molecular Alterations,’’
led by Angela Lin, reviewed the phenotypic features of NS, NF1,
CFC, CS, and Legius syndrome. Each speaker reviewed the molec-
ular alterations, and the cardinal features which are frequently
overlapping. These features included variable neurocognitive im-
pairment, skin and cardiac anomalies, and often, a characteristic
facial appearance. The ﬁnal presentation highlighted the extensive

6

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

phenotypic overlap of the RASopathies and the challenges in
naming syndromes, in general. An axis-based innovative approach
to future classiﬁcation was recommended.

Session II ‘‘Biochemical Properties and Function of Altered
Proteins: Perturbation of the Pathway,’’ led by Eric Legius, dis-
cussed the functional consequences of the mutations in the different
genes of the pathway observed in patients. Hereditary mutations of
genes coding for proteins that are components of the Ras/MAPK
pathway can activate the pathway by different mechanisms of
pathway activation: (1) inactivating mutations in negative regu-
lators of the pathway such as neuroﬁbromin (NF1) or SPRED1
(Legius syndrome) and (2) activating mutations as seen in CS, NS,
LEOPARD, and CFC. The mutations observed in these genes are
usually missense resulting in protein activation with subsequent
hyperactivation of the pathway. Some mutations do not result in a
functional activation of the resulting protein ‘‘in vitro,’’ but never-
theless are found in patients with the same, or similar clinical
features as patients with typical kinase activating mutations.

Session III entitled ‘‘Pre-Clinical Modeling of Ras/MAPK Path-
way Syndromes,’’ which was moderated by Bruce Gelb, focused on
translational research with genetically engineered animal models.
The session began with a presentation on the current preclinical
trials consortium using mouse models of Nf1 to assess novel
therapeutic agents as a potential model for developing therapies
for other inherited Ras pathway disorders. Several of the presenta-
tions described advances in understanding the pathogenesis of
disease for Ras/MAPK pathway defects, primarily by expressing
germline or somatic gain-of-function mutant proteins in a tissue-
speciﬁc manner.

Session IV, ‘‘Application of New Technologies’’ moderated by
Yoko Aoki discussed new technologies which could be considered
to advance the knowledge of the RASopathies. The discussion
included (1) the application of novel network approaches including
expression Quantitative Trait Locus (eQTL) to identify signaling
hubs that may be important targets for drug development or gene
interaction, (2) the application of clinical proteomics for analysis
and characterization of proteins and peptides present in body
ﬂuids, cells or tissues, and (3) novel phospho-signaling networks
and stochastic modeling of phenotypic markers.

Session V entitled ‘‘Potential Therapeutic Options: Modulating
the Pathway’’ was lead by Martin Zenker. The Ras pathway has been
highly studied in the context of cancer with many inhibitors in
development, or in clinical trials; some are FDA approved. The basic
mechanism of action of FTIs, as well as Raf and MEK inhibitors were
discussed along with the possibility of ‘‘re-purposing’’ such inhib-
itors to treat individuals with RASopathies long term. Current
efforts in the development of Ras pathway inhibitors as anticancer
drugs are focusing on the improvement of selectivity as well as on
strategies to avoid possible paradoxical effects that may be related to
feedback loops within the Ras pathway. In vivo application of
inhibitors was presented for NF1, NS, and CFC models.

Session VI, ‘‘Moving Forward: Treating Genetic Syndromes’’
was moderated by David Viskochil and explored treatment for
genetic syndromes. At present, a clinical trial for Hutchinson-
Gilford progeria using a FTI is underway. Discussion of this clinical
trial provided a framework for the development and implementa-
tion of clinical trials for children with extremely rare genetic

conditions. Key issues included the development of a uniﬁed
clinical database for all affected individuals before the actual trial,
and from that information the mindful selection of outcome
measures. NF1 was discussed as a model for the development and
organization of a multi-center clinical trials consortium. The
treatment of plexiform neuroﬁbroma progression with an mTOR
inhibitor was presented, and included discussion on the selection of
endpoints and recognition of windows of opportunity for effective
treatment. Fragile X syndrome is another rare genetic disorder
undergoing clinical trials. An mGluR5 antagonist, fenobam, is used
for behavior as measured by prepulse inhibition and minocycline is
used for language and attention therapy in fragile X individuals. The
importance of selecting measurable endpoints of treatment was
emphasized.

The Wrap-Up Session closing the symposium was moderated by
Roger Packer and Teri Melese. The conduction of clinical trials
within consortia, and the critical issue of collaborations between
academic centers, biotechnology companies and pharmaceutical
companies were discussed. The federal initiative through the Ofﬁce
of Rare Diseases Research (ORDR) for Therapeutics for Rare and
Neglected Diseases (TRND) was reviewed in the context of devel-
oping a Clinical Trials Consortium to develop rational protocols
and implement trials for the Ras Pathway disorders. The sympo-
sium ended with a commitment from participants to organize
further formal discussions on treatment.

SPEAKERS’ ABSTRACTS
New Perspectives on an Ancient Pathway
Frank McCormick. The Ras/MAPK pathway is one of the best-
trodden in cancer biology. The discovery that Ras genes are mutated
in human cancer dates back almost 30 years, while the relationship
between Ras, Raf, Mek, and Erk was established some 10 years later,
at the same time that the NF1 gene was identiﬁed and characterized.
These early discoveries prompted attempts to identify drugs that
would block the pathway and be effective in treating cancers and
NF1, and led to the development of small molecules that inhibit Raf
kinase or Mek kinase, amongst other targets in the pathway. More
recently, the role of the PI 30 kinase pathway in Ras signaling has
been better appreciated, prompting drug discovery in this pathway,
and the role of this pathway in other diseases, such as CS, NS, CFC,
and others (The RASopathies) has been appreciated. The Ras
pathway, generally deﬁned, is highly regulated. Indeed the con-
sequences of mis-regulation are strikingly clear from the pheno-
types associated with cancer and RASopathies. Attempts to block
these pathways with drugs have often led to failure, due to back-up
systems and feedback loops. Blockade of Ras by FTIs was thwarted
by geranylgeranyl transferase activity that restored Ras activity
following de-farnesylation. Feedback loops regulate signal trans-
mission from Ras at multiple levels. ERK phosphorylates receptor
tyrosine kinases, Sos, and Raf kinases, for example. In tumor cells
harboring activated alleles of Ras or B-Raf, these feedback loops are
expected to hyperactivated also. Conversely, when kinases in this
pathway are blocked by pharmacologic agents, loss of feedback is
likely to hyper-activate upstream elements, with important con-
sequences for therapy. Sorafenib, a drug approved for treatment of

RAUEN ET AL.

7

advanced hepatocellular carcinoma is more effective on tumors
with high levels of activated phospho-ERK, consistent with its
ability to inhibit Raf kinase activity. While these tumors do not
contain mutations in RAS or RAF genes, high levels of Raf kinase
signaling have been reported, through loss of function of Sprouty/
SPRED proteins. On the other hand, Sorafenib failed to show
clinical activity in melanomas expressing V600E BRAF, possibly
because of altered feedback loops in these cells. Likewise, MEK
inhibitors that appeared potent and effective in preclinical models
have failed, so far, in the clinic, possibly because of unrecognized
feedback loops and back-up systems that diminish their effects in
vivo. We recently described a novel feedback loop involving ephrin
signaling. Engagement of the EphA2 receptor by ephrins presented
on neighboring cells results in negative regulation of the Ras/MAPK
pathway by a novel mechanism. New data relating to the role of
GAPs in this process will be discussed, including biochemical
analysis of the neuroﬁbromin and Sprouty/SPRED protein. Analy-
sis of these complex and dynamic properties of the ancient, well-
trodden pathway has led to new insights into how signals are
transmitted, regulated and terminated, and new ways of predicting
effects of blocking individual elements of the pathway. Analysis of
cancer cells and RASopathies has played an important role in
understanding these processes at the molecular level, and, hope-
fully, will lead to better ways of developing effective and safe
therapies.

Clinical Features of Noonan Syndrome
Judith Allanson. NS is a common autosomal dominant multiple
congenital anomaly syndrome ﬁrst described over 40 years ago. The
incidence is reported to be between 1 in 1,000 and 1 in 2,500,
although mild expression may be more common. The cardinal
features of NS are well delineated. They include short stature,
congenital heart defects (particularly pulmonary valve dysplasia)
and/or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, broad or webbed neck, chest
deformity with pectus carinatum superiorly and pectus excavatum
inferiorly, developmental delay of variable degree, cryptorchidism,
coagulation defects and lymphatic dysplasias. The facial appearance
of NS is well established and shows considerable change with age,
being most striking in the newborn period and middle childhood
and most subtle in the adult. Many adults have features that differ
little from those in the general population. Other adults are
recognizable because of classical facial features, which include
ptosis and wide-spaced eyes, low set, posteriorly rotated ears with
a ﬂeshy helix, inverted triangular face which is broad at the temples
and tapers to a small chin, and long and broad or webbed neck.

Neuroﬁbromatosis Type 1 and Legius Syndrome
David A. Stevenson. NF1: NF1 is an autosomal dominant condition
due to mutations in the NF1 gene, which encodes neuroﬁbromin, a
negative regulator of Ras signaling. Variable expressivity is com-
mon even within families and the manifestations are age-depen-
dent. In the 1980s a group of experts decided on clinical diagnostic
criteria for NF1 and includes the presence of two of the following:
(1) six or more cafe au lait macules over 5 mm in it greatest diameter
in prepubertal individuals and over 15 mm in its greatest diameter

in postpubertal individuals; (2) two or more neuroﬁbromas of any
type or one plexiform neuroﬁbroma; (3) freckling in the axillary or
inguinal regions; 4) two or more Lisch nodules (iris hamartomas);
(5) optic glioma; (6) a distinctive osseous lesion such as sphenoid
dysplasia or thinning of long bone cortex, with or without pseu-
darthrosis; (7) ﬁrst-degree relative (parent, sibling, or offspring)
with NF-1 by the above criteria. The clinical diagnostic criteria have
historically been useful for the clinician for diagnostic purposes
although other manifestations are not included in the diagnostic
criteria (e.g., macrocephaly, malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors, learning disorders). A small subset of individuals fulﬁlls
the NF1 clinical diagnostic criteria with cafe au lait macules and
freckling in the axillary or inguinal regions without the develop-
ment of neuroﬁbromas or Lisch nodules. A cohort of individuals
with a documented 3-bp in-frame deletion in exon 17 (c.2970_2972
delAAT) provides what appears to be a unique NF1 genotype–
phenotype relation. Legius syndrome: Recently, individuals with
pigmentary ﬁndings fulﬁlling NF1 clinical diagnostic criteria (but
without tumor development) did not have an identiﬁable NF1
mutation, but instead harbored mutations in the SPRED1 gene.
SPRED1 negatively regulates the Ras/MAPK signaling pathway at
the Ras–Raf interface. Other clinical features reported in this cohort
included macrocephaly, ‘‘Noonan-like face,’’ lipomas, and learning
problems. Conclusion: The currently utilized diagnostic criteria for
NF1 may be insufﬁcient to differentiate NF1 from Legius syndrome.
Mutation analysis of NF1 and SPRED1 can help delineate these
overlapping syndromes and potentially change clinical manage-
ment schemes, although more information on the clinical pheno-
type of Legius syndrome will be required to sort out differences in
anticipatory guidance and screening regimens from NF1. Future
studies to assess cost-effectiveness of mutation analysis will be
needed. The clinical overlap between Legius syndrome and NF1
makes inclusion of individuals in NF1 clinical research protocols
based solely on NIH diagnostic criteria problematic.

Costello Syndrome
Karen W. Gripp. CS is one of several Ras/MAPK pathway disorders,
collectively referred to as ‘‘RASopathies.’’ While RASopathies share
many phenotypic features, and the clinical differential diagnosis can
be particularly challenging in young patients, CS has a distinctive
phenotype. The pregnancy of a fetus with CS is typically compli-
cated by polyhydramnios (92%) and macrocephaly (50%), and
delivery is preterm (50%) to parents with advanced paternal age
(62%), while fetal tachyarrhythmia is less common. Postnatally,
severe feeding difﬁculties and failure to thrive typically necessitate
feeding tube placement. Weight and height remain below normal,
whereas the head circumference is within the normal range, result-
ing in relative macrocephaly. Hypotonia and developmental delay
are noted from infancy, and standardized cognitive testing in older
individuals shows the mean full scale IQ to be in the range of mild
mental retardation (56–69), with particular weakness in expressive
language. Facial features coarsen over time and include a wide
mouth with prominent lips, and wart-like lesions termed papillo-
mata may occur. Deep palmar and plantar creases, with redundant
soft tissue and loose small joints are typical. Ulnar deviation of the
wrists and ﬁngers is characteristic for CS. Almost all individuals

8

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

develop tight Achilles tendons necessitating surgical release. Pro-
gressive kyphoscoliosis and osteopenia may affect teenagers and
young adults. Growth hormone deﬁciency is common, and puber-
tal development is often dysregulated. Cardiac involvement is noted
in about 3/4, including cardiac hypertrophy (41%), congenital
heart defect (21%), and supraventricular tachycardia (33%). CS
is a tumor predisposition syndrome with a 15% lifetime risk for a
malignancy, with rhabdomyosarcoma being the most common
(60%), followed by neuroblastoma, and bladder cancer. Rhabdo-
myosarcoma and neuroblastoma are childhood cancers and occur
in the typical age range in CS. In contrast, bladder cancer is typically
a malignancy of older adults, but may occur as early as the second
decade of life in individuals affected by CS. Germline mutations in
the HRAS gene are the only genetic cause of CS. HRAS is an
oncogene and aberrant activation of its gene product due to
missense mutations is seen in sporadic tumors. Similarly, increased
activation of the abnormal gene product occurs due to the germline
mutations in CS. While the vast majority of CS causing HRAS
mutations occurs in the paternal germline, exceptions include two
maternally derived germline mutations, one instance of somatic
mosaicism resulting in an atypical presentation of CS, and one
transmission from a parent with somatic mosaicism to a son with
CS. A review of 139 individuals shows p.G12S to be the most
common (113/139, or 81%), followed by p.G12A, seen in 7%. Other
mutations were seen in fewer than four individuals each. The
common mutations result in the typical phenotype, whereas the
presentation of presumably more strongly activating mutations
(p.G12V) appears to be more severe, and other changes (p.T58I)
may be associated with a milder phenotype. Delineation of the full
phenotypic spectrum associated with germline HRAS mutations is
ongoing and may provide a baseline for future drug therapies
directed at the hyperactive Ras/MAPK signaling pathway.

Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous Syndrome
Giovanni Neri. CFC is an autosomal dominant, multiple congeni-
tal anomalies/mental retardation (MCA/MR) syndrome, charac-
terized by typical facies, ectodermal and cardiac involvement, and
developmental delay. The main manifestations are relative macro-
cephaly, a broad forehead, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, a short
nose with depressed root and bulbous tip, sparse and curly hair,
sparse/absent eyebrows, cutaneous hyperkeratosis and hemangio-
mas, congenital heart defects (mainly pulmonic stenosis and hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy), failure to thrive (at least in part due to
severe feeding difﬁculties), epilepsy, and mental retardation. The
publication of the initial cases and of a number of subsequent
reports sparked a lively controversy over whether or not CFCS was
distinguishable from the NS. Although a number of phenotypic
manifestations do in fact overlap, others, such as neurocognitive
delay and major ectodermal involvement, are more typical, if not
exclusive, of CFCS. The controversy came to an end when genes
responsible for the now called neuro-cardio-facio-cutaneous
syndromes (NCFCS) were ﬁnally discovered. This family of
syndromes, also including the CS, was found to be genetically
heterogeneous, with several genes involved, encoding proteins
acting in the Ras/MAPK pathway that regulates cell proliferation,
differentiation, and death. The genes causing the majority of cases

of CFCS are BRAF, MEK1, MEK2, and KRAS. These recent ﬁndings
explain the phenotypic similarities and differences observed
among the various forms of NCFCS, allow for more accurate
genotype–phenotype
a detailed
knowledge of the molecular mechanisms at the basis of these
conditions, opening the way to possible pharmacologic treatments.

and provide

correlations,

Phenotypic Overlap and Molecular Advances: What
to Call a Syndrome in the Modern Era
John C. Carey. The recent advances in the identiﬁcation of genes
causing human congenital malformations and their syndromes
have had a remarkable effect on our thinking about the deﬁnition
and delineation of these entities. In many circumstances, we have
discovered that a single gene is the molecular and causal basis for
several previously recognized discrete syndrome phenotypes (e.g.,
COL2 is the causative gene for classical Stickler syndrome, hypo-
chondrogenesis, Kniest dysplasia, etc.), while a single well-known
syndrome (e.g., Bardet–Biedel syndrome) can be due to 13 genes on
different chromosomes. These advances have led clinical geneticists
to wonder how we should refer to a condition, that is, by its
traditional phenotypic name or according to its molecular basis.
There are many examples of this scenario: The overlap of pheno-
typic signs among Stickler syndrome, Marshall syndrome, and the
OSMED disorders leading to the type 1, type 2, type 3 Stickler
classiﬁcation; the ‘‘continuum’’ of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome
from a lethal phenotype (sometimes referred to as type 2 SLO) to a
phenotype with only minor anomalies and developmental delays;
and, of course, the phenotypic overlap among the community of
Ras pathway conditions (CFC, CS, NS, NF1, NFNS, and Legius).
Two recent papers have attempted to make sense of this apparent
dilemma: (1) The Invited Editorial by Hennekam [2007] in AJMG
led to his Patient Central proposal; (2) Robin and Biesecker [2001]
proposed an axis system similar to what is used in the ﬁeld of
psychiatry. The speaker will address these themes in this presenta-
tion. The discussion will include the history of the concept of a
syndrome, highlighting the international workshops in the 1980s,
the axis system, and the provision of several examples illustrating
the above concepts. The speaker recommends: (1) International
consensus leading to publication of well-deﬁned diagnostic criteria
for the phenotypes of these syndromes; (2) Wider application of the
axis system proposed by Robin and Biesecker; (3) Inclusion of the
concepts of locus and allelic heterogeneity in clinical contexts.

Biochemistry and Function of Neuroﬁbromin
and SPRED1
Eric Legius. Neuroﬁbromin is the ﬁrst protein of the Ras/MAPK
pathway that was identiﬁed to be mutated in a human heritable
disorder. NF1 is caused by heterozygous mutations in the NF1 gene
localized at chromosome band 17q11.2 and coding for neuro-
ﬁbromin. NF1 is characterized by multiple cafe-au-lait spots,
neuroﬁbromas, Lisch nodules, learning difﬁculties and an increased
risk of brain tumors and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Neuroﬁbromin contains a central region with a GTPase activating
protein (GAP) activity. The GAP-related domain of neuroﬁbromin

RAUEN ET AL.

9

(NF1GRD) stimulates the intrinsic GTPase function of the RAS
proteins. Guanine exchange factors such as SOS1 will promote the
activation of RAS proteins by stimulation of the transition of RAS
bound to GDP (RAS-GDP) to RAS bound to GTP (RAS-GTP).
Activated RAS (RAS-GTP) can stimulate the MAPK pathway by
activating the RAF protein kinases. RAS-GTP can also activate the
PI3-kinase pathway, the RAL-GDS pathway and PLCe. RAS-GTP is
inactivated by GAP-proteins such as neuroﬁbromin and p120-
GAP, the protein coded by RASA1. Heterozygous mutations in
RASA1 cause the capillary malformation—arteriovenous malfor-
mation syndrome. Both NF1 and RASA1 are tumor suppressor
genes. In NF1-associated tumors, the normal allele of the NF1 gene
is inactivated and the complete absence of neuroﬁbromin in tumor
cells results in activation of the RAS proteins. The RAS proteins
remain in the GTP-bound state for a much longer period of time
and this results in hyperactivation of their downstream targets. NF1
mutations identiﬁed in individuals with NF1 are therefore inacti-
vating mutations, also the mutations observed in the normal NF1
allele in NF1-associated tumor cells are inactivating mutations. A
heterozygous mutation in the NF1 gene is responsible for the
hyperactivation of the Ras/MAPK pathway in the neurons of the
brain and this results in neurocognitive abnormalities. This has
been studied extensively in the mouse and Drosophila models of
Nf1. Neuroﬁbromin deﬁciency in Drosophila results in a size defect
that can be rescued by activation of the cAMP pathway. The size
defect in Drosophila is also rescued by restoring the NF1GRD in
Drosophila Ras2 neurons (Ras2 is the Drosophila ortholog of
mammalian R-Ras). SPRED1 is a member of the SPROUTY/
SPRED family of proteins which are negative regulators of Ras–Raf
interaction and mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal-
ing. We reported a NF1-like syndrome (Legius syndrome)
in patients with a heterozygous inactivating mutation in the
SPRED1 gene. A biallelic mutation in SPRED1 was demonstrated
in a cafe-au-lait spot derived from melanocytes from a person
with Legius syndrome. Legius syndrome is characterized by
the same cafe-au-lait spots and freckling as in NF1 but no typical
NF1-associated tumors are seen in Legius
syndrome. The
inactivating mutations in SPRED1 result in an overactivation of
the RAF kinases by activated RAS due to a reduction of the
inhibitory effects of SPRED1 on the Ras–Raf interaction. It has
been shown that Ras-GTP recruits Raf to the cell membrane and
that the Ras–Raf interaction is associated with a phosphatase
holoenzyme comprised of Shoc2/Sur8 and the catalytic subunit of
PP1. It is believed that dephosphorylation of the S259 inhibitory site
of Raf proteins by the Shoc2/Sur8-PP1c holoenzyme is necessary for
Raf activation.

Biochemical and Functional Properties of SHP2
Marco Tartaglia. SHP2 is a cytoplasmic Src-homology 2 (SH2)
domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase, functioning as a
signal transducer downstream of growth factor and cytokine re-
ceptors. SHP2 positively controls signal ﬂow through RAS, and is
required during development. Germline missense mutations in
PTPN11, the gene coding SHP2, have been discovered as major
molecular events underlying the clinically related NS and LEOP-
ARD syndrome, two developmental disorders with overlapping

pleiomorphic phenotypes. A distinct class of missense mutations in
the same gene has been identiﬁed as the most frequent somatic event
in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, and occur with variable
prevalence in childhood and adult hematologic malignancies
and solid tumors. Available records based on more than 800
germline and somatic defects indicate that NS-causing and
leukemia-associated PTPN11 mutations are almost always mis-
sense changes, and are not randomly distributed throughout the
gene. Biochemical and functional characterization of disease-asso-
ciated mutations support the view that they can perturb SHP2
function by multiple mechanisms. Most lesions affect residues
involved in the N-SH2/PTP interdomain binding network that
stabilizes SHP2 in its catalytically inactive conformation or are in
close spatial proximity to them. These mutations up-regulate SHP2
function by impairing the switch between the active and inactive
conformation, favoring a shift in the equilibrium toward the latter,
without altering SHP2’s catalytic capability. A number of muta-
tions, however, affect residues contributing to the stability of
the catalytically inactive conformation but also participating in
catalysis or controlling substrate speciﬁcity. For some of these
defects, the individual substitution does not markedly perturb
substrate afﬁnity and/or catalysis, but rather protein activation
by N-SH2 dissociation prevails. A few missense mutations affect
residues located in the phosphopeptide binding cleft of each SH2
domain. Experimental evidence supports the idea that these amino
acid substitutions promote SHP2 gain of function by increasing the
binding afﬁnity or altering the binding speciﬁcity of the protein for
the phosphorylated signaling partners. LEOPARD syndrome-caus-
ing PTPN11 mutations constitute a functionally distinct mutation
group. While an impaired catalytic activity has been established as
biochemical behavior shared by these SHP2 mutants, they do not
appear to perturb intracellular signaling by a merely dominant
negative effect, as supposed in the past.

Biochemical and Functional Characterization
of Germline RAS mutations Associated With
Ras/MAPK Pathway Syndromes
Suzanne Schubbert. Germline missense mutations in HRAS and
KRAS and in genes encoding molecules that function up or
downstream of Ras in cellular signaling networks cause a group
of related developmental disorders that includes CS, NS, and CFC.
Biochemical and functional studies show that syndrome-associated
mutant Ras proteins demonstrate various abnormal biochemical
properties and a range of gain-of-function effects in different cell
types. Ras proteins are signal switch molecules that regulate cell
fates by coupling receptor activation to downstream effector path-
ways to control diverse cellular processes including proliferation,
differentiation, and survival. Ras proteins cycle between active
guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-bound and inactive guanosine di-
phosphate (GDP)-bound conformations (Ras-GTP and Ras-GDP).
The competing activities of guanosine nucleotide exchange factors
(GNEFs) and GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) regulate Ras-GTP
levels. Activated growth factor receptors recruit signal relay pro-
teins that stimulate GNEFs, which displace guanine nucleotides
from Ras and permit passive binding to GTP. Ras-GTP interacts

10

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

productively with Raf-1, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, Ral-GDS,
and other effectors. The intrinsic Ras GTPase terminates signaling
by hydrolyzing Ras-GTP to Ras-GDP. This slow ‘‘off’’ reaction is
greatly augmented by GAPs. Somatic missense RAS mutations that
introduce amino acid substitutions at positions 12, 13, and 61 are
frequently found in human cancers. Germline KRAS mutations that
encode novel amino acid substitutions not found in cancer have
been discovered in 2–4% of individuals with NS as well as in some
persons with CFC. Studies show that syndrome-associated K-Ras
proteins have distinct biochemical properties and are gain-of-
function mutants that are less activated than oncogenic Ras pro-
teins. Recombinant V14I and T58I K-Ras proteins display defective
intrinsic GTP hydrolysis and impaired responsiveness to GAPs.
P34R and D153V K-Ras show normal levels of intrinsic GTP
hydrolysis, however F156L K-Ras is highly impaired. P34R K-Ras
is insensitive to GAPs, and F156L K-Ras shows a weak response.
Interestingly, F156L K-Ras displays a markedly increased rate of
GTP and GDP dissociation, which is similar to an H-Ras mutant
with a substitution found in CS (K117R). In addition, COS-7
monkey kidney cells expressing V14I, P34R, and F156L K-Ras show
elevated levels of Ras-GTP that correlate with levels of phospho-
MEK and phospho-ERK. V14I, T58I, P34R, D153V, and F156L K-
Ras render primary myeloid and erythroid hematopoietic progen-
itors hypersensitive to growth factors, although at varied potency.
The T58I substitution was identiﬁed in an infant with both NS and
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, and interestingly primary mac-
rophage progenitor cells expressing T58I K-Ras show markedly
increased levels of Ras-GTP, phospho-MEK, and phospho-AKT.
In summary, biochemical and functional studies of syndrome-
associated Ras proteins supports the idea that the intrinsic Ras
GTPase activity, the responsiveness of these proteins to GAPs, and
guanine nucleotide dissociation all regulate developmental pro-
grams in vivo. Full author list: Suzanne Schubbert, Gideon Bollag,
Christian P. Kratz, Martin Zenker, Charlotte M. Niemeyer, Ellen
Daneyer, Eric Legius, Anders Molven, and Kevin Shannon.

Gain and Loss of Function Mutants Affecting
the Ras/MAPK Pathway Can Cause Noonan
Syndrome: SOS1 and RAF1
Amy E. Roberts. All of the genes that are implicated in NS encode
proteins that are components of the Ras/mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) signal transduction pathway. After mutations in
PTPN11 were identiﬁed in 50% of cases of NS, a ﬂurry of studies to
identify other NS genes ensued. Using a candidate gene approach, it
was shown that mutations in SOS1 and RAF1 cause 10%, and
3–17% of cases of NS, respectively. To date, no features have been
found to exclusively correlate with a particular genotype though
there are some genotype phenotype trends. Mutations in the genes
implicated in NS typically activate the pathway, although often to a
lesser extent than observed by somatic changes. However, excep-
tions to the gain-of-function mechanism of disease pathogenesis
have been described. The effect of SOS1 and RAF1 mutations on the
pathway and RAS and ERK activation will be discussed and the
evidence that loss or gain of function mutants can act as a mecha-
nism of NS clinical features will be reviewed.

Biochemical and Functional Characterization of
BRAF and MEK in CFC Syndrome
Katherine A. Rauen. CFC is a rare multiple congenital anomaly
disorder in which individuals have characteristic dysmorphic cra-
niofacial features, cardiac defects, ectodermal anomalies, develop-
mental delay and hypotonia. CFC is caused by alteration of activity
through the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway
due to heterozygous germline mutations in protein kinases BRAF,
MEK1, or MEK2. Mutations in KRAS, a small GTPase, have also
been implicated as causing both CFC and NS; however, its role has
yet to be well deﬁned. The majority of germline mutations that
cause CFC occur in BRAF. Unlike the mutation spectrum seen in
cancer, the BRAF mutations in CFC individuals are more widely
distributed affecting exon 6 and exons 11–16. The most common
BRAF mutations occur in exon 6 and result in the missense
substitution Q257R, in exon 12 at amino acid position E501 and
in exon 11 consisting of the missense substitution G469E. Func-
tional in vitro studies of these novel CFC mutant proteins demon-
strate that BRAF may be kinase activated or kinase impaired.
Missense mutations in MEK1 and MEK2, which encode down-
stream effectors of BRAF, also cause CFC syndrome. MEK1 and
MEK2 are threonine/tyrosine kinases with both isoforms having the
ability to activate ERK1 and ERK2. MEK1 and MEK2 mutations
comprise 25% of mutations in CFC individuals in which a gene
mutation has been identiﬁed. Mutations in MEK1 and MEK2 are
seen in roughly equal frequency. The vast majority are missense
substitutions located in exons 2 and 3. Rare in-frame deletions have
also been identiﬁed. Functional studies of the proteins encoded by
the novel CFC MEK1/2 mutations have shown that all of the CFC
mutant proteins studied are more active than wild-type MEK in
stimulating ERK phosphorylation.

Preclinical Testing in Genetically Engineered
Mouse Models
Kevin Shannon. Translating our molecular genetic understanding
of human disease into new treatments has proven challenging. This
is due, in part, to the fact that therapeutics is ultimately a biochemi-
cal problem that involves many issues that academic investigators
are unfamiliar with such as developing and modifying small
molecules; drug solubility, pharmacokinetics, and off-target effects;
and realistically assessing the risks of a new treatment to patients
versus the potential beneﬁts. Treating human developmental dis-
orders is further complicated by the young age of the patients who
are most likely to beneﬁt and by difﬁculties in deﬁning objective
endpoint for assessing clinical efﬁcacy. The discovery that NF1 is
caused by mutations in a gene that negatively regulates Ras-GTP
levels established hyperactive Ras signaling as the cause of a human
developmental disorder. It took over a decade to realize that NF1
was the ‘‘tip of the iceberg,’’ and germline mutations in PTPN11,
SOS, HRAS, KRAS, BRAF, and MEK1 are now known to underlie a
constellation of disorders that share some common features. To-
gether, these genetic data infer that developmental programs are
tightly regulated by activation of the canonical Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK
pathway. The high incidence of somatic RAS gene mutations and
inherent difﬁculties in directly reversing the adverse biochemical

RAUEN ET AL.

11

properties of these mutant proteins has stimulated intense interest
in developing anti-cancer agents that inhibit downstream kinases
including Raf and MEK. While some of these drugs may also prove
useful for treating developmental disorders, it is important to
recognize that the goals of cancer therapy (killing cells with a
speciﬁc somatic mutation) are fundamentally different from the
goals of treating the complications of a developmental disorder
(long term modulation of biochemical activity in dynamic pop-
ulations of normal cells). Genetically engineered mouse models of
human disease are providing mechanistic insights into disease
causation and are also being harnessed to test rational new treat-
ments for cancer and other disorders. An effort that is of interest is
the Preclinical Trials Consortium, which is funded by the Children’s
Tumor Foundation to test targeted agents in accurate mouse
models of tumors that arise in persons with NF1 and NF2. I will
discuss the structure and early experience of this group, as this may
prove useful for discussing how to implement preclinical trials in
related developmental disorders.

Mouse Models of Neuroﬁbromatosis-1 Optic
Gliomas: From Cage to Clinic
David H. Gutmann. NF1 is the most common inherited cancer
syndrome in which affected individuals develop low-grade gliomas.
As such, NF1 provides a unique platform to understand the
molecular and cellular underpinnings of these frequent pediatric
brain tumors. Over the past 10 years, my laboratory has employed
Nf1 genetically engineered mouse (GEM) models to deﬁne the
critical signaling pathways important for glioma cell growth, the
contribution of the tumor microenvironment to gliomagenesis,
the role of neural stem cells relevant to gliogenesis, and the impact of
glioma formation/growth on the normal brain. Initial studies on the
function of the NF1 gene product, neuroﬁbromin, demonstrated
that it primarily functions as a negative regulator of the RAS proto-
oncogene. To understand how neuroﬁbromin regulates RAS activ-
ity relevant to glial cell growth and gliomagenesis, we examined the
ability of neuroﬁbromin to inhibit the activity of the three major
RAS isoforms (Ha-RAS, K-RAS, and N-RAS) expressed in astro-
cytes. Surprisingly, Nf1 loss in primary mouse astrocytes caused
hyperactivation of K-RAS only, with no effects on the other RAS
isoforms. In addition, genetic K-RAS inhibition alone was sufﬁcient
to reverse the abnormal proliferation and motility phenotypes
observed in Nf1 /  astrocytes. Moreover, only K-RAS expression
in astrocytes resulted in optic glioma formation in vivo. These
ﬁndings demonstrate that K-RAS is the primary RAS isoform
responsible for regulating Nf1 /  astrocyte growth and motility:
The importance of K-RAS to gliomagenesis was further under-
scored by our detection of oncogenic K-RAS mutations in sporadic
pediatric low-grade gliomas. Next, we sought to determine how K-
RAS regulates astrocyte cell growth. Using an unbiased proteomics
approach, we identiﬁed the mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) signaling pathway as a downstream effector of K-RAS
activation in Nf1 /  astrocytes. We further showed that neuro-
ﬁbromin regulates astrocyte cell growth and motility in a RAS-,
Akt-, and mTOR-dependent fashion in vitro and in vivo, and that
mTOR signals through Rac1 to control these biological processes.
The importance of mTOR activation to Nf1 glioma growth was

validated in preclinical studies, which demonstrated that rapamy-
cin inhibition of mTOR suppressed optic glioma growth in our Nf1
GEM model of optic glioma in a dose-dependent fashion. In an
effort to develop a GEM model of Nf1 optic glioma, we ﬁrst
conditionally inactivated the Nf1 gene in glial ﬁbrillary acidic
protein (GFAP)-expressing glial cells in vivo. While these mice
had increased numbers of proliferating glial cells in their brains,
optic gliomas did not develop. To recapitulate the genetics of
individuals with NF1, Nf1þ/  mice with neuroﬁbromin loss in
glial cells were developed: Nearly 100% of these mice developed
low-grade glial neoplasms involving the prechiasmatic optic nerves
and chiasm by 3 months of age. These observations established an
obligatory role for non-neoplastic Nf1þ/  stromal cells in tumori-
genesis. We identiﬁed Nf1þ/  microglia in the developing tumor
by 6 weeks of age. Subsequent experiments demonstrated that these
Nf1þ/  microglia elaborated key stromal signals (hyaluronidases
and chemokines), which uniquely promoted the proliferation and
survival of Nf1 /  astrocytes. Using both genetic and pharmaco-
logic approaches, optic glioma growth could be suppressed by
blocking Nf1þ/  microglia function in vivo. Current studies are
aimed at using Nf1 GEM models to understand how microenvi-
ronmental cells and signals control the spatial and temporal pattern
of gliomagenesis in children, and to design stromal-directed adju-
vant therapies. Finally, the availability of GEM models of NF1-
associated optic glioma lays the foundation for preclinical studies
aimed at improving clinical outcome in children with these tumors.
In addition to employing Nf1 GEM optic glioma models to identify
novel targets for chemotherapy and for preclinical drug evaluation,
we have sought to determine the impact of glioma formation/
growth on normal brain function. In the case of NF1-associated
optic glioma, our current chemotherapy is reasonably effective at
halting tumor growth; however, few children ever regain vision
following treatment. To explore the basis for visual
loss, we
employed a combination of visual physiology, electron microscopy,
and magnetic resonance imaging to demonstrate that optic glioma
growth is associated with a time-dependent loss of axonal integrity
and retinal ganglion cell death. Current studies are focused on
identifying the signaling pathway responsible for Nf1þ/  retinal
ganglion cell survival and developing neuroprotective strategies as
adjuvant approaches to brain tumor treatment.

Modeling the Effects of Oncogenic BRAF in
Genetically Engineered Mice
Martin McMahon. Mutation of the BRAF proto-oncogene is
detected in 7% of all human malignancies and in the rare CFC
syndrome. Most (but not all) of such mutations lead to constitutive
activation of the BRAF! MEK ! ERK MAP kinase pathway. The
most common mutation detected in cancer, BRAFT1799A, leads to
expression of BRAFV600E, which is a highly activated form of the
protein. To model the effects of oncogenic BRAFV600E, we used gene
targeting in ES cells to generate mice carrying a Cre-activated
allele of BRaf (BRafCA). Prior to Cre-mediated recombination,
BRafCA expresses normal BRaf as a fusion transcript between
mouse exons 1–14 and human exons 15–18. However, following
Cre-mediated recombination BRafCA is rearranged to express
BRafV600E at normal levels of express under the control of the

12

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

normal BRaf promoter/enhances and subject to normal patterns of
differential mRNA splicing and usage of initiator AUG codons.
Even tissue-restricted expression of BRafV600E in the developing
mouse embryo is a lethal event, suggesting that sustained activation
of BRAF! MEK ! ERK MAP kinase signaling is incompatible
with survival. This may explain the lack of mutations encoding
BRAFV600E in humans with CFC syndrome. However, expression of
oncogenic BRafV600E in cells of the adult lung, thyroid, pancreas or
in melanocytes leads to rapid development of benign tumors that
generally fail to progress to malignancy unless combined with
silencing of tumor suppressor genes such as Trp53, Pten or Ink4a/
Arf. The implications of these observations for pharmacological
targeting of BRAFV600E-driven cancers will be discussed.

Modeling Genetic Syndromes of the Ras/MAPK
Pathway in Mice
Carmen Guerra. We have generated mouse models for CS, CFC and
NS by knocking in the corresponding mutations found in human
patients within murine embryonic stem cells. For CS, we have
inserted the oncogenic G12V miscoding mutation in the endoge-
þ/G12V and H-RasG12V/G12V mice are viable
nous H-Ras locus. H-Ras
and display many of the defects observed in CS patients including
facial anomalies, cardiomyopathies and low tumor incidence. In
addition, these mice revealed phenotypes that resembled the hyper-
emotivity, hypersensibility and cognitive impairments observed in
children with CS. Perhaps more importantly, H-RasG12V mice
develop an age-dependent systemic hypertension induced by alter-
ations in the renin-angiotensin II system, a condition that has been
observed but not well characterized in CS patients. As expected, this
hypertensive condition can be prevented by captopril treatment.
We are currently using this CS mouse model to evaluate by genetic
means whether inhibition of Farnesyl-Transferase, an enzyme
essential for the oncogenic activity of H-Ras oncogenes may provide
therapeutic beneﬁt to CS patients. To this end, we have crossed the
H-RasG12V/G12V strain with FTaselox/lox mice previously developed
in our laboratory. We hope to be able to present preliminary results
at the meeting. For CFC, we have used a mouse strain that expresses
low levels of a B-RafV600E oncogenic allele, thus displaying hyper-
active B-Raf protein kinase activity at levels similar to those induced
by bona ﬁde B-Raf mutations present in CFC patients. These mice
are viable and display developmental abnormalities highly remi-
niscent of those observed in CFC patients. They include reduced life
span, facial anomalies, smaller size, cardiomegaly, increased respi-
ratory frequency and seizures. In addition, we have observed other
defects in these mice so far not reported in CFC patients, mainly the
appearance of cataracts and pheocromocytoma tumors. These mice
were engineered so that the B-RafV600E allele could be conditionally
inactivated by expression of the FLPase recombinase. We are
currently deleting this hyperactive allele at various times during
late embryonic and postnatal development to determine the po-
tential reversibility of the various defects observed in this strain. B-
þ/LSLV600Efrt mice should also be useful to test the potential
Raf
therapeutic effect of available B-Raf and Mek inhibitors. Finally, we
have just developed the K-RasV14I knock-in mouse strain as a model
for NS. Results from the initial characterization of these mice in
hemi- and homozygocity will be presented at the meeting. Full

Author List: Carmen Guerra, Jelena Urosevic, Alberto J. Schuh-
macher, Vincent Sauzeau, Marta Ca~namero, Xose R. Bustelo. and
Mariano Barbacid.

Mice With Endogenous Expression of HrasG12V
Have Developmental Defects Consistent With
Costello Syndrome and Develop Neoplasms
Associated With Copy Number Imbalances
of the Oncogene
James A. Fagin. The HRAS gene is of particular interest from the
standpoint of development, because de novo germline mutations of
HRAS cause CS, a congenital disorder caused by germline muta-
tions of genes encoding effectors in the Ras/MAPK signaling
pathway. Most individuals affected with CS have HRAS mutations
encoding mutant proteins with comparatively weak transforming
activity, primarily HRASG12S. The G12V mutant of HRAS has the
lowest GTPase activity among various amino acid substitutions at
codon 12 and the highest transformation potential, and is the most
common HRAS mutation of this codon in cancer. Accordingly,
there has only been one child reported with a germline HRASG12V
mutation, which was associated with a particularly severe form of
CS. We developed mice with germline endogenous expression of
oncogenic HrasG12V to study effects on development and on
mechanisms of tumor initiation. They had high perinatal mortality,
abnormal cranial dimensions, malocclusion, defective dental ame-
loblasts and nasal septal deviation, consistent with some of the
features of human CS. Older animals (40–58 weeks) developed mild
myocardial ﬁbrosis, but no other signiﬁcant histological abnor-
malities in the heart, valves or arterial wall. These mice developed
skin and forestomach papillomas and angiosarcomas, which were
associated with HrasG12V allelic imbalance and augmented Hras
signaling. Some tumors had lost the wild-type Hras allele, whereas
the majority had excess copies of mutant Hras. The importance of
Hras gene dosage on tumorigenesis was conﬁrmed in mouse
embryonic ﬁbroblasts expressing either endogenous or supraphy-
siological levels of the oncoprotein, in which only the latter co-
operated successfully with either cMyc or T antigen to induce cell
transformation. Endogenous expression of HrasG12V was also
associated with a higher mutation rate in vivo. Hence, tumor
initiation by HrasG12V likely requires augmentation of signal
output, which in papillomas and angiosarcomas is achieved via
an imbalance of the ratio of mutant-to-wild-type Hras alleles, which
may in turn be favored by a higher mutation frequency in cells
expressing the oncoprotein.

Animal Models to Study the Effects of Ras/MAPK
Signals on Skin and Hair Development Provide
a Novel Platform for Studying Biomarkers and
Treatments for Costello, Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous
and Noonan Syndromes
Benjamin D. Yu. The skin phenotypes of CS and CFC suggest
that the skin may be an ideal platform to discover and validate
biomarkers for the Ras/MAPK pathway. The availability of mouse
models with human CS/CFC skin phenotypes and the relative ease

RAUEN ET AL.

13

of in which tissue can be obtained from patients further support the
idea that the skin could be used not only to screen for disease but
also to determine treatment response. Here we demonstrate that
Ras over-activation has speciﬁc effects on hair patterning, which
can be appreciated through microscopic and molecular studies of
isolated hair shafts. Using this model, we have identiﬁed the cells
and developmental pathways that are inﬂuenced by Ras. Impor-
tantly, by understanding the effect of Ras signaling on hair devel-
opment, safe trials could be performed to determine whether
cutaneous phenotypes can be locally rescued by topical application
of small molecules. Full Authors List: Benjamin D. Yu, Anandaroop
Mukhopadhyay, Suguna Krishnaswami and Heather Reilly-
Rhoten.

Animal Models of Human Neuro-Cardio-Facial
Cutaneous (Ras/MAPK) syndromes
Benjamin G. Neel. The SH2 domain-containing protein-tyrosine
phosphatase SHP2, encoded by PTPN11 in humans (Ptpn11 in
mice), plays a key role in RAS/ERK activation in response to most,
if not all, receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), cytokine receptor
and integrin signaling pathways, and may also have cell-type and
signal-dependent functions in other downstream signaling cas-
cades. Previous studies have suggested that all signaling functions
of SHP2 depend on its catalytic (PTP) activity. Germ line gain-of-
function (GOF) PTPN11 mutations cause 50% of the cases of the
autosomal dominant disorder NS, whereas more highly activated,
somatic alleles cause juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML)
and other hematological malignancies. Surprisingly, LEOPARD
syndrome (LS), another autosomal dominant developmental
disorder with strong phenotypic similarities to NS, is caused by
catalytically impaired, PTPN11 mutants that can act as dominant
negative mutants in transfection assays. Other genes mutated in NS
include SOS1, KRAS, and RAF1 (CRAF). Remarkably, some NS-
associated RAF1 mutants show increased in vitro kinase activity,
whereas others are associated with either normal or reduced kinase
activity. Unlike PTPN11-associated NS, in which hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM) is rare, human NS caused by RAF1
mutants with increased kinase activity (but not with the other type
of RAF1 mutants) shows a strong correlation with HCM. We have
generated and extensively analyzed mouse models for PTPN11-
associated NS, mutant PTPN11-evoked JMML, and a zebraﬁsh
model for Shp2 LOF and its disease-associated mutants. We
have also generated mouse models for increased (L613V) and
decreased (D486N) RAF1 activity. These models reveal novel
PTP-independent functions for Shp2 and Raf1, and provide a
conceptual basis for the distinct and shared pathological features
of these disorders. Full Author List: Benjamin G. Neel, Gordon
Chan, Rodney A. Stewart, Xue Wu, Jeremy Simpson, Demetrios
Kalaitizidis, Toshiyuki Araki, Wentian Yang, Jeffery L. Kutok, Peter
Backx and A. Thomas Look.

disorders is evolutionarily conserved in the animal kingdom. In the
fruit ﬂy, numerous aspects of development, such as the seven
photoreceptors of the eye, rely on Ras/MAPK signaling, and mutant
alleles exist for all relevant genes. Using genetic tools available for
Drosophila research, we have generated several transgenic fruit ﬂy
models that permit the expression of mutant Ras pathway proteins
associated with NS and related disorders in a temporally and
spatially controlled manner. For this presentation, our ﬁndings
with respect to the developmental perturbations caused by these
disease-associated transgenic alleles will be shown as well as insights
garnered about gene–gene interactions. Particular emphasis will be
placed on the perturbations in memory formation engendered by
gain-of-function alleles modeling the PTPN11 form of NS. As
certain aspects of memory formation are also conserved in the
animal kingdom, these ﬁndings provide testable hypotheses con-
cerning neurocognitive development in mouse models.

Genetic Networks and Control of Cancer
Susceptibility
Allan Balmain. Self-renewing epithelial tissues such as the skin or
intestine undergo frequent tissue damage due to infection by
exogenous organisms or exposure to environmental chemicals or
radiation. Skin cancer is the commonest form of human cancer, and
most other tumors also arise in epithelial tissues. Quantitative
genetics has identiﬁed polymorphisms within gene regulatory
factors or their target genes which cause phenotypic variation and
inﬂuence disease susceptibility. Human studies have also demon-
strated strong associations between polymorphic variation and
regulation of gene expression. Applying expression Quantitative
Trait Locus (eQTL) approaches to mouse strains with differing
susceptibility to diseases, such as obesity, has identiﬁed signaling
hubs that may be important targets for drug development. We used
network construction methods to analyze the genetic architecture
of gene expression in normal mouse skin in a cross between tumor-
susceptible Mus musculus and tumor-resistant Mus spretus. We
demonstrate that gene expression motifs representing different
constituent cell types within the skin such as hair follicle cells,
hematopoietic cells, and melanocytes are under separate genetic
control. Motifs associated with inﬂammation, epidermal barrier
function, cell cycle control and proliferation are differentially
regulated in mice susceptible or resistant to tumor development.
The intestinal stem cell marker Lgr5 is identiﬁed as a candidate
master regulator of hair follicle gene expression, and the Vitamin D
receptor (Vdr) links epidermal barrier function, inﬂammation, and
tumor susceptibility. These gene expression networks undergo
substantial rewiring during development of benign and malignant
skin tumors. Novel network approaches offer substantially greater
power than classical methods for identiﬁcation of genetic factors
that contribute to cancer susceptibility.

Animal Models for Noonan Syndrome and
LEOPARD Syndrome
Bruce D. Gelb. The Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signal transduction pathway altered in patients with NS and related

Clinical Proteomic Approaches to Identify
Biomarkers for Ras/MAPK Genetic Disorders
Richard R. Drake. The term clinical proteomics describes the
analysis and characterization of the proteins and peptides present

14

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

in a particular ﬂuid, cell or tissue-type. In contrast to the genetic
information in these systems which are relatively deﬁned and stable,
the protein and peptide constituents (i.e., proteomes) are cell and
tissue speciﬁc, and dynamically change over time in response to
different physiological situations. While there are many analytical
approaches to characterize proteins and peptides, the past decade
has seen a dramatic increase in the use of mass spectrometry based
methods, particularly in efforts to deﬁne protein changes reﬂective
of disease states (i.e., biomarkers). Mass spectrometers are used
because of their absolute sensitivity and speciﬁcity to detect mass
values of target molecules, as well as an inherent capability to detect
multiple analytes in complex samples. In relation to clinical appli-
cations, current mass spectrometry-based proteomic technologies
possess an equal wealth of possibilities for their use, but a corre-
sponding amount of limitations that have hampered their overall
utility. A brief overview of the basis for these promises and
challenges will be presented in relation to the instrumentation,
sample collection, storage and processing techniques. For the
analysis of clinical samples related to Ras/MAPK genetic disorders,
collection of urine and saliva represent the least invasive options for
use in proteomic-based studies. Previous studies have established
that physiological changes in the genitourinary tract and the kidney
are reﬂected by changes in the proteome present in urine. Urinary
proteins have also been shown to remain relatively stable after
collection, and large quantities can be collected in a non-invasive
manner. Initial results from the proteomic proﬁling of individual
urine samples from subjects with CS and CFC will be presented.
Issues related to their collection, processing and preparation for
mass spectrometry analysis will also be discussed.

Genetics and Stage Speciﬁcity of Drug
Response in AML
Garry Nolan. Previously, we demonstrated the presence of co-
existing blast subpopulations with distinct signaling proﬁles in
adult AML, using phospho-speciﬁc ﬂow cytometry. We identiﬁed
an adverse signaling proﬁle of high inducible phospho-Stat5 and
phospho-Stat3 at diagnosis, which was >95% predictive of future
relapse in our small cohort (n¼ 30). Subsequent studies from our
group and industrial collaborators with independent patient co-
horts has conﬁrmed these results. Activated Stat5 and Stat3 pro-
mote survival and proliferation, which may explain why a subclone
with enhanced signaling through these pathways would escape drug
treatment. Recently, we extended our studies to pediatric AML, and
observed dramatic signaling heterogeneity between patients. Our
pilot study included one set of paired diagnosis/relapse samples.
The GM-CSF-inducible pStat3hi/pStat5hi subset present in this
patient at diagnosis doubled in size at relapse, suggesting clonal
selection had occurred. To conﬁrm this, we sorted each putative
subclone from the diagnosis and relapse samples based on their
phospho-ﬂow signaling proﬁles, and performed copy number
analysis by array CGH. The pattern of copy number alterations
(CNAs) in each subclone was different, but the presence of several
conserved CNAs allowed us to retrace the natural history of each
subclone as will be detailed in the presentation. This approach is
very powerful because it eliminates much of the noise introduced by

patient-to-patient variability: Only the CNAs that differ between
subclones in a patient could explain the differences in signaling
behavior. A larger cohort of clinical samples will be needed to
identify recurring CNAs with distinct functional consequences.
Taken together, it is clear from our studies that the cytokine
activated Stat 3/5 double positive subpopulation is strongly corre-
lated with a negative outcome in patients treated with Ara-C and
daunorubicin. I will demonstrate this and stochastic modeling
of other phenotypic markers that suggest a differentiation stage
speciﬁc resistance to therapy that can predict outcome and survival
in AML, and possibly other, myeloid diseases.

Raf Pathway Inhibitors: Selectivity Matters
Gideon Bollag. The discovery of the Ras oncogene led to consider-
able interest in the anti-cancer activity of Ras pathway inhibitors.
The identiﬁcation of Raf kinase as an important Ras effector
subsequently led to drug discovery efforts to identify potent in-
hibitors of Raf kinase. One such discovery project led to the
identiﬁcation of sorafenib, a potent inhibitor of C-Raf kinase
activity in biochemical assays. Despite the successful development
of sorafenib as a therapeutic option for patients with metastatic
kidney and liver cancers, an understanding of the mechanistic role
of C-Raf inhibition remains enigmatic even 10 years since its initial
discovery. In the intervening years, identiﬁcation of the BRAF
oncogene led to renewed efforts to discover Raf pathway inhibitors.
Structure-guided optimization yielded PLX4032, a potent and
highly selective inhibitor of oncogenic B-Raf kinase activity. In
preclinical cellular and in vivo studies, PLX4032 demonstrates
potent anti-cancer activity against tumors bearing oncogenic BRAF
mutations, while showing no effect on tumors lacking BRAF
mutations. In non-clinical toxicology studies, PLX4032 exerts no
adverse effects even at the highest doses administered, conﬁrming
the high degree of selectivity of this compound. Given the favorable
pharmacology, PLX4032 has advanced to human clinical trials in
cancer patients. Early clinical data have now revealed that PLX4032
has anti-cancer activity in patients with metastatic melanoma.
Indeed, signiﬁcant tumor regressions have been conﬁrmed in
patients whose tumors harbor the BRAF oncogene; no regressions
have been observed in patients lacking BRAF-mutated tumors.
Thus, Raf inhibition affords an attractive therapeutic option for
patients with diseases that rely on the Raf pathway.

Advances in the Development of MEK Inhibitors for
Pharmacological Intervention of the Ras/MAP
Kinase Pathway
Judith S. Sebolt-Leopold. A number of drugs are being developed to
block different components of the Ras–Raf–MEK–mitogen-acti-
vated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase cascade. The MAPK kinase
kinase MEK has received increasing interest in recent years based on
its amenability to the development of exquisitely selective inhibitors
that effectively block MAPK signaling. CI-1040 (PD184352) was the
ﬁrst MEK inhibitor to enter the clinic and has served as a prototype
for subsequent pharmaceutical improvements. Subsequently, dur-
ing the past 10 years a multitude of highly potent and bioavailable

RAUEN ET AL.

15

MEK inhibitors have emerged as clinical candidates. While MEK
inhibitor trials have primarily targeted oncology patients, pharma-
ceutical companies are also exploring the feasibility of developing
these agents for inﬂammatory indications, such as rheumatoid
arthritis. As a MEK inhibitor has not yet won regulatory approval,
MEK remains an unprecedented kinase target, and as such carries
with it unanswered questions regarding its ultimate safety proﬁle.
However, toxicities observed in early clinical trials with MEK
inhibitors are proving to be manageable. As expected for agents
of this mechanistic class, common toxicities include diarrhea and
skin rash. Importantly, there are also encouraging clinical signs of
antitumor activity in these trials as evidenced by objective responses
in melanoma patients. Because of the high incidence of B-raf
mutations in the melanoma patient population, many companies
are placing a heavy emphasis on this tumor indication for early
clinical testing. However, the high incidence of ras and raf muta-
tions in many other tumor indications, including those of lung,
colorectal, pancreatic, and thyroid origin, make these reasonable
candidate populations for further study as well. Since it relatively
straightforward to prospectively test for ras and raf mutational
status, MEK inhibitors are therefore especially suited to a person-
alized medicine approach. An overview of the MEK inhibitor ﬁeld
will be provided and will address the current challenges facing their
development. Looking forward, there is no longer a need for further
improvements in enzyme potency. The playing ﬁeld now shifts to
clinical trial design and how best to use them. Optimization of
clinical activity in tumors with extensive genetic heterogeneity is
one of the many current challenges that now needs to be addressed.
MEK inhibitors will likely ﬁnd broader application as other targeted
agents become available for rational combination regimens. In
particular, activation by Ras of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT survival signaling pathway will compromise thera-
peutic gain from solely blocking the MAPK pathway in many
tumors. Agents targeting key steps in this pathway, including PI3K,
AKT, and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), are logical
candidates for MEK inhibitor combination trials.

Therapeutic Potential of Farnesyltransferase
Inhibitors
Jackson B. Gibbs. The enzyme called farnesyltransferase catalyzes a
lipid modiﬁcation on many proteins in the cell. The ras oncogene
proteins (called Harvey, Kirsten, and N-ras) are among the sub-
strates of farnesyltransferase. In the case of Ras, placing the lipid on
its tail (the ‘‘CAAX’’ box) is essential for its function since Ras
proteins are active only when attached to a membrane compart-
ment. In 1990, when farnesyltransferase was discovered, it was
thought that inhibition of this enzyme could serve as the Achilles
heel to inhibit Ras function. The importance of Ras as a tumor
promoting gene gone awry in many human cancers had been
known for some time, but efforts to inhibit its function proved
difﬁcult. An enzyme like farnesyltransferase afforded a target that
could be targeted by medicinal chemistry efforts, and several
pharmaceutical companies raced to develop such inhibitors. In
preclinical models, the inhibitors exhibited excellent anti-tumor
activity, particularly against tumors having a mutated Harvey-Ras

gene which is very sensitive to inhibition of farnesyltransferase. The
inhibitors also were active against tumors having mutated Kirsten
or N-Ras, but the activity was weaker. The goal, of course, was to test
these potential drugs in clinical trials in humans with cancer. But,
the inhibitors also offered valuable pharmacological probes to
explore the biology of farnesylation. In these studies, we learned
that another enzyme (geranylgeranyltransferase) can add a different
lipid to Kirsten and N-Ras proteins when farnesyltransferase is
inhibited and allow these forms of Ras to function (a highly
signiﬁcant observation given that mutations in Kirsten and N-Ras
are far more frequent than mutations in Harvey-Ras). Investigators
also discovered other proteins in the cell whose function also
depended on farnesyltransferase, and that inhibiting the lipid
modiﬁcation on these proteins contributed to the anti-tumor
activity of FTIs. So, now instead of thinking about farnesyltransfer-
ase as the Achilles heel to inhibit Ras function, it was instead
considered to be a general housekeeping enzyme that was necessary
for cell proliferation. Several clinical trials evaluated the activity of
FTIs against solid tumors and leukemias. One of the inhibitors was
also tested in children having defects in the NF1 gene. Overall, the
results of these trials were disappointing with little evidence for
anti-tumor activity. None of the FTIs tested in humans generated
sufﬁcient positive clinical data that could enable registration as new
drug. Nevertheless, there have been some learnings. Although FTIs
have activity against normal cells and indeed in preclinical studies
demonstrate side effects such as myelosuppression, the compounds
in general have been well tolerated in humans. While FTIs have not
proven useful to treat cancer, these compounds may have utility
treating genetic disorders driven by mutations in the Harvey-ras
gene or disorders having defects in other farnesylated proteins that
underlie the respective disease.

þ/ 

Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Underlying the
Learning Disabilities Associated With Disruptions
of Ras/MAPK Signaling: From the Lab to the Clinic
Alcino J. Silva. Ras-dependent activation of MAPK has a key role in
synaptic plasticity and learning and memory, and disruptions in
this signaling pathway underlie a number of genetic disorders that
affect cognitive function. For example, mutations in the NF1 gene,
encoding Neuroﬁbromin, a p21Ras GTPase Activating Protein
(GAP), cause learning disabilities and attention deﬁcits. Our studies
have shown that the learning and memory deﬁcits of a mouse model
of NF1 (nf1
) are caused by excessive Ras/MAPK signaling
leading to hyperphosphorylation of synapsin I, and subsequent
enhanced GABA release, which in turn result in impairments in the
induction of long-term potentiation (LTP), a cellular mechanism of
learning and memory. Consistent with increased GABA-mediated
inhibition, we found evidence for hypoactivation of key brain
regions in fMRI studies of NF1 patients. Recently, we discovered
that statins, at concentrations ineffective in controls, can reverse the
enhanced p21Ras activity in the brain of nf1
mice, rescue
their LTP deﬁcits, and reverse their spatial learning and attention
impairments. Strikingly, recently completed pilot clinical trials
(collaboration with the Elgersma laboratory in Rotterdam) uncov-
ered suggestive evidence that statins may also be able to reverse

þ/ 

16

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

cognitive deﬁcits in children with NF1. Additionally, our laboratory
is studying the molecular, cellular, systems and behavioral mech-
anisms of other genetic conditions that involve Ras/MAPK signal-
ing and learning disabilities. We will provide an update of these
other studies.

Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous Syndrome Alleles Are
Active During Zebraﬁsh Development and Are
Sensitive to Small Molecule Inhibitors
E. Elizabeth Patton. The Ras/MAPK pathway is critical for human
development, and plays a central role in the formation and pro-
gression of most cancers. Children born with germ-line mutations
in BRAF, MEK1, or MEK2 develop CFC syndrome, an autosomal
dominant syndrome characterized by a distinctive facial appear-
ance, heart defects, skin and hair abnormalities, and mental retar-
dation. CFC syndrome mutations in BRAF promote both kinase-
activating and kinase-impaired variants. CFC syndrome has a
progressive phenotype, and the availability of clinically active
inhibitors of the MAPK pathway prompts the important question
as to whether such inhibitors might be therapeutically effective in
treatment of CFC syndrome. To study the developmental effects of
CFC mutant alleles in vivo we have expressed a panel of 28 BRAF
and MEK alleles in zebraﬁsh embryos to assess the function of
human disease alleles and available chemical inhibitors of this
pathway. We ﬁnd that both kinase-activating and kinase-impaired
CFC mutant alleles promote the equivalent developmental out-
come when expressed during early development. BRAF CFC mu-
tations promote an additive effect during development, consistent
with both the kinase-active and kinase-impaired BRAF CFC muta-
tions acting as gain-of-function mutations during development.
We ﬁnd that treatment of CFC-zebraﬁsh embryos with inhibitors of
the FGF-MAPK pathway can restore normal early development.
Importantly, we ﬁnd a developmental window in which treatment
with a MEK inhibitor can restore the normal early development of
the embryo, without the additional, unwanted developmental
effects of the drug. CFC syndrome has a progressive phenotype,
and as many of the phenotypic effects develop postnatally, patients
may be helped by systemic therapies after birth. Our work shows the
zebraﬁsh system as a tractable tool for medical and research
geneticists to explore allele activity and therapeutic potential, and
establishes a foundation to propel forward the clinical discussion
and scientiﬁc strategy for assessing the suitability of using currently
available cancer drugs to treat the progressive phenotypes of CFC in
children. Full Author List: Corina Anastasaki, Anne L. Estep,
Richard Marais, Katherine A. Rauen, and E. Elizabeth Patton.

A Clinical Trial Strategy for Children With
Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome
Mark W. Kieran. Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS
or Progeria) is a rare autosomal-dominant genetic syndrome
characterized by certain features of premature aging. While
the clinical phenotype is almost pathognomonic for this disease,
it is the accelerated cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease that
results in death, typically in the second decade. Through the

creation of an international organization (the Progeria Research
Foundation), support for the identiﬁcation of the gene responsible
for the disease was achieved (lamin A). When mutated, the modi-
ﬁed lamin A results in an abnormal transcript called progerin.
While a detailed molecular understanding of how progerin causes
the speciﬁc traits associated with this disease remain poorly deﬁned,
alterations in the processing of lamin A appear to be an important
component in causing disease progression. In particular, the pres-
ence of a truncated lamin A molecule linked to a farnesyl group,
whose normal function is to transiently sequester lamin A to the cell
membrane, results in persistence of this protein at the nuclear
membrane. Critical in vitro and preclinical studies have supported
the role of this abnormal farnesylated protein in HGPS and have
demonstrated that drugs that target farnesylation, and possibly
geranylation, can reverse some aspects of cellular atypia, as well as
certain aspects of the disease in animal models. With these advances
in our understanding of the disease, and at least three classes of
drugs that can speciﬁcally target critical pathways implicated in
HGPS, we have developed a clinical trial strategy in an attempt to
ameliorate the severity of the disease. To achieve this goal, an
ongoing detailed analysis of the natural history and phenotype of
patients with HGPS is required and was provided by the Progeria
Research Foundation. This talk will detail the development of these
trials, selection of the outcome measures, and choice of the drugs
being used. This information may provide a pathway by which
other gene mutational syndromes can seek to develop similar
comprehensive treatment strategies that are likely to result in more
effective therapies for their patients.

Development of Treatments for NF1
Bruce R. Korf. NF1 is a complex multisystem disorder with a wide
range of variability of expression and unpredictable rate of pro-
gression. Major sources of morbidity include effects of both benign
and malignant tumors, learning disabilities, skeletal dysplasias,
vascular stenoses, and other problems. Management to date has
been limited to counseling, anticipatory guidance, and treatment of
speciﬁc complications. Benign tumors are typically treated surgi-
cally and malignancies with chemotherapy. There is, however, no
current approach to slowing or reversing the overall progression of
the disorder. Elucidation of the role of the NF1 gene product,
neuroﬁbromin, in the Ras signaling pathway has opened the door to
development of new approaches to therapy using drugs that target
this pathway. The possibility of conducting clinical trials, though,
raises major challenges in terms of deﬁnition of outcomes and
recruiting sufﬁcient numbers of participants to conduct a conclu-
sive study. Natural history data have been collected on some
phenotypes, including plexiform neuroﬁbromas, learning disabil-
ities, and skeletal dysplasias. There are also tools available for
assessment of quality of life. Genetic testing is routinely available;
though testing provides very limited ability to stratify the disorder
due to only a small number of genotype–phenotype correlations
established to date. There have been several ad hoc clinical trials
conducted in NF1 patients, and for the past several years the
Department of Defense Neuroﬁbromatosis Research Program has
funded the NF Consortium to conduct clinical trials. The NF
Consortium has one currently open trial targeting plexiform neuro-

RAUEN ET AL.

17

ﬁbromas with sirolimus (rapamycin). Endpoints are time to
progression and reduction of tumor volume. A second placebo-
controlled trial of Lovastatin for cognitive disorders in children
with NF1 will launch early summer 2009. A third trial for low grade
glioma is currently under ﬁnal review. The Consortium approach
offers the advantages of utilizing a set of clinical data collection sites,
which improves the ability to rapidly recruit participants, and also
facilitates management of the regulatory and data coordination
functions. Additional trials aimed at tumor and non-tumor
manifestations of neuroﬁbromatosis are being explored.

Fragile X: A Time for Targeted Treatments
Randi J. Hagerman. Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by a full
mutation, an expansion of the CGG sequence at the 5’ end of the
FMR1 gene. The full mutation leads to methylation of the gene and a
subsequent deﬁcit of transcription and therefore a deﬁcit of FMRP,
the protein produced by FMR1. The allele frequency of the full
mutation is approximately 1 in 2,500 in the general population.
FMRP is an RNA binding protein that regulates the translation of
many messages important for synaptic plasticity. Typically FMRP is
an inhibitor of translation so when FMRP is deﬁcient there is up
regulation of a variety of proteins. There is enhancement of the
downstream components of the metabotropic glutamate receptor
5 pathway (mGluR5) leading to enhanced long term depression
(LTD) and also enhanced levels of matrix metalloproteinase 9
(MMP9) levels in patients with FXS. Enhanced LTD leads to long,
thin and immature synaptic connections in FXS. These ﬁndings
have led to the use of targeted treatments in FXS including the use of
mGluR5 antagonists and minocycline, which lowers the level of
MMP9. The use of mGluR5 antagonists in the mouse model of FXS
has improved synaptic structure and plasticity, improved behavior,
eliminated seizures, and improved cognition. Preliminary studies
of a single dose of fenobam, an mGluR5 antagonist, in adult patients
with FXS suggested improved behavior and CNS function as
measured by prepulse inhibition (PPI). Further studies of mGluR5
antagonists are underway in patients with FXS. The use of minocy-
cline for 1 month in the fragile X knockout mouse after birth has
lead to maturation of synaptic structure, improved behavior and
cognitive beneﬁt. A survey of minocycline treatment in patients
with FXS suggests improvements in language, attention and aca-
demic abilities. Therefore a controlled trial of minocycline treat-
ment in children and adults with FXS is underway. Further
molecular studies in lymphocytes of patients with FXS has demon-
strated up regulation of the mTOR pathway and down regulation of
PTEN consistent with the large head and autism phenotype of
individuals with fragile X syndrome. FXS is the most common
single gene cause of autism and these molecular ﬁndings suggest
signiﬁcant overlap with other neurodevelopmental disorders that
have autism spectrum as part of their phenotype, such as tuberous
sclerosis. FMRP also regulates a number of other genes associated
with autism including the neuroligins and the neurorexins. Further
study of the commonalities across disorders may lead to the
development of new targeted treatments for FXS. At the upper
end of the premutation (55–200 CGG repeats) of FMR1 there are
lowered levels of FMRP which can lead to features of FXS in
patients. In addition there is up-regulation of FMR1- mRNA levels

in the premutation range which leads to RNA toxicity and both
aging problems and neurodevelopmental problems in some indi-
viduals with the premutation. We commonly see autism spectrum
in boys with the premutation in addition to ADHD. RNA toxicity
leads to dysregulation of a number of proteins including lamin A/C,
heat shock proteins and alpha B crystallin causing enhanced
neuronal cell death especially with stress.

Ras/MAPK Pathway From Beside to Bench and
Back: Towards Clinical Trials
Roger J. Packer. Although the conditions which result in molecular
alterations in the Ras/MAPK signaling pathway, at ﬁrst glance, seem
phenotypically heterogeneic, there are signiﬁcant overlaps as re-
gards neurodevelopment, cardiovascular, and other issues. This
overlapping symptomatology allows the possibility of developing
speciﬁc therapeutic protocols targeting defects in the Ras/MAPK
signaling pathway to alter the course of illness and, even conceiv-
ably, reverse some of the manifestations. In NF1, the most common
genetic condition with an activation of the pathway, clinical trials
are already open evaluating biologic agents interfering with Ras
signaling or activated downstream targets for varied conditions,
including progressive plexiform neuroﬁbromas, low-grade glio-
mas, and neurocognitive abnormalities. It is unclear whether one
biologic agent will be sufﬁcient, due to compensatory pathways,
and there is signiﬁcant interest in coupling these drugs for better
efﬁcacy. Major issues that still need to be explored are the long-term
toxicity of many of these drugs on the development of the nervous
system, their potential mutagenesis due to activation of feedback
loops, and their impact on bone growth. It has already been shown
that an mTor inhibitor, rapamycin, can effectively slow the growth
of low-grade gliomas in tuberous sclerosis, another condition
where the Ras/MAPK pathway is activated. Because of the relative
rarity of some of the conditions, such as CFC, CS, and LEOPARD
syndrome, it will be necessary for institutions to work collabora-
tively on these clinical protocols, as it is unlikely that one institution
will accrue enough patients to efﬁciently perform such trials. In
addition, there needs to be an agreement in what the outcome
parameters are to be and what the eligibility criteria should be across
studies; if this is not done, the studies will not be interpretable across
different centers and progress will be slowed. One mechanism
which has been found to be particularly effective in childhood
cancer, especially in the management of rarer forms of childhood
cancer, has been the development of cooperative groups with a well-
formed infrastructure to rapidly perform clinical trials. Recently,
the neuroﬁbromatosis community has embraced this approach,
and through the Department of Defense a neuroﬁbromatosis
clinical trials consortium has been opened and is accruing patients
on multiple trials for children with NF1. A similar consortium is
under discussion for patients with NF2. The cooperative group
mechanism theoretically allows for the more rapid development of
clinical trials and their completion. The infrastructure does not
have to be reinvented for each clinical trial and multiple manifes-
tations of disease can be addressed. Smaller institutions, with
innovative investigators, can be extremely important in such
consortiums, as their ability to share in progress in such rare
diseases is not limited by the small number of eligible patients at

18

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

their institution. In addition, studies can be planned sequentially,
allowing for more rapid progress. Results can be assessed centrally,
making outcomes more reproducible and possibly valid. A well-
organized infrastructure allowing the rapid accrual of patients,
results in clinical trials becoming more attractive to funding
agencies and industry. The consortium mechanism is not without
its potential pitfalls and can be slowed by in-ﬁghting and unneces-
sary bureaucracy. However, if done appropriately, a clinical trials
consortium for these Ras/MAPK pathway abnormalities holds the
promise of dramatically improving the rate and quality of transla-
tional investigations.

Aligning Interests Between the Public and
Corporate Sectors to Advance Rare Disease
Research
Teri Melese. The scale of the challenge to bring transformative
therapeutics to patients with common or rare diseases, and the
escalating costs of doing so, increasingly requires cross-disciplinary
collaboration. At the same time there is a growing imperative for
companies to access innovation outside of their own four walls. In
order to identify breakthrough strategies for new therapies that will
not result in costly failures late in development, there is a need to ﬁll
several knowledge gaps to understand more about the molecular
underpinnings of disease and the individual response of patients to
treatment. As a result, there is a tremendous opportunity to address
industry-wide healthcare initiatives together. Rare diseases are
therapeutically ‘‘neglected’’ because the costs of drug development
cannot be recouped by drug sales due to small patient numbers and
the inability in some cases for speciﬁc populations to pay for
medicines. Of the more than 6,000 rare diseases, fewer than 200
have any therapy. Public/Private Teams are able to facilitate ad-
vances in rare disease research by bringing together key comple-
mentary resources. Academic Medical Centers and Foundations
bring the experts in the biology and genetics of the diseases, experts
in patient care, and the biological samples that are the basis for
molecular studies. Biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies
are an important source of compounds and biologics that will
ultimately target key components of pathways involved in rare
disease. However, companies face numerous challenges when asked
to split indications for a speciﬁc compound. As an example there are
concerns about price structures; especially when pricing for the two
indications is different. There is the potential to run into side effects
in a particular population that might not be relevant in the disease
setting for which the drug is primarily intended, and might affect
the label and thus curtail commercial prospects for a compound. In
addition, in the case of the constellation of syndromes being
discussed at the symposium, there are difﬁculties involved in
adapting to a pediatric cohort. However, on the positive side, there
is an advantage in obtaining accelerated development in a popula-
tion with no proven therapies. A consideration is that companies
might take on the clinical development in a public private partner-
ship for a marketed drug, or a drug in clinical development and,
either donate compounds for a very rare condition, or price at the
level for the marketed indication. Some rare disease research is
currently being advanced in such consortiums or networks; exam-
ples of which are progeria and fragile X. Perhaps for an abandoned

molecule, companies might consider assigning all rights to the
university to clear the path for commercialization. A Federal
initiative to advance therapeutic development was formed in May
of 2009 called TRND, Therapeutics for Rare and Neglected Disease
and will be overseen by the NIH Ofﬁce of Rare Diseases Research
(ORDR) and involve the National Human Genome Research
Center and the National Chemical Genomics Center (NCGC). The
plan is for this program to work together with academic medical
centers, universities and the corporate sector to advance rare disease
research and treatment.

POSTER ABSTRACTS

In addition to the platform presentations summarized above,
fourteen research groups submitted abstracts and presented their
work at the poster session.

Mouse Models of Costello Syndrome
John P. Flaherty, Leslie Haynes, Leah Rae Donahue, and David E.

Bergstrom

þ

þ

Tyr

The Jackson Laboratory. Bar Harbor, ME, USA
CS is a rare, complex, developmental disorder characterized by a
constellation of features including failure to thrive, characteristic
facies, delay in intellectual development, hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy, arrhythmia, and predisposition to both benign and malig-
nant tumors. Past studies identifying gain-of-function mutations in
the HRAS gene as the causative basis of human CS and strong
conservation with the mouse ortholog, Hras1, have made the
development of a mouse model of CS a reality. To conﬁrm these
results and extend animal modeling studies to include various
allelic forms of the disease, we are developing ﬁve additional mouse
KitlSl-J/
models of CS in the CJ7 line of mouse 129S1/Sv-Oca2
J (JAX JR #000090) embryonic stem (ES) cells. Using a
recombineering-based ‘‘knock-in’’ approach, we have completed
construction of ﬁve vectors, each containing a loxP-ﬂanked, neo-
mycin resistance (Neor) selection cassette transcribed in the oppo-
site direction of Hras1 in intron 1; and site-directed mutations to
encode each of the following ﬁve pathogenic alleles—G12A en-
coded by the Hras1 amino acid 12 codon; GCA G12A encoded by
the Hras1 amino acid 12 codon, GCC; G12S encoded by the Hras1
amino acid 12 codon, AGC; G12V encoded by the Hras1 amino acid
12 codon, GTA; G12V encoded by the Hras1 amino acid 12 codon,
GTT. ES cells are currently being electroporated with each of the ﬁve
vectors. Conﬁrmation of proper targeting events, microinjection,
development/breeding of chimerae and identiﬁcation of ES-de-
rived (‘‘germline’’) mice carrying the CS alleles will follow. Each
strain will be deposited into The Jackson Laboratory Repository
allowing broad access to the research community. Designed sup-
pression of the CS alleles by the oppositely transcribed Neor
transcript will be relieved by crossing to inner cell mass- or
germline-speciﬁc ‘‘deleter’’ Cre lines such as Meox2-Cre or Zp3-
Cre, respectively. Together, these ﬁve models hold the potential for
uncovering allelic and codon preference inﬂuences on development
and neoplasia in CS, identifying CS modifying genes, and dissecting
tissue-speciﬁc facets of CS using spatially controlled Cre lines. This
work was supported by a generous gift from Dr. Christopher Earl,
BIO Ventures for Global Health.

RAUEN ET AL.

19

Genomic Duplication of PTPN11 is an Uncommon Cause of

Noonan Syndrome

John M. Graham, Jr.1, Nancy Kramer1, Bassem A. Bejjani2,
Christian T. Thiel3, Claudio Carta4, Giovanni Neri5, Marco
Tartaglia4, and Martin Zenker3

1Cedars-Sinai Medical Center at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA;
3University
2Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, WA;
Hospital Erlangen, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany;
4Istituto Superiore di Sanita, Rome, Italy; 5Universita Cattolica del
Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy

NS is a genetically heterogeneous disorder caused most com-
monly by activating mutations in PTPN11. We report a patient with
hypotonia, developmental delay and clinical features suggestive of
NS. High-resolution chromosome analysis was normal, and se-
quence analysis of PTPN11, SOS1, KRAS, BRAF, RAF1, MEK, and
MEK2 was also normal. Array CGH revealed a single copy gain of
nine BAC clones at 12q24.11q24.21 (8.98 Mb in size), which
encompassed the PTPN11 locus at 12q24.13 and was conﬁrmed
by FISH analysis. A similar case was reported and speculated that
such duplications might account for 15–30% of NS cases with no
detectable mutation in NS genes. We screened more than 250 NS
cases without mutation in known NS disease-causing genes by
quantitative PCR, and none of these cases produced results in the
duplicated range. We also explored the possibility that de novo
changes affecting the untranslated region (UTR) of the PTPN11
transcript might represent an alternative event involved in SHP2
enhanced expression. DHPLC analysis and direct sequencing of the
entire 30UTR in 36 NS patients without mutation in known genes
did not reveal any disease-associated variant. These ﬁndings
indicate that duplications of PTPN11 represent an uncommon
cause of NS, and functionally relevant variations within the 30UTR
of the gene do not appear to play a major role in NS. However,
recurrent observations of NS in individuals with duplications
involving the PTPN11 locus suggest that increased dosage of SHP2
may have dysregulating effects on intracellular signaling.

Modeling Genetic Syndromes on the Ras/MAPK Pathway

in Mice

Carmen Guerra1, Jelena Urosevic1, Alberto J. Schuhmacher1,
Vincent Sauzeau2, Marta Ca~namero1, Xose R. Bustelo3, and
Mariano Barbacid1

1Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncologicas, Madrid, Spain;
2Inserm 915-Institut du thorax. Faculte des Sciences de Nantes,
Nantes, France; 3CSIC-University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain
Understanding the causative role of the Ras/MAPK pathway in
Neuro-cardio-facio-cutaneous (NCFC) syndromes, requires the
development of genetically modiﬁed mouse models carrying the
same mutations that have been recently identiﬁed in these patients.
Mouse models will help to acquire a basic knowledge of the role of
the speciﬁc mutations in genes of the Ras/MAPK pathway in the
developmental defects of these patients. More importantly, these
mouse models will be used to assay therapeutic strategies that
hopefully will help to treat and or palliate some of the symptoms
of these patients. We have recently published the generation of an
H-RasG12V knock-in mouse model which are viable and besides
their low incidence of tumors, displays some of the features of CS
patients: facial anomalies, increased emotivity and sensitivity, and

more importantly cardiomyopathies, the most relevant alterations
of these patients. These mice will help to characterize the develop-
mental defects of CS patients and to evaluate therapeutic strategies.
Indeed, we have described in these mice a frequent alteration in CS
patients that was not well described before: an age-dependent renin-
angiotensin II dependent systemic hypertension, which can be
prevented by captopril treatment. We are currently evaluating in
this CS mouse model, by genetic approaches, the therapeutic value
of FTIs in CS patients. We have also developed two new knock-in
mouse models for two other germline mutations in the Ras/MAPK
pathway: B-RafV600E and K-RasV14I. B-RafV600E knock-in mice,
which displays reduced expression of the B-RafV600E knock-in
allele (10% of the total B-Raf expression), results in typical alter-
ations of CFC patients: reduced life span, facial anomalies, shorter
stature, cardiomegaly, increased respiratory frequency and seizures.
We have found other alterations not described yet in CFC patients,
such as pheocromocytoma and cataracts, which are currently under
characterization. Finally, we have just developed a K-RasV14I
knock-in mouse model, mutation that has been found in some
NS patients. Results from the initial characterization of this mouse
model will be presented in this meeting.

Molecular Analysis and Long-Term follow-Up study in

Noonan Syndrome and Related Disorders

Tomoko Kobayashi, Yoko Aoki, Tetsuya Niihori, Shoko

Komatsuzaki, Shigeo Kure, and Yoichi Matsubara

Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan
NS, CS, and CFC are autosomal dominant congenital anomaly
syndromes characterized by a distinctive facial appearance, heart
defects, mental retardation and tumor predisposition. Germline
mutations in PTPN11, HRAS, KRAS, BRAF, MEK1/2, SOS1, and
RAF-1 have been identiﬁed in NS and related disorders. We
suggested that disorders with mutations of molecules in the Ras/
MAPK cascade may be comprehensively termed ‘‘the Ras/MAPK
syndromes.’’ To re-classify these syndromes according to molecular
diagnosis and re-evaluate clinical manifestations, a website includ-
ing the details on the MAPK syndromes and mutation data (http://
www.medgen.med.tohoku.ac.jp/RasMapksyndromes.html) was
launched. According to our mutation analysis of the eight genes,
mutations were identiﬁed in 151 of 250 patients (60%) with NS and
related disorders. Evaluation of detailed clinical manifestations
revealed a genotype–phenotype correlation among mutation-pos-
itive patients. Pathogenic mutations in as yet unidentiﬁed genes
remain to be elucidated in the rest of patients. In order to assess
the precise prevalence, natural history, prognosis and the rate of
tumor development in Japanese patients, we designed a long-term
follow-up protocol of patients with CS and CFC.

Cardiac Abnormalities in Costello Syndrome: Clinical and

Molecular Analysis

Angela E. Lin1, Steven D. Colan2, Mark E. Alexander2, Robert
Hamilton3, Bronwyn Kerr4, Leslie Smoot3, A. Micheil Innes5,
Jeanne Baffa6, Katia Sol-Church7, Elizabeth Hopkins8, Deborah
Stabley7, and Karen W. Gripp8

1MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Boston, MA; 2Children’s
Hospital of Boston, MA; 3Hospital
for Sick Children, Toronto,
Canada; 4CMMUH, NHS Trust, Manchester, England; 5Alberta

20

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

Children’s Hospital, Calgary, Canada; 6Deparmentt of Cardiology;
7Department Biomedical Research, and 8A.I duPont Hospital for
Children, Wilmington, DE

Introduction: Cardiac abnormalities in CS are important
diagnostic and management features, and overlap with other Ras/
MAPK pathway syndromes. We report on clinical and molecular
studies from an ongoing study of CS, with attention to classiﬁca-
tion, severity of cardiac abnormality, progression and outcome, and
genotype–phenotype correlation. Methods: We studied 61 patients
with CS; 58 patients enrolled from July 2003 to June 2007 in an IRB
approved study with informed consent, plus 3 patients who were
part of a study of the prenatal features of CS. We also studied 83
HRASþ literature patients, and compared selected features to those
of other Ras/MAPK pathway syndromes. Results: In 80% of the
patients, the self-reported parental data form was supplemented
with medical records and/or published data. GENERAL: CS was
diagnosed by age 1 year in 16 patients (26%); 22 patients (36%) had
been followed between 5 and 18 years since their diagnosis. Though
most patients (48, 79%) were 5–18 years, 25% (12) were older than
18 years. Most patients were white (49, 75%) with a slight excess
of females (34, 54%). Cancer occurred in 10 patients (16%), 7 of
whom had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). GENOTYPE:
All patients had an HRAS mutation, most commonly G12S (51,
84%), followed by G12A, G12C (3 each), G12C (2) and T58I, A146V
(1 each). G12S was as common among patients with a single cardiac
defect (21, 41%) as those with more complex hearts of two or more
defects (18, 35%). CARDIAC PHENOTYPES: Patients were classi-
ﬁed based on the presence of no (11, 18%), one (19, 31%), two (14,
23%), three (14, 28%) or four (2, 5%) cardiac abnormalities. I.
Congenital heart defects (CHD) were present in 28 (45%) broadly
deﬁned to include valve anomalies, especially pulmonic stenosis
(PS) (12 patients), aortic/mitral/tricuspid and polyvalvar anoma-
lies (8 patients). PS rarely progressed. Mitral valve obstruction was
usually related to HCM rather than a primary valve dysplasia. II.
HCM was present in at least 36 patients (59%), typically isolated
subaortic septal hypertrophy, with /without obstruction (21, 34%).
Other types were global left hypertrophy (4 patients), diffuse, mild
interventricular hypertrophy (5 patients), unspeciﬁed or variable
(5 patients). HCM was chronically severe or progressed in
14 patients, stabilized in 12 patients, and resolved in 8 patients.
One pt had an operative biopsy showing myocardial disarray. Eight
patients underwent myectomy. III. Arrhythmia in CS consisted of
atrial tachycardia (27, 44%) especially chaotic atrial rhythm/mul-
tifocal atrial tachycardia, ectopic atrial tachycardia (15, 25%). Late
onset atrial ﬁbrillation in a 16-year-old is a new ﬁnding. In 8 patients
(13%) the arrhythmia was chronically severe or worsened. Two
patients had ablations. IV. Mild-moderate aortic root dilation was
documented in 3 (5%); there was no aortic dissection. Systemic
hypertension requiring treatment was reported in 3 (5%), pulmo-
nary hypertension occurred in 1 infant. OUTCOME: There were 4
(7%) deaths, 3 in newborns associated with fetal and postnatal atrial
tachycardia; the cause of the sudden death in a 5-year-old boy with
severe HCM was probably cardiac. Conclusions: This longitudinal
analysis of a large ongoing cohort of HRAS-proven CS patients
conﬁrms the high frequency of cardiac abnormalities, and reﬁnes
previous observations. PS is rarely progressive; mitral valve disease
is usually related to HCM. Atrial tachycardia has a high frequency in

CS, and is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in infancy.
The resolution of HCM, and the ﬂuctuating pattern of involvement
suggests HCM differs from non-syndromic HCM, although the
detection of myocardial disarray is a similarity to sarcomeric
disease. In anticipation for possible therapeutic trials, the delinea-
tion and classiﬁcation of cardiac abnormalities, especially HCM,
may play an important role as a metric.

Perturbation in ERK1/2 Signaling Result in Developmental

Deﬁcits Associated With NCFC Syndromes

Joanna Pucilowskaa, Jason Newbernb, Ivy Samuelsa, J. Colleen

Karloa, Sulagna Saittac, William Sniderb, and Gary Landretha

aCase Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland,
OH; bUniversity of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC; cThe Children’s
Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania School of Medi-
cine, Philadelphia, PA

Neuro-cardio-facial cutaneous (NCFC) syndromes are geneti-
cally related disorders arising from mutation of elements within a
common genetic pathway necessary for the activation of the ERK
MAP kinases. These syndromes are typiﬁed by cardiac and cranio-
facial defects arising from perturbations of neural crest develop-
ment. Importantly, these syndromes are also characterized by a high
incidence of cognitive deﬁcits and psychiatric disease. Saitta and
others have identiﬁed individuals with a 1 Mb microdeletion on
chromosome 22 which encompasses the MAPK1 gene encoding
ERK2. These individuals exhibit cardiac and craniofacial abnor-
malities accompanied by microcephaly and neurodevelopmental
deﬁcits. Similarly, deletion or duplication of 16p11.2, encompass-
ing the MAPK3 gene encoding ERK1, is associated with autism,
congenital heart defects and facial anomalies. We have developed
murine models of these syndromes in which the ERK genes have
been inactivated. Conditional inactivation of ERK2 in the devel-
oping neural crest (using Wnt1-cre) resulted in major craniofacial
defects including cleft palate, mandibular hypoplasia and shortened
maxilla. These phenotypes were exacerbated upon the additional
loss of one or both ERK1 alleles. Phenotypic severity was correlated
with impaired pharyngeal arch morphogenesis, consistent with
perturbation of neural crest development. Knockout of upstream
elements in the ERK signaling cascade, MEK1/2 or B/C-raf, within
the neural crest, resulted in similar phenotypes. In comparison,
little is known about the central nervous system effects of pertur-
bation of ERK signaling pathway. Conditional inactivation of Erk2
within the developing telencephalic progenitors alters the dynamics
of neural progenitor proliferation. Erk2 knockout mice exhibit
thinner cortex due to generation of fewer neurons that is accom-
panied by an increase in the number of astrocytes in the mature
brain. These mice exhibit profound deﬁcits in learning and memory
as well as anosmia. Mice in which both Erk isoforms are inactivated
in developing telencephalon at E13.5 through the action of GFAP-
cre, exhibit a phenotype that is more severe then observed upon
inactivation of Erk2 alone. Erk1/2 inactivation results in a dramatic
decrease in neural progenitor proliferation at E14.5 and the near
complete loss of basal intermediate neural progenitors that are
normally present in the subventricular zone. These changes corre-
late with a decrease in Map2þ neurons and an increase in uncom-
mitted Nestinþ progenitors in the developing cortex. Importantly,
at E16.5 we observe an even greater exacerbation of proliferation

RAUEN ET AL.

21

and differentiation defects during neurogenesis than observed in
mice lacking only Erk2. The perturbations of neural progenitor cell
cycle dynamics were associated with the suppression of cyclin D1
and elevated p27 levels, both of which are downstream effectors of
Erk1/2. Furthermore, double S-phase labeling suggests a signiﬁcant
lengthening of the G1 phase of the cell cycle of cortical progenitor
cells in mutant animals compared to wild type mice. In conclusion,
the developing human brain is exquisitely sensitive to gain as well as
loss of function alterations in proteins of the ERK kinase pathway.
Our data documents a critical role of Erk1/2 in regulating neural
progenitor cells dynamics during cortical development that may
also underlie the neurodevelopmental defects observed in NCFC
syndromes.

Comprehensive Mutation Analysis in Noonan Syndrome and

Functional Characterization of a Novel KRAS Mutation

Md. Abdur Razzaque1, Yuta Komoike1, Tsutomu Nishizawa1,
Michiko Furutani1,3, Toru Higashinakagawa2, and Rumiko
Matsuoka1,3

1International Research and Educational Institute for Integrated
Medical Sciences; 3Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Tokyo, Japan;
2Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan

NS is a developmental genetic disorder which is characterized by
short stature, unusual facial characteristics, mental retardation,
developmental delay and a wide spectrum of congenital heart
defects, most commonly pulmonic stenosis (PS) and hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM). The genes that cause the NS are involved
in the Ras–MAPK signaling pathways. We have studied a cohort of
66 clinically conﬁrmed NS patients of Japanese origin. We screened
for mutations in the PTPN11, KRAS, HRAS, ERAS, NRAS, SOS1,
Grb1, Grb2, ARAF, BRAF, RAF1, MEK1, and MEK2, and identiﬁed
mutations 28 in the PTPN11, 6 in the SOS1, 1 in the KRAS, 1 in the
BRAF and 10 in the RAF1. We previously demonstrated a loss-of-
function BRAF mutation and gain-of-function RAF1 mutations are
a cause of NS. In this study, we characterized a novel mutation in the
Kras with an amino acid substitution Asparagine to Serine at codon
116 (N116S). To explore the functional consequences of the
mutation we determined the ability of Kras mutant identiﬁed in
NS to activate its downstream effectors by measuring the endoge-
nous phosphorylation status of Erk by Western blotting in cells
transfected with constructs constitutively expressing the wild type
(WT) Kras or NS associated mutant Kras or oncogenic mutant Kras
(G12D). NS-associated Kras mutation resulted in enhanced Erk
activation. To examine whether the mutation we found in NS has
any oncogenic activity or not, we examined the growth in DMEM
containing 1% fetal calf serum of NIH3T3 ﬁbroblast cells expressing
the WT Kras or NS associated mutant Kras or oncogenic mutant
Kras. NS associated Kras mutation had no signiﬁcant effect on cell
proliferation in compared with the oncogenic Kras mutation. In
addition, Morpholino knocked-down zebraﬁsh embryos of kras
caused heart and craniofacial malformations, and expression of
mutated kras resulted in maldevelopment of the heart. Taken
together, our ﬁndings implicate Kras-N116S mutation exhibits gain
-of-function in vitro and expression of this mutant causes malde-
velopment of the heart in zebraﬁsh, suggesting a causative agent
of NS.

Functional Consequences of a Glutamic Acid Duplication in
the Switch 1 Region (p.E37dup) of HRAS Identiﬁed in a Boy With
Some Features of Costello Syndrome

Georg Rosenberger1, Lothar Gremer2, Torsten Merbitz-
Zahradnik2, Susanne Morlot3, Kerstin Kutsche1, and Mohammad
Reza Ahmadian2

1University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany; 2Heinrich Heine University Medical Center, D€usseldorf,
Germany; 3Medical Centre WagnerStibbe, Hannover, Germany

HRAS plays a central role in the transduction of signals elicited by
receptor activation to diverse downstream pathways, thereby con-
trolling many aspects of cellular physiology. Somatic mutations of
HRAS changing glycine at position 12 or 13 have been identiﬁed in
various human tumors and lead to constitutive HRAS activation by
impairing its GTP hydrolysis activity. The same HRAS missense
mutations, with p.G12S being the most common, have been
detected as germline mutations in patients with CS. CS is a
developmental disorder characterized by short stature, mental
retardation and heart and skin abnomalities. We identiﬁed a de
novo heterozygous 3-bp duplication in HRAS leading to a dupli-
cation of glutamic acid 37 (p.E37dup) in a male patient with some
clinical features reminiscent of CS. Here, we compare the con-
sequences of the p.E37dup mutation on HRAS function with HRAS
wild-type and HRASG12V. By quantitative ﬂuorescence methods we
demonstrated that p.E37dup marginally inﬂuenced kinetics of
guanine nucleotide binding and Sos1-catalyzed nucleotide ex-
change. Recombinant HRASE37dup showed decreased intrinsic GTP
hydrolysis activity by threefold, whereas RasGAP neuroﬁbromin-
stimulated GTP hydrolysis was completely abolished. Remarkably,
interaction of HRASE37dup with neuroﬁbromin and various effec-
tors was found to be drastically diminished. Accordingly, cell-based
co-precipitation of the active GTP-bound form of HRAS with
p.E37dup by any effector protein tested (RAF1, PI3K, PLCe, and
RALGDS) was markedly impaired supporting the notion that the
switch 1 region of HRASE37dup underwent drastic structural
changes. Our data suggest that HRASE37dup is predominantly
present in the active, GTP-bound form in the cell, but most
likely is not able to properly transduce signals due to diminished
effector binding. However, in COS-7 cells expressing HRASE37dup
we detected increased MEK, ERK, and AKT phosphorylation
after growth factor stimulation. Thus, although binding of
HRASE37dup to Ras binding domains of various effectors is im-
paired, HRASE37dup-expressing cells seem to escape from down-
regulating RAS-dependent signaling pathways by yet unknown
compensatory mechanisms. The molecular consequences of
p.E37dup, particularly increased MAPK and AKT signaling, may
account for the clinical manifestation similar to CS in the affected
boy.

Ocular Manifestations of Ras/MAPK Dysregulation: A
Comparison of CFC, Costello, Noonan Syndromes, and
Neuroﬁbromatosis 1

Suma P. Shankar1, Teri L. Young2, and Katherine A. Rauen1
1University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA;

2Duke University, Durham, NC

CFC, CS, NS, and NF1 are developmental disorders that belong
to the recently described group of syndromes called RASopathies.

22

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

These are caused by germline mutations in genes encoding key
components of Ras/mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling transduction pathway. Several in vitro and animal model
studies have shown that signaling through the MAPK is required for
normal ocular development. We evaluated ocular manifestations
in CFC and CS patients using ophthalmic medical records
and parental reports. We compare these ﬁndings to previously
published eye ﬁndings in NS and NF1. CFC is a congenital disorder
caused by mutations in genes of the Ras/MAPK pathway—BRAF,
MEK1, and MEK2. CFC is characterized by cardiac defects, distinc-
tive craniofacial appearance and cutaneous abnormalities. We
analyzed retrospective patient records from 51 CFC patients with
conﬁrmed molecular diagnosis. Visual problems were reported in
49/51 (96%) patients. All patients had cognitive developmental
delay. Other commonly reported manifestations were strabismus
37/51 (72%)—exotropia 28/37, esotropia 4/37; refractive errors
30/51 (58%)—myopia 12/30, hyperopia 18/30; nystagmus 21/51
(41%); ptosis 7/51 (13%) and optic nerve hypoplasia in 18/51
(35%). Other features were problems with depth perception,
abnormal head posture and amblyopia. CS is caused by missense
mutations in the gene HRAS. CS is characterized by failure to thrive,
neurocognitive delay, distinctive facial features, cardiac involve-
ment, musculoskeletal and cutaneous features. Signiﬁcant ocular
features included strabismus 16/34 (48%); refractive errors 19/34
(55%) with myopia (14/19) occurring signiﬁcantly more than
hyperopia (2/19), type of refractive error unknown (3/19); nystag-
mus 12/34 (35%) and optic nerve anomalies in 4/34 (0.12%). NS is
caused by mutations in genes PTPN11, KRAS, SOS1, and RAF1. NS
is characterized by a variable degree neurocognitive delay, short
stature, distinctive craniofacial features, congenital cardiac anom-
alies, and bleeding disorders. Previously reported ocular manifes-
tations
segment
changes, retinitis pigmentosa, ERG abnormalities and optic nerve
abnormalities. NF1 is caused by germline mutations in the NF1
gene. It is characterized by the presence of cafe-au-lait maculae,
intertriginous freckling, neuroﬁbromas and plexiform neuroﬁbro-
mas, and osseous dysplasia. Iris Lisch nodules and optic pathway
glioma are the most common ocular features. Others include
glaucoma, conjunctival hamartomas, retinal astrocytic hamarto-
mas, and choroidal hamartomas. The high occurrence of ocular
features in the syndromes of the Ras/MAPK pathway suggests that it
plays an important role in human eye and visual pathway develop-
ment. Early interventions are likely to beneﬁt patients and warrant
routine ophthalmologic evaluation. Further characterization of
the ocular manifestations in larger number of mutation positive
patients with Ras/MAPK syndromes is likely to help in the
development of potential treatment strategies.

include hypertelorism,

strabismus, anterior

Dermatologic Findings in 55 Mutation Positive Individuals

With Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous Syndrome

Dawn H. Siegel1, Jill McKenzie2, and Katherine A. Rauen3
1Oregon Health & Science University, Portland; 2University of
Washington Medical Center, Seattle, WA; 3University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA

The dermatologic ﬁndings were analyzed in a cohort of 55
individuals with identiﬁed CFC causing mutations. Dermatologic
surveys were designed by the authors and distributed to the subjects

through CFC International or directly by the authors (K.A.R. and
D.H.S.) between July of 2006 and October 2008. A second follow up
survey was collected between December 2007 and October 2008.
Cutaneous features were present in all mutation positive CFC
subjects with no clear genotype–phenotype correlation elucidated
in this study. Common features reported included sparse eyebrows,
sparse hair at the temples, and poor hair growth. Numerous
acquired melanocytic nevi and an increased incidence of infantile
hemangiomas were additional ﬁndings. The analyzed data were
collected via surveys ﬁlled out in most cases by the parents of
the subjects rather than by a physician. The dermatologic features
of CFC syndrome are distinctive and help to distinguish it from
the other Ras/MAPK pathway syndromes.

An Innovative Approach to Specialty Genetics: The UCSF

NF/Ras Pathway Genetics Clinic

Michelle N. Strecker and Katherine A. Rauen
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
Providing comprehensive care for individuals with rare syn-
dromes is often challenging; particularly given that specialty health
care providers cannot be expected to be well-versed on a plethora
of rare disorders. Individuals with rare syndromes also frequently
experience difﬁculty transitioning from pediatric to adult care due
to their multi-specialty needs. We have developed a new clinical
model to serve individuals with syndromes caused by germline
mutations in genes that encode various components of the Ras/
mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. These syn-
dromes include: NF1, NS, CS, CFC, LEOPARD syndrome, Legius
syndrome, capillary malformation-AV malformation syndrome
and gingival ﬁbromatosis. Although individually, these genetic
syndromes are rare, when taken together, these syndromes may
represent one of the most common classes of Mendelian genetic
disorders. The common underlying pathogenetic mechanism of the
Ras/MAPK disorders leads to signiﬁcant overlap in phenotypic
features as well as the resulting specialty care needs. It is this overlap
that inspired the idea of a pathway-based (instead of a disease-
based) genetics clinic. Building off of the Children’s Tumor
Foundation’s neuroﬁbromatosis satellite clinic model, we devel-
oped a comprehensive network of over 50 specialists from pediatric
and adult care, as well as practitioners in reproductive endocrinol-
ogy, obstetrics and gynecology and perinatology. Through
this pathway-based approach to care, we are able to provide
comprehensive management of complex cases and multidisciplin-
ary referrals to our carefully selected network of specialists; all of
whom are located at a single tertiary care center. Our ability to
provide care throughout the life cycle allows us to facilitate smooth
transitions from pediatric to adult multidisciplinary care. In the
past 5 months alone (January 2009 to May 2009), the clinic served
36 individuals with complex health needs: three with optic pathway
gliomas; two with malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors; two
with longstanding chronic pain; and both a child and an adult with
NF1-associated hypertension. We made 14 referrals for cardiac
evaluations, 5 for endocrinology, 2 for gastroenterology, 18 for
neurology and nine for ophthalmology. Preliminary patient feed-
back has been very positive. In order to help insure the continued
success of the clinic in meeting patient needs, we have established an
external patient advocacy advisory board and an internal scientiﬁc

RAUEN ET AL.

23

advisory board to provide feedback and guidance as the clinic
continuously evolves. As we move toward becoming a center for
translational medicine, we will serve as a hub for ongoing research
and clinical trials. We anticipate that this novel clinic will serve as a
model for other institutions.

Prenatal Phenotype and Neonatal Presentation of Cardio-

Facio-Cutaneous Syndrome

Susan H. Tran and Katherine A. Rauen
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
Objective: To delineate the prenatal phenotype and neonatal
characteristics of CFC. Study Design: From January 2007 to
September 2008, a survey was conducted via CFC International.
Data was collected on CFC mutation type, maternal characteristics,
pregnancy, delivery, and neonatal outcomes, with medical record
review performed when available. Summary statistics were calcu-
lated using Microsoft Excel. Results: We identiﬁed 38 individuals
with diagnostic mutations in BRAF (n¼ 30), MEK1 (n¼ 6), or
MEK2 (n¼ 2) genes. The median age of participants was 8.5 years.
Hyperemesis gravidarum, gestational hypertension, preeclampsia,
and gestational diabetes occurred in 13%, 5%, 8%, and 8% of
pregnancies, respectively. Prenatal testing included: 0/3 abnormal
ﬁrst trimester nuchal translucency ultrasounds; 0/14 abnormal
amnio or CVS karyotype studies; and abnormal second trimester
maternal serum triple marker screening in 28% of respondents.
Decreased fetal movement was reported in 29%. Various second
and third trimester ultrasound abnormalities were reported
(Table). Delivery occurred via spontaneous vaginal, operative
vaginal, or cesarean delivery in 35%, 19%, and 46%, respectively,
and at a median gestational age of 35.9 weeks with median birth
weight of 3,233 g. Neonatal complications included feeding tube
requirement (57%), irregular heart beat (24%), and hypoglycemia
(11%). Conclusion: CFC is a multiple congenital anomaly disorder
characterized by craniofacial anomaly, ectodermal abnormalities,
congenital heart defects, and developmental and growth delay. In
mutation-positive individuals, the prenatal phenotype includes
polyhydramnios, renal and cardiac abnormalities, macrocephaly, and
macrosomia on second and third trimester ultrasound. Elevated rates
of operative delivery and neonatal complications were also noted.

Rates of ultrasound ﬁndings in CFC syndrome

Ultrasound ﬁnding
Polyhydramnios
Renal abnormality
Other abnormalities
Macrocephaly
Macrosomia
Heart abnormality
Brain
Neck
Bones
Face

n (%)

25/38 (66%)
8/36 (22%)
7/34 (21%)
7/35 (20%)
6/36 (17%)
6/35 (17%)
3/35 (9%)
3/34 (9%)
2/36 (6%)
0/35 (0%)

Perturbation in ERK1/2 Signaling Results in Cardiac and

Glandular Defects Associated With NCFC Syndromes

Michiko Watanabea, Natalie Cheroskya,

Ivy Samuelsa, Yong-Qiu Doughmana,

Jason Newbernb,
Jamie Wikenheisera,

Madhusudhana Gargeshaa, Ganga Karunamunia, J. Colleen Karloa,
Sulagna Saittac, William Sniderb, and Gary Landretha

aCase Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland,
OH; bUniversity of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC; cThe Children’s
Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA

Neuro-cranio-facial cutaneous (NCFC) syndromes arise from
mutations in genes that impact the ERK/MAP kinase pathway.
Phenotypes associated with a different class of
syndromes
(DiGeorge and related syndromes), also appear to arise from the
disturbance of this pathway. Individuals with the latter syndromes
have cardiac and craniofacial defects associated with perturbations
of neural crest development. Saitta and colleagues have identiﬁed
individuals with a 1 Mb microdeletion on chromosome 22 which
encompasses the MAPK1 gene encoding ERK2. These individuals
exhibit cardiac and craniofacial abnormalities. Deletion or dupli-
cation of 16p11.2, encompassing the MAPK3 gene encoding ERK1,
is also associated with congenital cardiac and craniofacial defects.
This spectrum of defects in individuals lacking ERK pathway genes
was replicated in mice that were lacking ERK genes only in neural
crest cells. Neural crest cell-speciﬁc deletion of the genes for
upstream elements of the ERK cascade (B-RAF and C-RAF, MEK1
and MEK2) as well as deletion of a critical downstream effector, the
transcription factor serum response factor (SRF), resulted in defects
similar to those that resulted from the deletion of ERKs. From these
and other ﬁndings, we favor the hypothesis that neural crest cells
are particularly sensitive to perturbations involving either over-
stimulation or under-stimulation of the ERK pathway, and that
these perturbations can result in the craniofacial and cardiac defects
observed in several classes of human syndromes. Neural crest cells
are known to have profound effects on the development of the
heart. They inﬂuence physiology of the tubular heart, regulate
the differentiation of the secondary heart ﬁeld, are involved in
the septation of the outﬂow tract of the heart, provide cells
for the innervation of the heart, and inﬂuence the maturation of
the conduction system of the heart. Our analyses of the hearts of
embryonic mice with ERK pathway components perturbed in
neural crest cells (NCC) suggest that several roles for the NCC are
disturbed in these mice. We identiﬁed conotruncal defects such
as persistent truncus arteriosus (PTA) and double-outlet right
ventricle (DORV) that have been identiﬁed in individuals with
DiGeorge and related syndromes. In addition we observed ventric-
ular wall abnormalities. Further analysis of the steps in neural crest
cell development of these transgenic embryonic mice will be
pursued to identify the mechanisms that lead to these and other
cardiac defects. Analysis of the expression pattern of the activated
form of ERK (pERK) revealed the surprising ﬁnding that it is
present at discrete sites at deﬁned windows of developmental time.
By focusing on cardiac development, we discovered that pERK is
expressed in the cytoplasm and nuclei of NCC from the time they
are within the neural tube, when they reach the pharyngeal arches
and form the bulk of the mesenchyme surrounding the secondary
heart ﬁeld, and when they enter the endocardial matrix of the
outﬂow tract of the heart proper. The elements that activate pERK
within NCCs at these stages in their development are the focus of
our studies. Other tissues relevant to heart development that
express pERK are the epicardial cells that give rise to the vessels

24

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

of the heart. With regard to epicardial expression of pERK, our
recent ﬁndings indicate an intriguing link between ERK signaling in
epicardial cell lines and the development of lymphatics. Investiga-
tion of this connection may elucidate why individuals with NS and
other related syndromes may suffer lymphedema.

A Restricted Spectrum of NRAS Mutations Causes Noonan

Syndrome

Martin Zenker1, Ion C. Cirstea2, Kerstin Kutsche3, Amy
E. Roberts4, Denise Horn5, Bruce D. Gelb6, Mohammad R.
Ahmadian2, and Marco Tartaglia7

1University

of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany;
2Heinrich-Heine University Medical Center, D€usseldorf, Germany;
3Universit€atsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany;
4Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, USA; 5University Medicine of
Berlin, Germany; 6Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, USA;
7Istituto Superiore di Sanita, Rome, Italy

NS, CFC and the related disorders of the neuro-cardio-facial-
cutaneous spectrum are known to be caused by constitutional
dysregulation of the Ras/MAPK signaling pathway. Based on the
evidence that NS and CFC are genetically heterogeneous with
mutations in known disease genes accounting for only 70–80% of
cases, a systematic scanning of the entire coding sequence of the
NRAS gene as another obvious candidate gene was performed on a
cohort of 533 individuals with phenotype ﬁtting or suggestive of
these disorders and tested negative for mutations in previously
identiﬁed disease genes. We identiﬁed two previously unreported
nucleotide changes (c.149C>T and c.179G>A) predicting the
amino acid substitutions T50I and G60E, each shared by two
unrelated individuals. Three cases were sporadic, and in the re-
maining family transmitting the trait, the missense change co-
segregated with disease. All mutation carriers displayed typical
features of NS. Both the identiﬁed NRAS mutations affected amino
acid residues that show strong evolutionary conservation among
RAS orthologues and paralogs. Transient expression of both the

NS-associated NRAS mutants resulted in enhanced ERK phosphor-
ylation in a stimulus-dependent manner. In NRASG60E, these effects
were related to accumulation in the active form and GAP resistance,
whereas NRAST50I was not found to be enriched in the GTP-loaded
state, suggesting a different mechanism of functional dysregulation
for this mutant. We conclude that NS can be caused by altered
signaling through NRAS in a way that resembles KRAS dysregulated
function in NS and CFC. Similarly to what observed for the
germline KRAS mutations, NS-causing NRAS lesions do not affect
residues recurrently mutated in human cancers, and appear to be
less activating in vitro compared to the cancer-associated defects.
Based on the large size of the patient cohorts included in the study,
germline NRAS mutations are estimated to occur with a prevalence
of less than 1% in patients with NS.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank all the participants who attended the symposium which
made this event such a success. Special thanks to the NSSG, the
CSFN and the ICSSG, CFC International, NF Inc. California and the
CTF for coming together physically and in heart to support this
event. We thank all the private and public contributing agencies for
the educational grants and awards. This work was supported in part
by NIH grants HD048502 and HD061140 (K.A.R.).

REFERENCE

Hennekam RC. 2007. What to call a syndrome. Am J Med Genet Part A

143A:1021–1024.

Robin NH, Biesecker LG. 2001. Considerations for a multiaxis nomencla-

ture system for medical genetics. Genet Med 3:290–293.

Tidyman WE, Rauen KA. 2009. The RASopathies: Developmental syn-
dromes of Ras/MAPK pathway dysregulation. Curr Opin Genet Dev
19:230–236.

