ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.
2:191–216

The Annual Review of
Pathology: Mechanisms of Disease is online at
pathmechdis.annualreviews.org

This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev.pathol.2.010506.091940
Copyright c(cid:2) 2007 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved

1553-4006/07/0228-0191$20.00

Neuroﬁbromatosis
Andrea I. McClatchey
Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,
Massachusetts 02129 and Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115; email: mcclatch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

Key Words
peripheral nerve sheath tumor, schwannoma, Neuroﬁbromin, Ras
signaling, Merlin/Schwannomin, Ezrin, Radixin, Moesin (the
ERM proteins), membrane organization

Abstract
As familial cancer syndromes, the neuroﬁbromatoses exhibit com-
plex phenotypes, comprising a range of tumor and nontumor mani-
festations. Although the three recognized forms of neuroﬁbromato-
sis (NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis) all feature the development
of nervous system tumors, their underlying genetic bases are clearly
distinct. The most prominent common feature of all three is the
appearance of Schwann cell–initiated tumorigenesis of the periph-
eral nervous system. Recent progress in delineating the molecular
function of the NF1- and NF2-encoded proteins, together with the
development and use of manipulable mouse models, has led to im-
portant advances in understanding the pathogenesis of many fea-
tures of neuroﬁbromatosis. An important outcome of the study of
neuroﬁbromatosis-associated tumorigenesis has been insight into
the more general molecular and cellular bases of nervous system
tumors.

191

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

Neuroﬁbromatosis:
group of inherited
familial cancer
syndromes
characterized by
multiple cutaneous
and/or internal
tumors derived
mostly from
peripheral nerves
NF1:
neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1
NF2:
neuroﬁbromatosis
type 2

INTRODUCTION
Neuroﬁbromatoses are a group of genetic dis-
orders featuring the development of tumors of
the nervous system, particularly of the nerve
sheath (1–3). Over the past two decades, the
organization and mobilization of national and
international networks of clinicians and re-
searchers invested in neuroﬁbromatosis (NF)
have facilitated signiﬁcant advances in under-
standing the genetic and molecular pathogen-
esis of NF and in developing diagnostic cri-
teria, management strategies, animal models,
and, recently, clinical trials (2, 3). This ef-
fort has also yielded the formation of ma-
jor NF treatment centers across the United
States and in Europe, where both manage-
ment and clinical research efforts are coor-
dinated. Three major forms of NF are rec-
ognized as distinct entities on the basis of
their genetic origins and pathogenesis: neu-
roﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1), neuroﬁbromato-
sis type 2 (NF2), and schwannomatosis (3,
4). The genetic bases of NF1 and NF2 are
known, and they have both been studied ex-
tensively. Schwannomatosis was recognized

Late 1700s
First clinical 
description
of NF1

Early 1800s
First clinical 
description 
of NF2

Late 1800s
Characterization
of NF1; original use of 
the term neuroﬁbroma

1978
National Neuroﬁbromatosis 
Foundation is established;
now known as the
Children’s Tumor Foundation

1987
NIH establishes the nomenclature NF1
and NF2, as well as diagnostic criteria and
treatment guidelines for both disorders
Genetic markers for NF1 and NF2 are identified 
on chromosomes 17 and 22, respectively

1700s

1800s

1970s

1980s

1990s

2000 on

1990
Identification of the NF1 gene
and description of its encoded protein,
named Neurofibromin in 1992

1993
Identification of the NF2 gene
and description of its encoded protein,
named Merlin or Schwannomin

1994
Strains of Nf1-mutant
mice are generated

2003
Schwannomatosis
is recognized
as genetically
distinct from NF2

1997-2000
Strains of Nf2-mutant
mice are generated 

1996
Drosophila melanogaster
model of NF2 is developed

1997
Drosophila melanogaster
model of NF1 is developed

Figure 1
Timeline of historical milestones in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 and type 2
(NF1 and NF2) research.

192 McClatchey

only recently as a distinct disorder, and much
less is known about its genetic or molecular
basis (4). This review outlines both common-
alities and distinctions among the different
forms of NF and describes recent advances in
understanding the pathogenesis of individual
features of NF.

General Clinical Features
NF1 was described in the late 1700s, but was
ﬁrst recognized as a disorder and character-
ized extensively in 1882 by von Reckling-
hausen (Figure 1) (5). NF1 incidence is as
high as 1 per 3500 individuals, making it one
of the most common genetic disorders among
humans (2, 3). Although NF1 is familial, there
is a very high incidence of new mutations,
likely due to the large size of the NF1 gene
and an unusually high mutation rate associ-
ated with the NF1 locus. The clinical pheno-
types associated with NF1 are numerous and
include both tumor and nontumor symptoms.
The onset and severity of nearly all clinical
features of NF1 are age-dependent and ex-
tremely variable, even within NF1 families;
indeed, the unpredictable expressivity of NF1
is one of the most challenging aspects of NF1
management. The complex diagnostic crite-
ria for NF1 were updated in 1997 (Figure 2)
(6).

The signature of NF1 is the development
of benign neuroﬁbromas, which are mixed tu-
mors composed of all cell types found in the
normal peripheral nerve, including Schwann
cells (see Figure 3) (1, 2). Neuroﬁbromas de-
velop on or around the peripheral nerves, ei-
ther as encapsulated dermal and subcutaneous
masses that pose little clinical threat but can be
very disﬁguring, or as plexiform neuroﬁbro-
mas that are often congenital and can develop
deep within the body near the nerve roots.
Plexiform neuroﬁbromas are usually diffuse
and tend to expand along large segments
of the nerve, often leading to disﬁgurement
and nerve dysfunction (Figure 4). Even more
insidious, approximately 10% of plexiform
neuroﬁbromas progress to malignancy; the

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

Diagnostic criteria for NF1
 
An individual having two or more of the following:
 
Six or more café-au-lait spots:
     1.5 cm or larger in individuals past puberty
     0.5 cm or larger in individuals before puberty

 

Two or more neurofibromas of any type, or one or
   more plexiform neurofibromas

 

Diagnostic criteria for schwannomatosis
 
An individual over 30 years of age having the 
following:
 
Two or more nonintradermal schwannomas, at least
   one with histological confirmation

 

No evidence of vestibular tumor on high-quality 
   magnetic resonance imaging scan

 

Freckling in the axilla or groin

 

Optic glioma

 

Two or more Lisch nodules

 

A distinct bony lesion, such as dysplasia of the sphenoid 
     bone or dysplasia or thinning of the long bone cortex

 

A first-degree relative with NF1

Diagnostic criteria for NF2
 
An individual with the following has definite NF2:
 
Bilateral vestibular schwannomas or
   family history of NF2 (first-degree relative)
plus
unilateral vestibular schwannoma before age 30 or
   any two of the following:
     — Meningioma
     — Glioma
     — Schwannoma
     — Juvenile posterior subcapsular lenticular opacities

 

 

 

No known constitutional NF2 mutation
or
One pathologically confirmed nonvestibular 
   schwannoma and a first-degree relative meeting
   the above criteria

An individual with the following has probable NF2:
 
Unilateral vestibular schwannoma before age 30 plus
   at least one of the following:
      —  Meningioma
      —  Glioma
      —  Schwannoma
      —  Juvenile posterior subcapsular lenticular opacities
or
two or more meningiomas plus unilateral vestibular 
   schwannomas before age 30 or one of the following:
        — Glioma
        — Schwannoma
        — Juvenile posterior subcapsular lenticular opacities

 

 

Figure 2
Current diagnostic criteria for neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1), neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2), and
schwannomatosis. Adapted from References 4 and 6: MacCollin M, Chiocca EA, Evans DG, Friedman
JM, Horvitz R, et al. 2005. Diagnostic criteria for schwannomatosis. Neurology 64:1838–45 and Gutmann
DH, Aylsworth A, Carey JC, Korf B, Marks J, et al. 1997. The diagnostic evaluation and
multidisciplinary management of neuroﬁbromatosis 1 and neuroﬁbromatosis 2. JAMA 278:51–57.

resulting malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors (MPNSTs) are highly metastatic and
essentially incurable. NF1 patients are also
predisposed to develop other tumor types,
including gliomas, myeloid leukemias, and
pheochromocytomas. In each case, loss or
mutation of the wild-type NF1 allele can be
detected in the tumor, consistent with the
classiﬁcation of NF1 as a tumor suppressor
gene (7, 8).

Nontumor manifestations of NF1 in-
clude abnormal skin pigmentation (caf´e-au-
lait spots), learning disabilities, skeletal ab-
normalities, and visual anomalies (particularly
Lisch nodules), any of which can be dis-
ﬁguring or disabling (1, 2). Increasing evi-
dence suggests that at least some of these
phenotypes are due to haplo-insufﬁciency
for NF1. Moreover, studies of animal mod-
els
that NF1 heterozygosity in

suggest

Schwannomatosis:
development of
multiple
schwannomas in
patients that neither
harbor germ-line
mutations in the NF2
gene nor develop
schwannomas of the
vestibular nerve

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

193

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

Neurofibroma

Schwannoma

Nerve

MPNST

Schwann cell
Perineurial cell
Fibroblast
Mast cell
Axon

Figure 3
The Schwann cell, which is particularly sensitive to loss of NF1/Neuroﬁbromin and/or NF2/Merlin
function, is the cell-of-origin for the neuroﬁbroma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST),
and schwannoma. Unlike schwannomas, which are comprised of Schwann cells only, neuroﬁbromas
contain multiple cell types from the peripheral nerve. Additional mutations promote the progression of
neuroﬁbromas to MPNSTs.

Figure 4
Magnetic resonance imaging of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1), neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2), and
schwannomatosis. Coronal images of (a) a plexiform neuroﬁbroma of the thigh in an NF1 patient,
(b) bilateral vestibular schwannomas in an NF2 patient, and (c) a spinal schwannoma in a
schwannomatosis patient. Arrowheads indicate tumor masses. Images provided by Dr. Scott Plotkin.

surrounding cells plays an obligate role in
the formation of neuroﬁbromas and other
NF1-associated tumors (see below) (9, 10).
Thus, variation in the expression of either the
mutant or wild-type NF1 allele could con-

tribute to the variable expressivity of NF1
symptoms.

NF2, which occurs much less frequently
than NF1 (incidence of 1/25,000), was orig-
inally described in the 1800s, but it was not

194 McClatchey

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

Schwann cell:
specialized glial cell
that surrounds and
electrically insulates
the axons in a
peripheral nerve
Neuroﬁbroma:
benign polyclonal
tumor formed by a
mixture of Schwann
cells, perineurial
ﬁbroblasts, and often
mast cells, located on
or around a
peripheral nerve
MPNST: malignant
peripheral nerve
sheath tumor
Tumor suppressor:
any gene/protein
whose loss of
function results in
tumor formation
Schwannoma:
benign tumor
composed exclusively
of Schwann cells that
grows on or around a
peripheral nerve

until nearly a century later that NF2 was rec-
ognized as a discrete entity (Figure 1) (3).
The cardinal feature of NF2 is the devel-
opment of schwannomas on or around the
vestibular branches of both auditory nerves
(Figure 4) (1–3). Loss of hearing is there-
fore usually the ﬁrst sign of NF2 and often
occurs only when the tumor(s) is relatively
large. Many NF2 patients develop additional
schwannomas—on other cranial nerves or
spinal nerve roots—and meningiomas, benign
tumors of the meninges that surround the
brain and spinal cord. Although rare, NF2 pa-
tients also develop ependymomas and astrocy-
tomas with a much higher frequency than the
normal population. Tumors in NF2 patients
are uniformly benign and do not progress to
malignancy, but they can compress associated
nerves, causing considerable pain and nerve
dysfunction (schwannomas), or increase cra-
nial pressure, causing a plethora of symptoms
including weakness, migraines, and impaired
vision, speech, or memory (meningiomas).
Finally, many NF2 patients develop poste-
rior subcapsular cataracts, an unusual type of
cataract that involves altered cellular architec-
ture rather than crystalline lens opacity. There
is variability in the presentation of NF2, but
it is not as high as that seen in NF1.

In contrast to neuroﬁbromas, schwan-
nomas are encapsulated tumors composed
only of Schwann cells (1, 2). Although most
schwannomas in NF2 develop at the boundary
between the central and peripheral nervous
systems, dermal schwannomas can develop in
NF2 and can be confused with cutaneous neu-
roﬁbromas; histological analysis reveals that
these lesions contain only Schwann cells (3).
Indeed, the appearance of dermal schwanno-
mas was likely an original source of confusion
in distinguishing NF1 and NF2 as distinct dis-
orders.

Schwannomatosis was only recently rec-
ognized as a distinct disorder despite re-
cent estimates that its incidence is similar
to that of NF2 (1/30,000) (3, 4). This is
likely due to the considerable difﬁculty in dis-
tinguishing schwannomatosis from NF2. In

fact, schwannomatosis patients develop mul-
tiple schwannomas anywhere, except on the
vestibular nerve; otherwise, these tumors are
indistinguishable from those of NF2 patients
(Figure 4). Although biallelic NF2 mutations
(and other mutations) are found in schwan-
nomas from schwannomatosis patients, they
are not found in normal tissue from the same
patient, suggesting that they represent sec-
ondary mutations (see below). MacCollin et
al. (11) even suggested that the primary ge-
netic mutation that causes schwannomatosis
acts by facilitating mutation of the NF2 locus.
The frequency of NF2 mutation in these tu-
mors suggests that loss of function of the NF2
protein is a key cooperating event in schwan-
noma formation in these patients. Unraveling
the genetic and molecular bases of schwanno-
matosis will be an important and fascinating
endeavor.

Treatment
A particularly poignant consequence of the
limited treatment strategies available for NF1
and NF2 is that clinical genetic testing, al-
though now available for both, is not often
used in diagnosing NF1 or NF2 (2, 3). In fact,
early diagnosis does not inﬂuence manage-
ment; instead, conservative approaches and a
strategy of informed vigilance predominate.
Treatment of particularly severe tumors in-
volves surgery, often multiple ones. Although
benign, the intimate association of neuroﬁ-
bromas and schwannomas with nerves ren-
ders them difﬁcult to resect completely, and
these tumors often recur. The slow-growing
nature of these tumors renders them poor can-
didates for chemotherapeutic intervention, al-
though radiation therapy is successful in treat-
ing some schwannomas. Nevertheless, a key
challenge in treating many patients with ei-
ther disorder is the sheer multiplicity of tu-
mors. Therefore, the development of new
therapeutic strategies based on an improved
genetic and molecular understanding of NF
pathogenesis is an urgent goal of the NF
community.

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

195

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

Neuroﬁbromin:
protein encoded by
the NF1 tumor
suppressor gene;
negatively regulates
the signaling activity
of the small GTPase
Ras
Merlin: protein
encoded by the NF2
tumor suppressor
gene; inhibits cell
proliferation in
response to cellular
adhesion

GENETICS

The NF1 and NF2 Tumor
Suppressor Genes
The identiﬁcation of the NF1 and NF2 genes
in 1990 and 1993, respectively, vaulted NF
research to a new level of study (12–16). In
addition to raising the possibility of genetic
counseling for some NF patients, the identiﬁ-
cation of the NF1- and NF2-encoded proteins
allowed for studies of the molecular pathogen-
esis of NF, the generation of animal models
that mimic aspects of the human disease, and
the possibility of developing targeted ther-
apeutic strategies. Each of these endeavors
yielded both expected and unexpected insight
into NF. The genetic basis of schwannomato-
sis has not been elucidated.

Both genes were identiﬁed by positional
cloning and loss of heterozygosity studies, and
can be classiﬁed as tumor suppressor genes
by genetic criteria (12–16). Thus, NF1 and
NF2 patients harbor constitutional heterozy-
gous inactivating mutations at the NF1 or NF2
locus, reﬂecting either inherited or new germ-
line mutations. Somatic mutation of the re-
maining wild-type allele is presumed to initi-
ate tumor development and can be detected
in tumors. In addition, mutations in the NF1
or NF2 gene are often found in sporadic ver-
sions of the tumors associated with NF1 and
NF2. For example, although sporadic neu-
roﬁbromas are rare, NF1 mutations have been
identiﬁed in sporadic MPNSTs and myeloid
leukemias (7, 8). Similarly, nearly all spo-
radic schwannomas and approximately 60%
of sporadic meningiomas exhibit biallelic in-
activation of NF2 (17–21). In fact, schwanno-
mas and meningiomas are among the most
common brain tumors in humans. In ad-
dition to the tumors associated with famil-
ial NF2, NF2 mutations frequently occur in
sporadic mesotheliomas, malignant tumors of
the lung lining linked to asbestos exposure
(17, 21).
The NF1 gene is extremely large (∼350 kb)
and encodes a correspondingly large protein,
dubbed Neuroﬁbromin (220–280 kDa) (12–

14). The large size of the NF1 gene may
help explain the high incidence of mutation at
the NF1 locus; indeed, approximately 50% of
NF1 patients represent new mutations with-
out a family history of NF1 (22). Researchers
have also proposed that gene conversion in-
volving any of several NF1 pseudogenes on
other chromosomes or intragenic recombi-
nation between unusual repeated sequences
within the NF1 gene contributes to a rate
of mutation tenfold higher than most other
human genes (23, 24). The high mutation
rate of the NF1 gene is evidenced by the re-
cent ﬁnding that homozygous mutation of the
Mlh1 mismatch repair gene in humans leads
to features of NF1 and to somatic NF1 mu-
tations (25). Indeed, Mlh1-deﬁciency exacer-
bates the tumorigenic consequences of het-
+/−) in mouse
erozygous Nf1 mutation (Nf1
models (26).

Most NF1 mutations identiﬁed in humans
are either small deletions or truncating muta-
tions that completely inactivate the gene (22).
Despite the extensive variability in NF1 ex-
pressivity, genotype-phenotype correlations
have been identiﬁed only in patients with par-
ticularly severe forms of NF1, who carry large
deletions that encompass the entire NF1 gene
plus several adjacent or embedded genes (27).
Instead, genetic modiﬁers that lie outside the
NF1 gene appear to account for a large frac-
tion of the symptomatic variability seen in
NF1 (28–30).

The smaller NF2 gene (110 kb) encodes
a 69-kDa protein termed Merlin (also known
as Schwannomin) and exhibits a much lower
rate of mutation (15, 16). Nevertheless, like
NF1, the occurrence of NF2 without fam-
ily history is common, reﬂecting a relatively
high frequency of new mutation (2). Although
there is also considerable variability in NF2
expressivity, there is a strong tendency for dis-
ease onset and severity to be similar in NF2
families (31–37). However, neither this appar-
ent genotype-phenotype correlation nor the
identity of several missense mutations in the
NF2 gene has yielded clear structure-function
insight into the NF2-encoded protein.

196 McClatchey

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

Evolutionary Conservation
The reduced genome complexity of lower
organisms such as the fruit ﬂy Drosophila
melanogaster, ﬂatworm Caenorhabditis elegans,
and baker’s yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae
provides great advantages for studying in-
dividual genes. The NF1 gene is highly
conserved evolutionarily, with homologues
present in most eukaryotic genomes, includ-
ing that of the fruit ﬂy and yeast (Figure 5a)
(38, 39). As discussed below, studies of ﬂy NF1

have been instrumental in dissecting the major
molecular pathways regulated by NF1. No-
tably, there is no identiﬁable NF1 homologue
in C. elegans, despite conservation of the Ras
signaling pathway in which the NF1 protein
is thought to function (40).

Interestingly, homologues of NF2 are re-
stricted to metazoans (multicellular eukary-
otes), including the fruit ﬂy and ﬂatworm;
there is no NF2 homologue in yeast (41, 42).
This is consistent with a role for the NF2-
encoded protein, Merlin, in coordinating cell

2818 aa

2764 aa

3079 aa

a

Mammalian

Fly

Yeast

p120 Ras-GAP

b

Merlin

FERM

Ezrin

Radixin

Moesin

FERM

FERM

FERM

dMerlin

FERM

dMoesin

FERM

GRD

GRD

GRD

GRD

1047 aa

596 aa

586 aa

583 aa

577 aa

635 aa

578 aa

Figure 5
Schematic illustration depicting the organization of the NF1/Neuroﬁbromin and NF2/Merlin proteins
and their evolutionary conservation among species. (a) The large NF1/Neuroﬁbromin protein is
conserved from yeast to mammals. It was recently suggested that, in addition to a central GTPase
activating protein–related domain (GRD), an immediately adjacent region of approximately 80 amino
acids (aa) (indicated in green) controls ubiquitin-mediated degradation of Neuroﬁbromin. Both domains
are contained within a region of higher homology (indicated in orange) than the ﬂanking parts. This
portion encompasses approximately one-third of the protein and is functionally undeﬁned. In
comparison, homology with the smaller mammalian p120 GTPase activating proteins for Ras (Ras-GAP)
is limited to the GRD. (b) NF2/Merlin and the ERM (Ezrin, Radixin, and Moesin) proteins share a
highly conserved N-terminal FERM domain (Four-point-one, Ezrin, Radixin, Moesin), whereas the
less-conserved C termini of the ERMs contain bona ﬁde actin-binding domains (red ) not present in
Merlin.

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

197

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

proliferation and cell-cell contact, as discussed
below. The striking conservation of the NF2
coding sequence across species suggests con-
servation of function (Figure 5b). Indeed,
somatic inactivation of ﬂy NF2 (Mer) leads
to excessive cellular proliferation (43, 44).
Studies of ﬂy NF2 have also expanded our un-
derstanding of the molecular function of NF2,
as discussed below. In fact, the human protein
can function reliably in both the mouse and
Drosophila systems (43). The C. elegans homo-
logue nfm-1 has been identiﬁed, but not ex-
tensively studied (45).

+/− or Nf 2

Mouse Models of Neuroﬁbromatosis
The mouse NF1- and NF2-encoded proteins
both share 98% amino acid identity with
their cognate human proteins (46, 47). The
generation and study of mice carrying tar-
geted mutations in the mouse Nf1 and Nf 2
loci conﬁrmed that both mouse homologues
function as tumor suppressor genes and that
both the Nf1- and Nf 2-encoded proteins have
important roles during embryogenesis (48–
52). Although both heterozygous Nf1- or
+/−) mice, which
Nf 2-mutant (Nf1
should genetically mimic human NF1 and
NF2 patients, respectively, are cancer prone,
neither spontaneously develops the hallmarks
of human NF1 and NF2 (51, 52). However,
second-generation mouse models that target
Nf1- or Nf 2-deﬁciency to speciﬁc cell types
have now modeled most aspects of NF1 and
NF2, as described below (52, 53). Collec-
tively, mouse models of NF have been used
to address key questions concerning the ge-
netic, molecular, and cellular pathogenesis of
NF. These Nf-mutant mice are also valuable
sources of primary Nf1- and Nf 2-deﬁcient
cells for study and vehicles for preclinical test-
ing of targeted therapeutics.

Constitutional inactivation of the mouse
Nf1 gene revealed that,
like most tumor
suppressors, Nf1 is required for normal
embryonic development (48, 49). Homozy-
−/−) embryos die dur-
gous Nf1-mutant (Nf1
ing midembryogenesis (E13.5, or embryonic

day 13.5 of the 19–20 day mouse gestation)
owing to a cardiac defect known as double
outlet right ventricle. Subsequent studies re-
vealed that this reﬂects a critical function for
Nf1 in the endothelial cells of the endocar-
dial cushion (54). At older ages (∼18 months),
+/− mice are prone to developing some
Nf1
of the tumors seen in NF1 patients, notably
pheochromocytoma and myeloid leukemia;
both exhibit loss of the wild-type Nf1 allele
(49).

Targeted inactivation of the mouse Nf 2
gene revealed a role for Nf 2 at an even ear-
lier stage of embryonic development (50). Ho-
−/−) embryos fail
mozygous Nf 2-mutant (Nf 2
very early during development (E7.0) without
gastrulating. Developmental failure in these
embryos appears to be due to a lack of extra-
embryonic ectoderm, without obvious over-
proliferation of any cell compartment. Mosaic
−/− cells
embryos partially composed of Nf 2
evade this defect but exhibit defects in other
tissues, suggesting multiple roles for nor-
mal Nf 2 function during embryogenesis (I.
Saotome & A.I. McClatchey, unpublished ob-
+/− mice predominantly de-
servations). Nf 2
velop osteosarcoma and liver tumors (both
hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarci-
noma) late in life (12–24 months of age) (50,
52). Notably, these mice also develop a num-
ber of other tumor types with lower frequency,
including a range of soft tissue sarcomas
such as chondrosarcoma, ﬁbrosarcoma, and
rhabdomyosarcoma. The frequent loss of the
wild-type Nf 2 allele in all these tumor types
suggests that Nf 2 loss contributed to their for-
mation. Moreover, the high rate of metastasis
exhibited by many of these tumors suggests
that Nf 2 loss can also promote metastatic pro-
gression (51). Thus, impaired NF2 function
may play a broader role in cancer develop-
ment than originally predicted. Although NF2
mutations have not been described in human
tumors of these types, accumulating evidence
suggests that elimination of NF2 function can
occur via other mechanisms, including epi-
genetic regulation of the NF2 gene or post-
translational inactivation of the NF2-encoded

198 McClatchey

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

protein (55–57). Deregulation of NF2 signal-
ing may also occur at other steps in the path-
way (see below).

+/−;p53

+/−, Nf 2

Genetic Cooperativity
To determine whether inactivation of other
tumor suppressor genes might cooperate with
loss of Nf1 or Nf 2 to accelerate tumorigene-
sis or elicit the hallmarks of NF1 and NF2
in mice, Nf1- and Nf 2-mutant mice were
crossed with mice carrying other tumor sup-
pressor gene mutations (51, 58–60). Such
studies of genetic cooperativity yielded im-
portant insight into both speciﬁc and general
genetic inﬂuences on NF-associated tumori-
genesis. In contrast to humans, the Nf1, Nf 2,
and p53 tumor suppressor loci are all geneti-
cally linked on the long arm of mouse chromo-
some 11 (Figure 6a). Compound heterozy-
+/−;p53
+/−, and
gotes (Nf1
+/−;Nf 2
+/−) were engineered with both
Nf1
the linked (cis) and unlinked (trans) conﬁgu-
ration of mutant alleles (51, 58–60). In each
case, the cis conﬁguration (linkage of the tu-
mor suppressor mutations) led to a markedly
more severe tumor phenotype than that of
either the trans or singly heterozygous mu-
tant conﬁguration. Thus, Nf1
cis
mice predominantly develop aggressive MP-
NSTs and malignant astrocytomas at 6–12
months of age, most of which exhibit loss of
both wild-type Nf1 and p53 alleles presum-
ably due to loss of the wild-type chromosome
(Figure 6b) (58–60). Consistent with the idea
that variable NF1 expressivity is at least partly
due to genetic modiﬁcation, the penetrance
of both MPNSTs and astrocytomas in these
mice varies greatly depending upon the ge-
netic background (60). In fact, recent studies
have identiﬁed a locus linked to Nf1 and p53
on mouse chromosome 11 that dominantly
modiﬁes the susceptibility to both astrocy-
tomas and MPNSTs (61, 62). Importantly,
this locus is also imprinted, yielding allele-of-
origin effects on tumor susceptibility (61).

+/−;p53

+/−

Analogous work revealed that inactiva-
tion of p53 also cooperates with Nf 2 loss in

MPNST,
glioma

Osteosarcoma

a

Human

Mouse

NF1

p53

NF2

22

17

b

cis

Nf2

Nf1
p53

11

Nf1
p53

Nf2

p53

c

trans

Nf1

p53

X

Rare

Nf2

X

p53

Frequent

Figure 6
Location of the mouse and human NF1, NF2, and p53 tumor suppressor
loci. Also depicted are the genetic steps and consequences of cooperativity
between mutations in the Nf1, Nf 2, and p53 tumor suppressor loci (see
text). MPNST, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor.

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

199

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

+/−;p53

+/−

Ras-GAP: GTPase
activating protein for
Ras

+/−;p53

+/−

+/−;p53

+/−

+/− or p53

tumorigenesis in the mouse; Nf 2
cis mice develop multiple osteosarcomas that
also show loss of both wild-type Nf 2 and p53
alleles by 3–4 months of age (51). Notably,
trans mice also develop os-
Nf 2
+/−
teosarcomas earlier than Nf 2
mice; surprisingly, these tumors also exhibit
loss of both wild-type Nf 2 and p53 alleles,
suggesting a two-step mechanism whereby so-
matic recombination yielding a cis conﬁgura-
tion is followed by loss of the wild-type chro-
mosome (Figure 6c). In contrast, tumors that
develop in Nf1
trans mice exhibit
loss of either the wild-type Nf1 or p53 allele,
but not both (58, 59). This can be explained
by the much tighter linkage between Nf1 and
p53 (∼4 centimorgans apart) than between
Nf 2 and p53 (∼40 centimorgans) (Figure 6c),
which dictates the rate of somatic recombina-
tion between loci. These data underscore the
inﬂuence of genetic linkage of cancer predis-
posing or modifying mutations.
+/−;Nf 2

cis mice
do not develop osteosarcomas but instead
develop tumors classiﬁed as schwannomas,
both immunohistochemically and ultrastruc-
turally, by 6–18 months of age (63; C.-H. Liu
& A.I. McClatchey, unpublished observa-
tions). The tight linkage of the Nf1 and p53
loci to one another strongly argues against a
genetic basis for the differing tumor spectra
+/−
in Nf 2
cis mice. Instead, these models support the
hypothesis that loss of Nf1 cooperates with
Nf 2 deﬁciency in tumorigenesis derived from
Schwann cells but not osteoblasts, thereby
reﬂecting
cooperativity.
Additional studies of Nf 2/p53- and Nf1/p53-
mediated tumorigenesis
the
timing of Nf 2 or Nf1 inactivation relative to
that of p53 dictates the tumor phenotype,
likely
context-dependent
cooperativity (64, 65).

Remarkably, Nf1

cell-type-speciﬁc

+/−;Nf1

+/−

also reﬂecting

+/−

cis and Nf 2

+/−;p53

suggest

that

Co-inactivation of the Nf1, Nf 2, and/or
p53 tumor suppressor genes is facilitated by
their linked organization on mouse chro-
mosome 11. Furthermore, Eden et al. (66)
have recently shown that genome-wide hy-

200 McClatchey

+/−

+/−;p53

pomethylation promotes tumor development
in Nf1
cis mice by increasing the
rate of loss of the wild-type chromosome.
Thus, the unique conﬁguration of chromo-
some 11 may elicit genetic interactions not
mimicked during human NF-associated tu-
morigenesis. However, these studies identi-
ﬁed context-dependent cooperation between
the NF1, NF2, and p53 tumor suppressor
pathways, which is important in delineating
the molecular pathogenesis of NF1 and NF2.
These studies also highlight the complexity of
genetic and epigenetic inﬂuences on the pro-
cess of tumorigenesis and suggest that genome
architecture and the distinct conﬁgurations
of the mouse and human genomes have a
profound impact on tumorigenesis in both
species.

FUNCTIONS OF THE NF1- AND
NF2-ENCODED PROTEINS

NF1/Neuroﬁbromin and Ras
Signaling
The central portion of Neuroﬁbromin con-
tains a small domain that bears striking ho-
mology to negative regulators of the small
GTPase Ras (Figure 5a). So-called GT-
Pase activating proteins for Ras (Ras-GAPs)
retard Ras signaling by enhancing its in-
trinsic GTPase activity, thereby promoting
the inactive GDP-bound state (67). This
suggests that Neuroﬁbromin functions as a
tumor suppressor by negatively regulating
mitogenic Ras signaling and that the inabil-
ity to downregulate Ras is central to NF1-
associated tumorigenesis (Figure 7). Indeed,
elevated levels of Ras-GTP and of Ras path-
way signaling have been measured in NF1-
mutant tumors, and Neuroﬁbromin functions
as a Ras-GAP in vivo and in vitro (68). How-
ever, this domain represents only a small por-
tion (∼12%) of the Neuroﬁbromin protein.
Indeed, although multiple studies now sug-
gest that the Ras-GAP function of Neuroﬁ-
bromin is necessary in some settings for its tu-
mor suppressor function, it is unclear whether

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

the remainder of Neuroﬁbromin performs
other critical functions or provides regulatory
and/or localization-determining information.
In fact, almost nothing is known about the
88% of Neuroﬁbromin that lies outside of
the GTPase activating protein–related do-
main (GRD).

The strongest support for functions of
Neuroﬁbromin beyond Ras regulation comes
from studies of Drosophila NF1. Homozygous
inactivation of Drosophila NF1 yields viable
ﬂies, but ones that are abnormally small and
exhibit electrophysiological, learning, and cir-
cadian defects (39, 69–71). Only the circadian
defect was rescued by genetic reduction of Ras
signaling (71). The other defects were res-
cued instead by increasing adenylyl cyclase
(AC)–cyclic adenosine-3(cid:3),5(cid:3)-monophosphate
(cAMP)-protein kinase A signaling (39, 69,
70). A role for Neuroﬁbromin in regulating
AC activity and cAMP levels has also been
demonstrated in mammalian cells (72–74).
Notably, Schwann cells are one of the few cell
types that require cAMP signaling for prolif-
eration; in many cell types, increased cAMP
signaling is instead associated with growth
arrest and differentiation (75). Dual roles in
regulating both Ras signaling and cAMP pro-
duction could explain why Neuroﬁbromin
function is
regulating
Schwann cell proliferation. Notably, these
studies do not rule out the possibility that in
some contexts, aberrant Ras activity inhibits
AC. In fact, a recent study suggested that ﬂy
NF1 can stimulate AC activity in either a Ras-
dependent or -independent manner (76).

so important

for

The activation of Ras downstream of
growth factor receptor signaling is well es-
tablished, although distinct pools of Ras are
likely activated by subsets of receptors (77).
Moreover, there are more than 20 Ras-GAPs
in the human genome (67). Hence, it is un-
likely that loss of NF1 results in a general-
ized activation of Ras signaling; rather, the
NF1-regulated pool of Ras is likely to con-
trol a speciﬁc signaling output. Activation of
the Raf/MEK, PI3K/AKT, and Rac pathways
are the best-studied consequences of activated

Figure 7
Working model depicting the roles of NF1/Neuroﬁbromin and
NF2/Merlin in negatively regulating signaling downstream of growth factor
(GF) receptors. Ras signaling output in response to extracellular signals is
enhanced in the absence of NF1. NF2 appears to coordinate negative
regulation of transmembrane receptor signaling with the formation and
maintenance of cell-cell or cell-extracellular matrix adhesive structures.
Unlike NF1, loss of NF2 is likely to deregulate the function of multiple
receptor effectors, including Ras. PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.

GRD: GTPase
activating
protein–related
domain

−/−

Ras signaling, and all are elevated in Nf1
cells (Figure 7) (68). However, it is not clear
which effector pathways are critical for NF
pathogenesis. Recent studies suggest that el-
evated activity of mTOR (mammalian tar-
get of rapamycin) is a critical consequence of
Nf1 deﬁciency (78, 79). These studies clearly
established that mTOR is a target of Nf1-
regulated Ras signaling, and raised the pos-
sibility that the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin
might yield therapeutic beneﬁt. Indeed, ra-
−/−
pamycin blocks the proliferation of NF1
primary and tumor cells (78). Rapamycin and
its derivatives have been heralded as potential
therapeutic agents for several other cancers,
which could facilitate an investigation of its
efﬁcacy in NF1.

Given the extensive evidence suggesting
that Nf1 haplo-insufﬁciency plays a critical

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

201

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

ERM: Ezrin,
Radixin, and Moesin
FERM:
Four-point-one,
Ezrin, Radixin,
Moesin

role in the pathogenesis of several clinical fea-
tures of NF1, strategies that increase Neu-
roﬁbromin activity or protein levels could
have important clinical beneﬁt not just for
NF1, but also for other cancers exhibiting
deregulated Ras signaling. Until recently, lit-
tle was known about how Neuroﬁbromin lev-
els or activity are regulated. Neuroﬁbromin is
dynamically regulated by ubiquitin-mediated
proteolysis (80). Sequences immediately ad-
jacent to the GRD appear to be required
for Neuroﬁbromin degradation,
indicating
the ﬁrst clear function for a region of Neu-
roﬁbromin outside the GRD (Figure 5a).
Unlike many other examples of ubiquitin-
mediated degradation, this does not appear
to be initiated by direct phosphorylation of
Neuroﬁbromin (81). Identiﬁcation of the pre-
cise signals that control proteolysis of Neu-
roﬁbromin may also provide new therapeutic
opportunities.

NF2/Merlin and Membrane
Organization
The NF2-encoded protein, Merlin, is closely
related to the ERM (Ezrin, Radixin, and
Moesin) proteins, which are thought to or-
ganize speciﬁc membrane domains by provid-
ing regulated linkage between membrane pro-
teins and the actin cytoskeleton (Figure 5b)
(41, 82). Early studies established that
Merlin, like the ERM proteins, localizes to
areas of cortical cytoskeleton remodeling, in-
cluding cell-cell boundaries and membrane
rufﬂes (83–85). These studies also established
that Merlin inhibits the proliferation of both
normal and oncogene-transformed cells (86,
87). However, the localization of Merlin to
the membrane-cytoskeleton interface is novel
among tumor suppressors. From this location,
Merlin is poised to modulate the transmission
of mitogenic signals from the extracellular en-
vironment (Figure 7).

Central to the function of Merlin and
ERM proteins is their ability to undergo reg-
ulated intramolecular self-interaction, which,
in turn, controls
localization (41,

their

that all

83, 88–90). Molecular and structural stud-
ies reveal
four proteins can be
roughly superimposed, with a trilobed amino
(N)-terminal FERM (Four-point-one, Ezrin,
Radixin, Moesin) domain and a carboxyl (C)-
terminal domain that can extend across the
FERM domain surface, potentially masking
the binding sites of other proteins (91, 92).
Contrasting models of Merlin and ERM reg-
ulation by conformation-dependent changes
have been developed and involve reciprocal
relationships with members of the Rho fam-
ily of small GTPases (93). The best-studied
mechanism of ERM activation is via activa-
tion of the small GTPase RhoA, which in-
duces phosphorylation of the ERM C termi-
nus, challenging N- to C-terminal interaction
and effecting translocation to the membrane-
cytoskeleton interface. Studies of the single
Drosophila ERM protein, Moesin, reveal that
it can also negatively regulate Rho activity
in a feedback regulatory mechanism (94). In
contrast, Merlin is regulated by the Rho GT-
Pase Rac1; Rac-induced phosphorylation of
Merlin leads to diminished self-association,
translocation away from the insoluble com-
partment, and inactivation of Merlin (57). A
reciprocal relationship between Merlin and
Rac also appears to exist. Thus, Merlin can
negatively regulate Rac-dependent signaling
in a feed-forward mechanism. Recent studies
have shown that the serine/threonine kinase
Pak can mediate Rac-induced phosphoryla-
tion of Merlin and that Merlin can bind to
and directly inhibit Pak (95–97). Therefore,
Rac and Pak may be important therapeutic
targets for NF2.

Merlin’s molecular function is not well un-
derstood. It appears capable of interacting
with many different proteins and may asso-
ciate with several larger molecular complexes.
However, it is not yet clear which interactors
or complexes are relevant to the pathogenesis
of NF2. Indeed, a key question in the ﬁeld is
whether Merlin’s association with one partic-
ular complex is critical for tumor suppression
or whether its association with multiple com-
plexes collectively imparts tumor suppression.

202 McClatchey

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

AJ: adherens
junction

A number of studies suggest that Mer-
lin can control contact-dependent inhibition
of proliferation in several cell types (85, 96,
98). Merlin may regulate the poorly under-
stood phenomenon of contact-dependent in-
hibition of proliferation through interaction
with the extracellular matrix (ECM) recep-
tor CD44 in some cell types (98). Alter-
natively, Nf 2-deﬁcient cells of several types
lack stable cadherin-containing cell junctions
known as adherens junctions (AJs) (85). Mer-
lin can localize to AJs and physically associate
with AJ components. Merlin may function to
stabilize large actin-cytoskeleton-associated
membrane signaling complexes such as the
AJ or CD44-containing cell-ECM attach-
ment complexes by locally inhibiting Rac-Pak
signaling.

Several lines of evidence suggest that Mer-
lin can regulate receptor tyrosine kinase activ-
ity and perhaps trafﬁcking. Merlin can report-
edly interact physically with several proteins
involved in growth factor receptor signaling,
including PDZ-domain-containing adaptors
such as EBP50/NHE-RF1, that may con-
trol the membrane distribution of receptor
tyrosine kinases (99–103). The reported lo-
calization of Merlin to vesicular structures
and/or to lipid rafts further supports a role
in the distribution or trafﬁcking of mem-
brane receptors (104, 105). Consistent with
this model, recent studies uncovered a role
for Drosophila Merlin in regulating the abun-
dance and turnover of signaling and adhesion
receptors (106). Together with the aforemen-
tioned role for Merlin in cell adhesion, these
data suggest that Merlin may control contact-
dependent inhibition of proliferation by co-
ordinating the turnover of adhesion struc-
tures and growth factor receptors (Figure 7).
This would be consistent with the observa-
tion that Merlin both controls AJ stability and
prevents Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
internalization speciﬁcally in contacting cells
(M. Curto & A.I. McClatchey, unpublished
observations). Similarly, Merlin could coordi-
nate cell-ECM attachment and proliferation
control (82).

PATHOGENESIS OF SPECIFIC
LESIONS
Advances in delineating the molecular func-
tion of NF1 and NF2, together with the avail-
ability and manipulability of Nf1- and Nf 2-
mutant strains of mice, have led to a much
clearer understanding of the pathogenesis of
speciﬁc features of NF1 and NF2 as described
below.

Neuroﬁbromatosis Type 1
Pathogenesis
Neuroﬁbromas. Neuroﬁbromas are com-
plex tumors, composed of all of the cell
types found in the peripheral nerve, includ-
ing Schwann cells, neuronal processes, per-
ineurial ﬁbroblasts, and mast cells (Figure
3) (1, 2). A key question is whether neuroﬁ-
broma formation is driven by loss of NF1
in one or more cell types. Studies of cells
cultured from neuroﬁbromas identiﬁed Nf1-
deﬁciency in Schwann cells (107, 108). How-
ever, direct evidence that the Schwann cell is
the cell-of-origin for neuroﬁbromas emerged
from the manipulation of mouse models. Al-
+/− mice do not spontaneously de-
though Nf1
velop neuroﬁbromas or MPNSTs, Cichowski
et al. (58) generated chimeric mice composed
−/− cells and found that they
partly of Nf1
developed multiple plexiform neuroﬁbromas
−/− cells. Tumor
derived largely from Nf1
abundance in these mice correlated with the
extent of chimerism. This seminal study in-
+/− mice did
dicated that the reason why Nf1
not develop neuroﬁbromas was that the loss
of the wild-type Nf1 allele was rate-limiting.
Although this study was the ﬁrst to model
neuroﬁbromas in the mouse, it did not reveal
the cell-of-origin of neuroﬁbromas. Further-
more, these mice did not develop the cuta-
neous neuroﬁbromas that are the hallmark of
NF1.

To test the hypothesis that Nf1-deﬁciency
in Schwann cells is required for neuroﬁbroma
formation, Zhu et al. (9, 53) generated a strain
of mice carrying a conditional Nf1-mutant

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

203

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

allele. These mice were mated with trans-
genic Krox20-Cre mice, in which expression of
the Cre recombinase is restricted to Schwann
cells in the peripheral nervous system (109,
110); Cre-mediated recombination led to Nf1
inactivation, speciﬁcally in these cells. Im-
portantly, these investigators examined both
Nf1lox/−;Krox20-Cre and Nf1lox/lox;Krox20-Cre
mice and found that plexiform neuroﬁbro-
mas developed only in Nf1lox/−;Krox20-Cre
mice (9). This study demonstrated that the
Schwann cell is the cell-of-origin for neuroﬁ-
broma and suggested that Nf1 inactivation in
Schwann cells is sufﬁcient for neuroﬁbroma
formation only when combined with Nf1 het-
erozygosity in the tumor environment. They
went on to suggest that the recruitment of
+/− mast cells to the tumor may play a
Nf1
central role in mediating this effect, consis-
tent with studies indicating that Nf1 haplo-
insufﬁciency leads to hyperproliferation of
mast cells (111). Indeed, accumulating ev-
idence suggests that haplo-insufﬁciency for
Nf1 and for other tumor suppressors plays an
unappreciated role in tumorigenesis (112).

in primary or neuroﬁbroma-derived Schwann
cells, may play a causal role in MPNSTs (119).

Glial tumors. A recent series of papers de-
scribes important advances in understand-
ing the pathogenesis of NF1-associated glial
tumors through mouse modeling. Approxi-
mately 15% of children with NF1 develop
optic gliomas, which are low-grade (pilocytic)
astrocytomas that develop around the op-
tic nerve and can cause vision abnormali-
ties and/or precocious puberty owing to dis-
turbance of the nearby hypothalamus (1–3).
Although rare, adult NF1 patients do de-
velop high-grade astrocytomas more fre-
quently than normal individuals. Although
+/− mice do not develop low- or high-
Nf1
grade astrocytomas, Nf1
cis mice
develop high-grade astrocytomas with vari-
able penetrance (60). However, tumors do not
develop around the optic nerve in these mice,
and tumors that arise elsewhere in the brain do
so without progression from low-grade astro-
cytoma, thereby modeling human secondary
glioblastoma. This is consistent with the iden-
tiﬁcation of p53 mutations in human malig-
nant astrocytomas (120).

+/−;p53

+/−

MPNSTs. Both genetic and pathological
studies indicate that MPNSTs develop as a re-
sult of the malignant progression of neuroﬁ-
bromas, a process clearly involving additional
genetic mutation (68). Studies of human tu-
mors and animal modeling both indicate that
loss of the p53 tumor suppressor gene is a com-
mon event that cooperates with NF1 loss in
MPNST progression (58, 59, 113, 114). In
addition, mutations in the Ink4a locus, which
encodes both the p16/Ink4a and p14ARF tu-
mor suppressors, have also been identiﬁed in
human MPNSTs (115–117). The established
functions of p16/Ink4a as a negative regula-
tor of the cell cycle machinery and p14ARF as
an activator of p53 suggest molecular explana-
tions for their role in malignant progression to
MPNSTs (118). Finally, some evidence sug-
gests that ampliﬁcation or increased expres-
sion of the Epidermal Growth Factor Recep-
tor, which is expressed at very low levels if at all

The consequences of

inactivating Nf1
speciﬁcally in astrocytes in vivo were in-
vestigated by crossing conditional Nf1lox/lox
mice with ∗
GFAP-Cre transgenic mice in
which expression of the Cre recombinase is
restricted to astrocytes beginning at E14.5
(121). The study of these mice revealed that
astrocyte-speciﬁc loss of Nf1 leads to in-
creased proliferation, but is not sufﬁcient for
tumor formation. Subsequent studies revealed
that Nf1-deﬁcient astrocytes in the context
+/− surrounding cells do form op-
of Nf1
tic glioma; several lines of evidence suggest
that tumorigenesis in these models requires
Nf1 haplo-insufﬁciency speciﬁcally in neu-
rons (10). This is consistent with the observa-
tion that neuron-speciﬁc inactivation of Nf1
yields astrogliosis, likely owing to paracrine
signaling (53). Importantly, Nf1lox/lox;hGFAP-
Cre mice, in which Cre is expressed earlier in
development (E10.5) both in astrocytes and

204 McClatchey

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

in neural stem/progenitor cells, develop op-
tic gliomas regardless of the genotyope of
surrounding cells (122). This may indicate
that progenitor cells are the cell-of-origin
for optic glioma and are particularly sensitive
to loss of Nf1; alternatively, Nf1-deﬁciency
in early glial/neuronal progenitors may give
−/− astrocytes and differen-
rise to both Nf1
−/− neurons that, in turn, provide
tiated Nf1
−/− astro-
paracrine signals that promote Nf1
cytoma formation.

Myeloid leukemias. Although only a small
percentage of NF1 children develop juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia ( JMML), this rep-
resents a 200–500-fold increase in incidence
relative to normal children (123). Moreover,
JMML is a severe manifestation of NF1, re-
quiring hematopoietic stem cell transplanta-
tion. The study of NF1-associated JMML
has revealed key insights into the molecular
pathogenesis of sporadic JMML and other
leukemias. The discovery of loss of the wild-
type NF1 allele, decreased NF1-speciﬁc GAP
activity, increased Ras-GTP levels, and sig-
naling in primary leukemia cells from NF1
children, suggested that hyperactive Ras sig-
naling is responsible for malignancy in this
setting (8, 124–126). Indeed, activating mu-
tations in either NRAS or KRAS2 are found
in approximately 25% of sporadic JMMLs
(127, 128). This model was further supported
by the identiﬁcation of gain-of-function mu-
tations in the Ptpn11 gene in Noonan syn-
drome patients, who are also predisposed to
develop JMML (129). Ptpn11 encodes SHP-
2, a phosphatase that positively regulates sig-
naling downstream of growth factor receptors
(130). The hypersensitivity of JMML cells
to the growth factor granulocyte-macrophage
colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) suggests
that the inability to attenuate Ras signaling
downstream of the GM-CSF receptor is a crit-
ical initiating step in myeloid leukemia (Fig-
ure 8) (131). This hypothesis was tested using
Nf1-mutant strains of mice. Although some
+/− mice develop myeloid leukemia, they
Nf1
do so with long latency. To better model NF1-

GM-CSF

GM-CSF receptor

SHP-2

GDP

Ras

GTP

Ras

NF1

Raf

Rac

PI3K

Figure 8
The study of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1–associated
leukemia helped uncover the critical role of Ras
signaling in sporadic myeloid leukemias. Most
sporadic myeloid malignancies exhibit mutations
that inactivate Nf1, activate RAS, or activate
Ptpn11 (which encodes the SHP-2 phosphatase).
Each of these mutational events results in
increased Ras signaling. The inability to attenuate
Ras signaling downstream of the
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor
(GM-CSF) receptor appears to be a critical step in
leukemogenesis. PI3K, phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase.

transplanted fetal

associated leukemia in the mouse, Largaes-
pada et al.
liver
(131)
−/− embryos, which are also
cells from Nf1
hypersensitive to GM-CSF, into irradiated
recipients (132). This yielded a highly repro-
ducible model of myeloid leukemia that exhib-
ited hyperactive Ras. Importantly, leukemo-
genesis in these mice was markedly attenuated
upon genetic elimination of GM-CSF (133).
These mice were used as vehicles for preclin-
ical testing of farnesyl transferase inhibitors,
which should block the posttranslational pro-
cessing and function of Ras (134); although
the farnesyl
transferase inhibitor used in
this study neither inhibited KRAS or NRAS
processing nor retarded leukemogenesis, the
study highlights the utility of developing

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

205

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

genetically deﬁned preclinical mouse models.
A more tractable model for preclinical test-
ing was developed through conditional inac-
tivation of Nf1 in adult hematopoietic cells
by crossing Nf1lox/lox mice with mice carrying
the interferon-inducible Mx1-Cre transgene
(135).

Learning and memory. Cognitive defects
are a challenging aspect of NF1 manage-
ment, with nearly half of NF1 children ex-
hibiting some type of learning disability (2,
3). Although the underlying cause of cogni-
tive impairment in NF1 is not known, in-
creasing evidence suggests that it may re-
ﬂect abnormalities in neuronal networking
during development owing to NF1 haplo-
insufﬁciency and excess Ras signaling. As
for many other aspects of NF pathogene-
sis, the strongest evidence comes from stud-
ies of Nf1-mutant mice. Researchers initially
+/− mice exhibit marked
appreciated that Nf1
defects in learning and memory that are res-
cued by diminishing KRAS gene dosage (136,
+/− mice ap-
137). Learning deﬁcits in Nf1
pear to result from increased Ras signaling
in a subset of neurons, which, in turn causes
increased production of GABA (λ-amino bu-
tyric acid), a neurotransmitter that acts neg-
atively on a second set of neurons that func-
tion in long-term potentiation (learning and
memory) (137). Importantly, treatment with
lovastatin, an inhibitor of the rate-limiting
enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis that in-
hibits Ras farnesylation and activity, corrected
+/− mice (138).
the learning deﬁcits in Nf1
This study again highlights the utility of Nf1-
mutant mice in preclinical testing and raises
the possibility that lovastatin, a widely pre-
scribed and well-tolerated drug, could be of
clinical beneﬁt for cognitive aspects of NF1.

Neuroﬁbromatosis Type 2
Pathogenesis
Schwannomas. Schwannomas
com-
posed entirely of Schwann cells (1–3). In
both NF2 and schwannomatosis patients,

are

that promotes Nf 2

schwannomas tend to develop at the bound-
ary of the central and peripheral nervous
systems rather than at the periphery, which
may reﬂect their origin in a particular subset
of Schwann cells (or Schwann cell precur-
sors) or their requirement for a particular
−/−
microenvironment
+/− mice do
Schwann cell proliferation. Nf 2
not
spontaneously develop schwannomas
(51, 52), but targeted inactivation of Nf 2,
speciﬁcally in Schwann cells and in a subset
of neural crest cells, leads to Schwann cell
hyperproliferation and some frank tumors
(52). The incomplete penetrance of frank
tumors in this model suggests that additional
mutations that cooperate with Nf 2 loss may
be required. Indeed, mathematical modeling
indicates that at least one mutational event
in addition to biallelic inactivation of NF2 is
necessary for human schwannoma formation
(139).

As for the neuroﬁbroma in NF1, a key
goal in the study of NF2-associated tumori-
genesis is identifying the cell-of-origin of
the schwannoma. During development, neu-
ral crest–derived Schwann cell precursors mi-
grate from the dorsal neural tube to posi-
tions along developing axon bundles (140).
These immature Schwann cells become either
myelinating or nonmyelinating Schwann cells
that differ in their association with periph-
eral axons. As they interact with and insulate
peripheral axons, maturing Schwann cells as-
sume an exquisite degree of compartmental-
ization that is coordinated by intra- and inter-
−/−
cellular junctions. Studies of cultured Nf 2
primary or schwannoma-derived Schwann
cells reveal actin cytoskeleton defects,
in-
creased Rac activity, and loss of contact-
dependent inhibition of proliferation, sug-
gesting that the molecular signatures of Nf 2-
deﬁciency in other cell types are relevant to
the study of schwannoma formation (141, 142;
W.F. Chan & A.I. McClatchey, unpublished
observations).

Meningiomas. In humans, three grades of
sporadic meningioma are recognized (grades

206 McClatchey

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

(144)

I–III); NF2 patients develop almost exclu-
sively benign grade I and II meningiomas
(3, 143). To generate a model of Nf 2-
associated meningioma development, Kala-
marides et al.
injected adenovirus
expressing the Cre recombinase into the fore-
brain of Nf 2lox/lox mice. These mice exhib-
ited biallelic inactivation of Nf 2 in arachnoid
cells and developed meningiomas histologi-
cally similar to those of human NF2 patients.
The mice provide a valuable model for study-
ing the cellular origin of meningioma. More-
over, because primary arachnoid cells are
extremely difﬁcult to culture and few menin-
gioma cell lines exist, the ability to estab-
lish meningioma cell lines from these mice
will be a powerful tool for investigating the
molecular and cellular basis of meningioma
development.

Mesothelioma. Somatic inactivation of NF2
is frequently observed in sporadic mesothe-
lioma, an aggressive tumor associated with en-

vironmental exposure to asbestos (145). Al-
though mesothelioma is not a recognized fea-
ture of familial NF2, Baser et al. (146) re-
cently suggested that NF2 patients exposed
to asbestos might be at a higher risk of devel-
oping malignant mesothelioma. Two groups
+/− mice, which do
recently reported that Nf 2
not spontaneously develop mesothelioma, are
particularly susceptible to mesothelioma upon
exposure to asbestos ﬁbers via peritoneal in-
jection (147, 148). Both studies reported loss
of the wild-type Nf 2 allele in primary cultures
or cell lines established from the mesothelial
tumors. In one study, mutations at the Ink4a
and p53 tumor suppressor loci were frequently
identiﬁed in mesothelioma cells (147); this is
consistent with reports of mutations in the
corresponding loci in human mesothelioma
and suggests that these represent cooperating
events (145). As for meningioma, these mod-
els, and cells derived from them, represent im-
portant tools for delineating the pathogenesis
of mesothelioma.

SUMMARY POINTS
1. NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis are inherited cancer syndromes that feature the
development of tumors of the nervous system; however, the genetic bases and patho-
genesis of these disorders are distinct.

2. Genetic studies using mice with constitutional Nf1- and Nf 2-mutant alleles suggest
that the conﬁgurations of the mouse and human genomes strongly inﬂuence the
proﬁles of tumors developed by the two species.

3. Conditional inactivation of Nf1 and Nf 2 alleles has been used to successfully model

many of the features of NF1 and NF2.

4. Increased Ras signaling appears responsible for Nf1-associated tumorigenesis.
5. NF1 haplo-insufﬁciency makes important contributions to both tumor and nontumor

phenotypes in NF1.

6. Despite the limited tumor spectrum exhibited by human NF2 patients, studies of
Nf 2-mutant mice reveal a requirement for Merlin function in many cell types and an
unexpectedly wide range of tumors associated with Nf 2-deﬁciency.

7. The NF2 tumor suppressor Merlin appears to coordinate cell-cell or cell-ECM ad-

hesion with growth factor receptor signaling.

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

207

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to gratefully acknowledge Marcello Curto and Jessica Casaletto for their
comments on the manuscript and for help with the ﬁgures. This work was supported by grants
from the National Institutes of Health (RO1CA113733-01) and the Department of Defense
(W81XWH-05-1-0189).

LITERATURE CITED

1. Friedman JM, Gutmann DH, Riccardi VM, eds. 1999. Neuroﬁbromatosis: Phenotype, Nat-

ural History, and Pathogenesis. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press. 400 pp. 3rd ed.

2. Huson S, Hughes R. 1994. The Neuroﬁbromatoses: A Pathogenetic and Clinical Overview.

London: Chapman & Hall Medical. 487 pp.

3. Korf BR, Rubenstein AE. 2005. Neuroﬁbromatosis: A Handbook for Patients, Families, and

Health Care Professionals. New York: Thieme Med. Publ. 253 pp.

4. MacCollin M, Chiocca EA, Evans DG, Friedman JM, Horvitz R, et al. 2005. Diagnostic

criteria for schwannomatosis. Neurology 64:1838–45

5. von Recklinghausen F. 1882. Ueber die Multiplen Fibrome der Haut und ihre Beziehung zu

den Multiplen Neuromen. Berlin: Hirschwald 138 pp.

6. Gutmann DH, Aylsworth A, Carey JC, Korf B, Marks J, et al. 1997. The diagnostic eval-
uation and multidisciplinary management of neuroﬁbromatosis 1 and neuroﬁbromatosis
2. JAMA 278:51–57

7. Perry A, Roth KA, Banerjee R, Fuller CE, Gutmann DH. 2001. NF1 deletions in S-100
protein-positive and negative cells of sporadic and neuroﬁbromatosis 1 (NF1)-associated
plexiform neuroﬁbromas and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Am. J. Pathol.
159:57–61

8. Side L, Taylor B, Cayouette M, Conner E, Thompson P, et al. 1997. Homozygous
inactivation of the NF1 gene in bone marrow cells from children with neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1 and malignant myeloid disorders. N. Engl. J. Med. 336:1713–20

9. Zhu Y, Ghosh P, Charnay P, Burns DK, Parada LF. 2002. Neuroﬁbromas in NF1:

Schwann cell origin and role of tumor environment. Science 296:920–22

10. Bajenaru ML, Hernandez MR, Perry A, Zhu Y, Parada LF, et al. 2003. Optic nerve
glioma in mice requires astrocyte Nf1 gene inactivation and Nf1 brain heterozygosity.
Canc. Res. 63:8573–77

11. MacCollin M, Willett C, Heinrich B, Jacoby LB, Acierno JSJ, et al. 2003. Familial
schwannomatosis: exclusion of the NF2 locus as the germline event. Neurology
60:1968–74

12. Cawthon RM, Weiss R, Xu GF, Viskochil D, Culver M, et al. 1990. A major segment of the
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 gene: cDNA sequence, genomic structure, and point mutations.
Cell 62:193–201

13. Viskochil D, Buchberg AM, Xu G, Cawthon RM, Stevens J, et al. 1990. Deletions and a
translocation interrupt a cloned gene at the neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 locus. Cell 62:187–92
14. Wallace MR, Marchuk DA, Andersen LB, Letcher R, Odeh HM, et al. 1990. Type 1 neu-
roﬁbromatosis gene: identiﬁcation of a large transcript disrupted in three NF1 patients.
Science 249:181–86

15. Trofatter JA, MacCollin MM, Rutter JL, Murrell JR, Duyao MP, et al. 1993. A novel
moesin-, ezrin-, radixin-like gene is a candidate for the neuroﬁbromatosis 2 tumor suppressor.
Cell 72(5):791–800

9. Homozygous
loss of Nf1 in
Schwann cells is
sufﬁcient for
neuroﬁbroma
formation and
heterozygous loss
of Nf1 in
surrounding
non-neoplastic
cells is necessary
for tumorigenesis.

11. Genetic
demonstration that
mutations in the
NF2 gene do not
cause
schwannomatosis,
thereby deﬁning it
as a third major
form of
neuroﬁbromatosis.

208 McClatchey

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

16. Rouleau GA, Merel P, Lutchman M, Sanson M, Zucman J, et al. 1993. Alteration in a
new gene encoding a putative membrane-organizing protein causes neuro-ﬁbromatosis
type 2. Nature 363:515–21

17. Sekido Y, Pass HI, Bader S, Mew DJ, Christman MF, et al. 1995. Neuroﬁbromatosis type
2 (NF2) gene is somatically mutated in mesothelioma but not in lung cancer. Canc. Res.
55:1227–31

18. Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Xu L, Gonzalez-Agosti C, Burwick JA, Pinney D, et al. 1997.
Universal absence of merlin, but not other ERM family members, in schwannomas. Am.
J. Pathol. 151:1649–54

19. Ruttledge MH, Sarrazin J, Rangaratnam S, Phelan CM, Twist E, et al. 1994. Evidence
for the complete inactivation of the NF2 gene in the majority of sporadic meningiomas.
Nat. Genet. 6:180–84

20. Lomas J, Bello MJ, Arjona D, Alonso ME, Martinez-Glez V, et al. 2005. Genetic and
epigenetic alteration of the NF2 gene in sporadic meningiomas. Genes Chromosomes Canc.
42:314–19

21. Bianchi AB, Mitsunaga SI, Cheng JQ, Klein WM, Jhanwar SC, et al. 1995. High fre-
quency of inactivating mutations in the neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 gene (NF2) in primary
malignant mesotheliomas. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:10854–58

22. Thomson SA, Fishbein L, Wallace MR. 2002. NF1 mutations and molecular testing. J.

Child Neurol. 17:555–61; discussion 71–2, 646–51

23. Dorschner MO, Sybert VP, Weaver M, Pletcher BA, Stephens K. 2000. NF1 microdele-
tion breakpoints are clustered at ﬂanking repetitive sequences. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9:35–46
24. Hulsebos TJ, Bijleveld EH, Riegman PH, Smink LJ, Dunham I. 1996. Identiﬁcation and
characterization of NF1-related loci on human chromosomes 22, 14 and 2. Hum. Genet.
98:7–11

25. Wang Q, Montmain G, Ruano E, Upadhyaya M, Dudley S, et al. 2003. Neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1 gene as a mutational target in a mismatch repair-deﬁcient cell type. Hum. Genet.
112:117–23

26. Gutmann DH, Winkeler E, Kabbarah O, Hedrick N, Dudley S, et al. 2003. Mlh1 deﬁ-
ciency accelerates myeloid leukemogenesis in neuroﬁbromatosis 1 (Nf1) heterozygous mice.
Oncogene 22:4581–85

27. Leppig KA, Kaplan P, Viskochil D, Weaver M, Ortenberg J, Stephens K. 1997. Familial
neuroﬁbromatosis 1 microdeletions: cosegregation with distinct facial phenotype and early
onset of cutaneous neuroﬁbromata. Am. J. Med. Genet. 73:197–204

28. Easton DF, Ponder MA, Huson SM, Ponder BA. 1993. An analysis of variation in ex-
pression of neuroﬁbromatosis (NF) type 1 (NF1): evidence for modifying genes. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 53:305–13

29. Szudek J, Joe H, Friedman JM. 2002. Analysis of intrafamilial phenotypic variation in

neuroﬁbromatosis 1 (NF1). Genet. Epidemiol. 23:150–64

30. Szudek J, Evans DG, Friedman JM. 2003. Patterns of associations of clinical features in

neuroﬁbromatosis 1 (NF1). Hum. Genet. 112:289–97

31. Merel P, Hoang-Xuan K, Sanson M, Bijlsma E, Rouleau G, et al. 1995. Screening for

germ-line mutations in the NF2 gene. Genes Chromosomes Canc. 12:117–27

32. Kluwe L, Bayer S, Baser ME, Hazim W, Haase W, et al. 1996. Identiﬁcation of NF2
germ-line mutations and comparison with neuroﬁbromatosis 2 phenotypes. Hum. Genet.
98:534–38

33. Kluwe L, MacCollin M, Tatagiba M, Thomas S, Hazim W, et al. 1998. Phenotypic
variability associated with 14 splice-site mutations in the NF2 gene. Am. J. Med. Genet.
77:228–33

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

209

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

39. The
development of a
model of NF1 in
Drosophila
melanogaster
suggests that NF1
controls protein
kinase A signaling
in a
Ras-independent
manner.

34. Parry DM, MacCollin MM, Kaiser-Kupfer MI, Pulaski K, Nicholson HS, et al. 1996.
Germ-line mutations in the neuroﬁbromatosis 2 gene: correlations with disease severity
and retinal abnormalities. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59:529–39

35. Ruttledge MH, Andermann AA, Phelan CM, Claudio JO, Han FY, et al. 1996. Type
of mutation in the neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 gene (NF2) frequently determines severity of
disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59:331–42

36. Evans DG, Trueman L, Wallace A, Collins S, Strachan T. 1998. Genotype/phenotype
correlations in type 2 neuroﬁbromatosis (NF2): evidence for more severe disease associ-
ated with truncating mutations. J. Med. Genet. 35:450–55

37. Evans DG, Wallace AJ, Wu CL, Trueman L, Ramsden RT, Strachan T. 1998. Somatic
mosaicism: a common cause of classic disease in tumor-prone syndromes? Lessons from
type 2 neuroﬁbromatosis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63:727–36

38. Tanaka K, Nakafuku M, Satoh T, Marshall MS, Gibbs JB, et al. 1990. S. cerevisiae genes
IRA1 and IRA2 encode proteins that may be functionally equivalent to mammalian ras
GTPase activating protein. Cell 60:803–7

39. The I, Hannigan GE, Cowley GS, Reginald S, Zhong Y, et al. 1997. Rescue of a

Drosophila NF1 mutant phenotype by protein kinase A. Science 276:791–94

40. C. elegans Sequencing Consortium. 1998. Genome sequence of the nematode C. elegans:

a platform for investigating biology. Science 282:2012–18

41. Bretscher A, Edwards K, Fehon RG. 2002. ERM proteins and merlin: integrators at the

cell cortex. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:586–99

42. Golovnina K, Blinov A, Akhmametyeva EM, Omelyanchuk LV, Chang LS. 2005. Evo-
lution and origin of merlin, the product of the Neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2) tumor-
suppressor gene. BMC Evol. Biol. 5:69

43. LaJeunesse DR, McCartney BM, Fehon RG. 1998. Structural analysis of Drosophila merlin
reveals functional domains important for growth control and subcellular localization. J.
Cell Biol. 141:1589–99

44. McCartney BM, Kulikauskas RM, LaJeunesse DR, Fehon RG. 2000. The
neuroﬁbromatosis-2 homologue, Merlin, and the tumor suppressor expanded function
together in Drosophila to regulate cell proliferation and differentiation. Development
127:1315–24

45. Gobel V, Barrett PL, Hall DH, Fleming JT. 2004. Lumen morphogenesis in C. elegans

requires the membrane-cytoskeleton linker erm-1. Dev. Cell 6:865–73

46. Bernards A, Snijders AJ, Hannigan GE, Murthy AE, Gusella JF. 1993. Mouse neuroﬁ-
bromatosis type 1 cDNA sequence reveals high degree of conservation of both coding and
noncoding mRNA segments. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2:645–50

47. Haase VH, Trofatter JA, MacCollin M, Tarttelin E, Gusella JF, Ramesh V. 1994. The
murine NF2 homologue encodes a highly conserved merlin protein with alternative forms.
Hum. Mol. Genet. 3:407–11

48. Brannan CI, Perkins AS, Vogel KS, Ratner N, Nordlund ML, et al. 1994. Targeted
disruption of the neuroﬁbromatosis type-1 gene leads to developmental abnormalities in
heart and various neural crest-derived tissues. Genes Dev. 8:1019–29

49. Jacks T, Shih TS, Schmitt EM, Bronson RT, Bernards A, Weinberg RA. 1994. Tumour
predisposition in mice heterozygous for a targeted mutation in Nf1. Nat. Genet. 7:353–61
50. McClatchey AI, Saotome I, Ramesh V, Gusella JF, Jacks T. 1997. The Nf 2 tumor sup-
pressor gene product is essential for extraembryonic development immediately prior to
gastrulation. Genes Dev. 11:1253–65

210 McClatchey

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

51. McClatchey AI, Saotome I, Mercer K, Crowley D, Gusella JF, et al. 1998. Mice het-
erozygous for a mutation at the Nf 2 tumor suppressor locus develop a range of highly
metastatic tumors. Genes Dev. 12:1121–33

52. Giovannini M, Robanus-Maandag E, van der Valk M, Niwa-Kawakita M,
Abramowski V, et al. 2000. Conditional biallelic Nf 2 mutation in the mouse pro-
motes manifestations of human neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Genes Dev. 14:1617–30
53. Zhu Y, Romero MI, Ghosh P, Ye Z, Charnay P, et al. 2001. Ablation of NF1 function
in neurons induces abnormal development of cerebral cortex and reactive gliosis in the
brain. Genes Dev. 15:859–76

54. Gitler AD, Zhu Y, Ismat FA, Lu MM, Yamauchi Y, et al. 2003. Nf1 has an essential role

in endothelial cells. Nat. Genet. 33:75–79

55. Alonso ME, Bello MJ, Gonzalez-Gomez P, Arjona D, de Campos JM, et al. 2004. Aberrant
CpG island methylation of multiple genes in ependymal tumors. J. Neurooncol. 67:159–65
56. Kimura Y, Koga H, Araki N, Mugita N, Fujita N, et al. 1998. The involvement of
calpain-dependent proteolysis of the tumor suppressor NF2 (merlin) in schwannomas
and meningiomas. Nat. Med. 4:915–22

57. Shaw RJ, Paez JG, Curto M, Yaktine A, Pruitt WM, et al. 2001. The Nf 2 tumor

suppressor, merlin, functions in Rac-dependent signaling. Dev. Cell 1:63–72

58. Cichowski K, Shih TS, Schmitt E, Santiago S, Reilly K, et al. 1999. Mouse models

of tumor development in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Science 286:2172–76

59. Vogel KS, Klesse LJ, Velasco-Miguel S, Meyers K, Rushing EJ, Parada LF. 1999. Mouse

tumor model for neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Science 286:2176–79

60. Reilly KM, Loisel DA, Bronson RT, McLaughlin ME, Jacks T. 2000. Nf1;Trp53 mutant
mice develop glioblastoma with evidence of strain-speciﬁc effects. Nat. Genet. 26:109–13
61. Reilly KM, Broman KW, Bronson RT, Tsang S, Loisel DA, et al. 2006. An imprinted
locus epistatically inﬂuences Nstr1 and Nstr2 to control resistance to nerve sheath tumors
in a neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 mouse model. Canc. Res. 66:62–68

62. Reilly KM, Tuskan RG, Christy E, Loisel DA, Ledger J, et al. 2004. Susceptibility to
astrocytoma in mice mutant for Nf1 and Trp53 is linked to chromosome 11 and subject
to epigenetic effects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101:13008–13

63. Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Louis DN, Nielsen GP, Antonescu CR, Borowsky AD, et al.
2004. Comparative pathology of nerve sheath tumors in mouse models and humans. Canc.
Res. 64:3718–24

64. Robanus-Maandag E, Giovannini M, van der Valk M, Niwa-Kawakita M, Abramowski
V, et al. 2004. Synergy of Nf 2 and p53 mutations in development of malignant tumours
of neural crest origin. Oncogene 23:6541–47

65. Zhu Y, Guignard F, Zhao D, Liu L, Burns DK, et al. 2005. Early inactivation of p53
tumor suppressor gene cooperating with NF1 loss induces malignant astrocytoma. Canc.
Cell 8:119–30

66. Eden A, Gaudet F, Waghmare A, Jaenisch R. 2003. Chromosomal instability and tumors

promoted by DNA hypomethylation. Science 300:455

67. Bernards A, Settleman J. 2004. GAP control: regulating the regulators of small GTPases.

52. Targeted
deletion of Nf 2 in
mouse Schwann
cells leads to
hyperproliferation
and schwannoma
development.

57. Activation of
the small GTPase
Rac leads to
phosphorylation
(residue S518) and
inactivation of
Merlin; active
Merlin can
negatively regulate
Rac signaling.

58. Chimeric mice
composed partly of
Nf1−/− cells
develop
neuroﬁbromas,
demonstrating that
loss of the
wild-type Nf1 allele
is rate limiting for
neuroﬁbroma
formation in mice.

68. Cichowski K, Jacks T. 2001. NF1 tumor suppressor gene function: narrowing the GAP.

Trends Cell Biol. 14:377–85

Cell 104:593–604

69. Guo HF, The I, Hannan F, Bernards A, Zhong Y. 1997. Requirement of Drosophila NF1

for activation of adenylyl cyclase by PACAP38-like neuropeptides. Science 276:795–98

70. Guo HF, Tong J, Hannan F, Luo L, Zhong Y. 2000. A neuroﬁbromatosis-1-regulated

pathway is required for learning in Drosophila. Nature 403:895–98

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

211

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

71. Williams JA, Su HS, Bernards A, Field J, Sehgal A. 2001. A circadian output in Drosophila

mediated by neuroﬁbromatosis-1 and Ras/MAPK. Science 293:2251–56

72. Dasgupta B, Dugan LL, Gutmann DH. 2003. The neuroﬁbromatosis 1 gene product
neuroﬁbromin regulates pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide-mediated sig-
naling in astrocytes. J. Neurosci. 23:8949–54

73. Kim HA, Ratner N, Roberts TM, Stiles CD. 2001. Schwann cell proliferative responses

to cAMP and Nf1 are mediated by cyclin D1. J. Neurosci. 21:1110–16

74. Tong J, Hannan F, Zhu Y, Bernards A, Zhong Y. 2002. Neuroﬁbromin regulates G

protein-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activity. Nat. Neurosci. 5:95–96

75. Kim HA, DeClue JE, Ratner N. 1997. cAMP-dependent protein kinase A is required
for Schwann cell growth: interactions between the cAMP and neuregulin/tyrosine kinase
pathways. J. Neurosci. Res. 49:236–47

76. Hannan F, Ho I, Tong JJ, Zhu Y, Nurnberg P, Zhong Y. 2006. Effect of neuroﬁbromatosis
type I mutations on a novel pathway for adenylyl cyclase activation requiring neuroﬁ-
bromin and Ras. Hum. Mol. Genet. 15:1087–98

77. Philips MR. 2005. Compartmentalized signaling of Ras. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 33:657–61
78. Johannessen CM, Reczek EE, James MF, Brems H, Legius E, Cichowski K. 2005. The
NF1 tumor suppressor critically regulates TSC2 and mTOR. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
102:8573–78

79. Dasgupta B, Yi Y, Chen DY, Weber JD, Gutmann DH. 2005. Proteomic analysis reveals
hyperactivation of the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway in neuroﬁbromatosis
1-associated human and mouse brain tumors. Canc. Res. 65:2755–60

80. Cichowski K, Santiago S, Jardim M, Johnson BW, Jacks T. 2003. Dynamic regulation of

the Ras pathway via proteolysis of the NF1 tumor suppressor. Genes Dev. 17:449–54

81. Ciechanover A, Orian A, Schwartz AL. 2000. Ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis: biological

regulation via destruction. Bioessays 22:442–51

82. McClatchey AI, Giovannini M. 2005. Membrane organization and tumorigenesis—the

NF2 tumor suppressor, Merlin. Genes Dev. 19:2265–77

83. Gonzalez-Agosti C, Xu L, Pinney D, Beauchamp R, Hobbs W, et al. 1996. The merlin

tumor suppressor localizes preferentially in membrane rufﬂes. Oncogene 13:1239–47

84. Maeda M, Matsui T, Imamura M, Tsukita S, Tsukita S. 1999. Expression level,
subcellular distribution and rho-GDI binding afﬁnity of merlin in comparison with
Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin proteins. Oncogene 18:4788–97

85. Lallemand D, Curto M, Saotome I, Giovannini M, McClatchey AI. 2003. NF2 deﬁciency
promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis by destabilizing adherens junctions. Genes Dev.
17:1090–100

86. Lutchman M, Rouleau GA. 1995. The neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 gene product, schwan-

nomin, suppresses growth of NIH 3T3 cells. Canc. Res. 55:2270–74

87. Tikoo A, Varga M, Ramesh V, Gusella J, Maruta H. 1994. An anti-Ras function of

neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 gene product (NF2/Merlin). J. Biol. Chem. 269:23387–90

88. Gronholm M, Sainio M, Zhao F, Heiska L, Vaheri A, Carpen O. 1999. Homotypic and
heterotypic interaction of the neuroﬁbromatosis 2 tumor suppressor protein merlin and
the ERM protein ezrin. J. Cell Sci. 112(Pt. 6):895–904

89. Nguyen R, Reczek D, Bretscher A. 2001. Hierarchy of merlin and ezrin N- and C-
terminal domain interactions in homo- and heterotypic associations and their relationship
to binding of scaffolding proteins EBP50 and E3KARP. J. Biol. Chem. 276:7621–29

90. Sherman L, Xu HM, Geist RT, Saporito-Irwin S, Howells N, et al. 1997. Interdomain
binding mediates tumor growth suppression by the NF2 gene product. Oncogene 15:2505–
9

212 McClatchey

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

91. Pearson MA, Reczek D, Bretscher A, Karplus PA. 2000. Structure of the ERM
protein moesin reveals the FERM domain fold masked by an extended actin binding
tail domain. Cell 101:259–70

92. Shimizu T, Seto A, Maita N, Hamada K, Tsukita S, et al. 2002. Structural basis for
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Crystal structure of the merlin FERM domain. J. Biol. Chem.
277:10332–36

93. McClatchey AI. 2003. Merlin and ERM proteins: unappreciated roles in cancer develop-

ment? Nat. Rev. Canc. 3:877–83

94. Speck O, Hughes SC, Noren NK, Kulikauskas RM, Fehon RG. 2003. Moesin functions

antagonistically to the Rho pathway to maintain epithelial integrity. Nature 421:83–87

95. Kissil JL, Johnson KC, Eckman MS, Jacks T. 2002. Merlin phosphorylation by p21-
activated kinase 2 and effects of phosphorylation on merlin localization. J. Biol. Chem.
277:10394–99

96. Kissil JL, Wilker EW, Johnson KC, Eckman MS, Yaffe MB, Jacks T. 2003. Merlin, the
product of the Nf 2 tumor suppressor gene, is an inhibitor of the p21-activated kinase,
Pak1. Mol. Cell 12:841–49

97. Xiao GH, Beeser A, Chernoff J, Testa JR. 2002. p21-activated kinase links Rac/Cdc42

signaling to merlin. J. Biol. Chem. 277:883–86

98. Morrison H, Sherman LS, Legg J, Banine F, Isacke C, et al. 2001. The NF2 tumor sup-
pressor gene product, merlin, mediates contact inhibition of growth through interactions
with CD44. Genes Dev. 15:968–80

199:pe37

99. Kolch W. 2003. Erbin: sorting out ErbB2 receptors or giving Ras a break? Sci. STKE
100. Lazar CS, Cresson CM, Lauffenburger DA, Gill GN. 2004. The Na+/H+ exchanger
regulatory factor stabilizes epidermal growth factor receptors at the cell surface. Mol.
Biol. Cell 15:5470–80
101. Murthy A, Gonzalez-Agosti C, Cordero E, Pinney D, Candia C, et al. 1998. NHE-RF, a
regulatory cofactor for Na+-H+ exchange, is a common interactor for merlin and ERM
(MERM) proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 273:1273–76

102. Rangwala R, Banine F, Borg JP, Sherman LS. 2005. Erbin regulates mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinase activation and MAP kinase-dependent interactions between Merlin
and adherens junction protein complexes in Schwann cells. J. Biol. Chem. 280:11790–97
103. Wiederhold T, Lee MF, James M, Neujahr R, Smith N, et al. 2004. Magicin, a novel
cytoskeletal protein associates with the NF2 tumor suppressor merlin and Grb2. Oncogene
23:8815–25

104. McCartney BM, Fehon RG. 1996. Distinct cellular and subcellular patterns of expression
imply distinct functions for the Drosophila homologues of moesin and the neuroﬁbromato-
sis 2 tumor suppressor, merlin. J. Cell Biol. 133:843–52

105. Stickney JT, Bacon WC, Rojas M, Ratner N, Ip W. 2004. Activation of the tumor

suppressor merlin modulates its interaction with lipid rafts. Canc. Res. 64:2717–24

106. Maitra S, Kulikauskas RM, Gavilan H, Fehon RG. 2006. The tumor suppressors
Merlin and expanded function cooperatively to modulate receptor endocytosis and
signaling. Curr. Biol. 16:702–9

107. Kluwe L, Friedrich R, Mautner VF. 1999. Loss of NF1 allele in Schwann cells but not
in ﬁbroblasts derived from an NF1-associated neuroﬁbroma. Genes Chromosomes Canc.
24:283–85

108. Serra E, Rosenbaum T, Winner U, Aledo R, Ars E, et al. 2000. Schwann cells harbor
the somatic NF1 mutation in neuroﬁbromas: evidence of two different Schwann cell
subpopulations. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9:3055–64

91. The crystal
structure of
Moesin is solved;
superimposition of
residues conserved
in Merlin suggest
that Merlin forms a
similar structure
and may be
regulated similarly.

106. In Drosophila,
Merlin and the
related tumor
suppressor work
together to control
the surface
availability of
certain membrane
receptors.

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

213

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

109. Voiculescu O, Charnay P, Schneider-Maunoury S. 2000. Expression pattern of a Krox-
20/Cre knock-in allele in the developing hindbrain, bones, and peripheral nervous system.
Genesis 26:123–26

110. Topilko P, Schneider-Maunoury S, Levi G, Baron-Van Evercooren A, Chennouﬁ AB,
et al. 1994. Krox-20 controls myelination in the peripheral nervous system. Nature
371:796–99

111. Ingram DA, Yang FC, Travers JB, Wenning MJ, Hiatt K, et al. 2000. Genetic and bio-
chemical evidence that haploinsufﬁciency of the Nf1 tumor suppressor gene modulates
melanocyte and mast cell fates in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 191:181–88

112. Santarosa M, Ashworth A. 2004. Haploinsufﬁciency for tumor suppressor genes: when

you don’t need to go all the way. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1654:105–22

113. Greenblatt MS, Bennett WP, Hollstein M, Harris CC. 1994. Mutations in the p53 tumor
suppressor gene: clues to cancer etiology and molecular pathogenesis. Canc. Res. 54:4855–
78

114. Menon AG, Anderson KM, Riccardi VM, Chung RY, Whaley JM, et al. 1990. Chromo-
some 17p deletions and p53 gene mutations associated with the formation of malignant
neuroﬁbrosarcomas in von Recklinghausen neuroﬁbromatosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
87:5435–39

115. Berner JM, Sorlie T, Mertens F, Henriksen J, Saeter G, et al. 1999. Chromosome
band 9p21 is frequently altered in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors: studies
of CDKN2A and other genes of the pRB pathway. Genes Chromosomes Canc. 26:151–60

116. Kourea HP, Orlow I, Scheithauer BW, Cordon-Cardo C, Woodruff JM. 1999. Dele-
tions of the INK4A gene occur in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors but not in
neuroﬁbromas. Am. J. Pathol. 155:1855–60

117. Nielsen GP, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Ino Y, Moller MB, Rosenberg AE, Louis DN.
1999. Malignant transformation of neuroﬁbromas in neuroﬁbromatosis 1 is associated
with CDKN2A/p16 inactivation. Am. J. Pathol. 155:1879–84

118. Sherr CJ. 2004. Principles of tumor suppression. Cell 116:235–46
119. DeClue JE, Heffelﬁnger S, Benvenuto G, Ling B, Li S, et al. 2000. Epidermal growth
factor receptor expression in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1-related tumors and NF1 animal
models. J. Clin. Invest. 105:1233–41

120. Holland EC. 2001. Gliomagenesis: genetic alterations and mouse models. Nat. Rev. Genet.

2:120–29

121. Bajenaru ML, Zhu Y, Hedrick NM, Donahoe J, Parada LF, Gutmann DH. 2002.
Astrocyte-speciﬁc inactivation of the neuroﬁbromatosis 1 gene (NF1) is insufﬁcient for
astrocytoma formation. Mol. Cell Biol. 22:5100–13

122. Zhu Y, Harada T, Liu L, Lush ME, Guignard F, et al. 2005. Inactivation of NF1 in CNS
causes increased glial progenitor proliferation and optic glioma formation. Development
132:5577–88

123. Lauchle JO, Braun BS, Loh ML, Shannon K. 2006. Inherited predispositions and hyper-

active Ras in myeloid leukemogenesis. Pediatr. Blood Canc. 46:579–85

124. Miles DK, Freedman MH, Stephens K, Pallavicini M, Sievers EL, et al. 1996. Patterns
of hematopoietic lineage involvement in children with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 and
malignant myeloid disorders. Blood 88:4314–20

125. Shannon KM, O’Connell P, Martin GA, Paderanga D, Olson K, et al. 1994. Loss of the
normal NF1 allele from the bone marrow of children with type 1 neuroﬁbromatosis and
malignant myeloid disorders. N. Engl. J. Med. 330:597–601

214 McClatchey

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

126. Bollag G, Clapp DW, Shih S, Adler F, Zhang YY, et al. 1996. Loss of NF1 results in
activation of the Ras signaling pathway and leads to aberrant growth in hematopoietic
cells. Nat. Genet. 12:144–48

127. Kalra R, Paderanga DC, Olson K, Shannon KM. 1994. Genetic analysis is consistent with

the hypothesis that NF1 limits myeloid cell growth through p21ras. Blood 84:3435–39

128. Miyauchi J, Asada M, Sasaki M, Tsunematsu Y, Kojima S, Mizutani S. 1994. Mutations

of the N-ras gene in juvenile chronic myelogenous leukemia. Blood 83:2248–54

129. Tartaglia M, Mehler EL, Goldberg R, Zampino G, Brunner HG, et al. 2001. Mutations
in PTPN11, encoding the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, cause Noonan syndrome.
Nat. Genet. 29:465–68

130. Neel BG, Gu H, Pao L. 2003. The ‘Shp’ing news: SH2 domain-containing tyrosine

phosphatases in cell signaling. Trends Biochem. Sci. 28:284–93

131. Largaespada DA, Brannan CI, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG. 1996. Nf1 deﬁciency causes
Ras-mediated granulocyte/macrophage colony stimulating factor hypersensitivity and
chronic myeloid leukaemia. Nat. Genet. 12:137–43

132. Zhang YY, Vik TA, Ryder JW, Srour EF, Jacks T, et al. 1998. Nf1 regulates hematopoietic
progenitor cell growth and ras signaling in response to multiple cytokines. J. Exp. Med.
187:1893–902

133. Birnbaum RA, O’Marcaigh A, Wardak Z, Zhang YY, Dranoff G, et al. 2000. Nf1 and

Gmcsf interact in myeloid leukemogenesis. Mol. Cell 5:189–95

134. Mahgoub N, Taylor BR, Gratiot M, Kohl NE, Gibbs JB, et al. 1999. In vitro and
in vivo effects of a farnesyltransferase inhibitor on Nf1-deﬁcient hematopoietic
cells. Blood 94:2469–76

135. Le DT, Kong N, Zhu Y, Lauchle JO, Aiyigari A, et al. 2004. Somatic inactivation of Nf1 in
hematopoietic cells results in a progressive myeloproliferative disorder. Blood 103:4243–
50

136. Silva AJ, Frankland PW, Marowitz Z, Friedman E, Laszlo GS, et al. 1997. A mouse model
for the learning and memory deﬁcits associated with neuroﬁbromatosis type I. Nat. Genet.
15:281–84

134. Preclinical use
of a mouse model
of Nf1-associated
leukemogenesis to
test potentially
Ras-inhibiting
farnesyl transferase
inhibitors.

137. Costa RM, Federov NB, Kogan JH, Murphy GG, Stern J, et al. 2002. Mechanism for
the learning deﬁcits in a mouse model of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Nature 415:526–30
138. Li W, Cui Y, Kushner SA, Brown RA, Jentsch JD, et al. 2005. The HMG-CoA reduc-
tase inhibitor lovastatin reverses the learning and attention deﬁcits in a mouse model of
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Curr. Biol. 15:1961–67

139. Woods R, Friedman JM, Evans DG, Baser ME, Joe H. 2003. Exploring the “two-hit
hypothesis” in NF2: tests of two-hit and three-hit models of vestibular schwannoma
development. Genet. Epidemiol. 24:265–72

140. Garratt AN, Britsch S, Birchmeier C. 2000. Neuregulin, a factor with many functions in

the life of a schwann cell. Bioessays 22:987–96

141. Nakai Y, Zheng Y, MacCollin M, Ratner N. 2006. Temporal control of Rac in Schwann
cell-axon interaction is disrupted in NF2-mutant schwannoma cells. J. Neurosci. 26:3390–
95

142. Pelton PD, Sherman LS, Rizvi TA, Marchionni MA, Wood P, et al. 1998. Rufﬂing mem-
brane, stress ﬁber, cell spreading and proliferation abnormalities in human Schwannoma
cells. Oncogene 17:2195–209

143. Lusis E, Gutmann DH. 2004. Meningioma: an update. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 17:687–92
144. Kalamarides M, Niwa-Kawakita M, Leblois H, Abramowski V, Perricaudet M, et al. 2002.
Nf 2 gene inactivation in arachnoidal cells is rate-limiting for meningioma development
in the mouse. Genes Dev. 16:1060–65

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbromatosis

215

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.ANRV295-PM02-08

ARI

13 December 2006

20:55

145. Lechner JF, Tesfaigzi J, Gerwin BI. 1997. Oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes in

mesothelioma—a synopsis. Environ. Health Perspect. 105(Suppl. 5):1061–67

146. Baser ME, Rai H, Wallace AJ, Evans DG. 2005. Neuroﬁbromatosis 2 (NF2) and malig-
nant mesothelioma in a man with a constitutional NF2 missense mutation. Fam. Canc.
4:321–22

147. Altomare DA, Vaslet CA, Skele KL, De Rienzo A, Devarajan K, et al. 2005. A mouse
model recapitulating molecular features of human mesothelioma. Canc. Res. 65:8090–95
148. Fleury-Feith J, Lecomte C, Renier A, Matrat M, Kheuang L, et al. 2003. Hemizygosity
of Nf 2 is associated with increased susceptibility to asbestos-induced peritoneal tumours.
Oncogene 22:3799–805

216 McClatchey

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.Contents

ARI

13 December 2006

2:13

Annual Review
of Pathology:
Mechanisms of
Disease

Volume 2, 2007

Contents

Frontispiece

Henry C. Pitot p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

pxii

Adventures in Hepatocarcinogenesis

Henry C. Pitot p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 1

Endocrine Functions of Adipose Tissue

Hironori Waki and Peter Tontonoz p

Endometrial Carcinoma

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Antonio Di Cristofano and Lora Hedrick Ellenson p

Muscle Diseases: The Muscular Dystrophies

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Elizabeth M. McNally and Peter Pytel p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Pathobiology of Neutrophil Transepithelial Migration: Implications in

p31

p57

p87

Mediating Epithelial Injury
Alex C. Chin and Charles A. Parkos p

von Hippel-Lindau Disease

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

William G. Kaelin, Jr. p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Cancer Stem Cells: At the Headwaters of Tumor Development

Ryan J. Ward and Peter B. Dirks p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Neuroﬁbromatosis

Andrea I. McClatchey p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Malaria: Mechanisms of Erythrocytic Infection and Pathological

Correlates of Severe Disease
Kasturi Haldar, Sean C. Murphy, Dan A. Milner, Jr., and Terrie E. Taylor p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

VEGF-A and the Induction of Pathological Angiogenesis
Janice A. Nagy, Ann M. Dvorak, and Harold F. Dvorak p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

In Vivo Pathology: Seeing with Molecular Speciﬁcity and Cellular

Resolution in the Living Body
Christopher H. Contag p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 111

p 145

p 175

p 191

p 217

p 251

p 277

vi

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.Contents

ARI

13 December 2006

2:13

Cell-Based Therapy for Myocardial Ischemia and Infarction:

Pathophysiological Mechanisms
Michael A. Laﬂamme, Stephan Zbinden, Stephen E. Epstein,
and Charles E. Murry p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Cystic Disease of the Kidney

Patricia D. Wilson and Beatrice Goilav p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Pathobiology of Pulmonary Hypertension

Marlene Rabinovitch p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Body Trafﬁc: Ecology, Genetics, and Immunity in Inﬂammatory

Bowel Disease
Jonathan Braun and Bo Wei p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 307

p 341

p 369

p 401

Contents

vii

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2007.2:191-216. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.orgby University of Alabama - Birmingham on 07/11/13. For personal use only.