The APL Paradigm and the ''Co-Clinical Trial'' Project
  
Caterina Nardella, Andrea Lunardi, Akash Patnaik, et al. 
  
Cancer Discovery 

2011;1:108-116. 

Updated version
  

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org/content/1/2/108
 
  

Cited Articles
  
Citing articles
  

This article cites by 17 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org/content/1/2/108.full.html#ref-list-1
 
  
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org/content/1/2/108.full.html#related-urls
 
  

  
  

  
  

E-mail alerts
  
Reprints and 
Subscriptions
  
Permissions
  

Sign up to receive free email-alerts

 related to this article or journal.

pubs@aacr.org
.

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department
at
  
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
.
permissions@aacr.org
  

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on July 11, 2013. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research. 

views
views

        PROsPeCTive 
    The APL Paradigm and the “Co-Clinical Trial” Project 
        Caterina Nardella   1,  2,        Andrea Lunardi   1,        Akash Patnaik   3,  4,        Lewis C. Cantley   4,  5, and         Pier Paolo Pandolfi   1    

                           summary: Tremendous advances in technologies have allowed the attainment of powerful insights into the 
molecular and genetic determinants that drive human cancers. However, this acquired knowledge has been 
translated into effective therapeutics very slowly, in part due to difficulty in predicting which drug or drug 
combination is likely to be effective in the complex mutational background of human cancers. To address this 
difficulty we have proposed and initiated the “co-clinical trial” project, in which we exploit mouse models that 
faithfully replicate the variety of mutational events observed in human cancers, to conduct preclinical trials that 
parallel ongoing human phase I/II clinical trials. Here, we focus on concepts relevant to the application of this novel 
paradigm and the essential components required for its implementation to ultimately achieve the rational and 
rapid development of new therapeutic treatments. Cancer Discovery; 1(2); 108–16. ©2011 AACR    .

   introduCtion 

 The “co-clinical trial” project stems from the realization of 
the tremendous power of preclinical testing of new drugs and 
drug combinations in faithful genetically engineered mouse 
(GEM) models of human cancer. 

 A “GEM to human” or “preclinical to clinical” approach has 
already proven to be highly effective toward the eradication of 
a subset of diseases [e.g., acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)] 
in which the genetic defects are defined and “druggable” tar-
gets and targeted therapies have been identified. In this arti-
cle, we discuss how we propose to export this paradigm for the 
optimization of therapy in other tumor types, and in principle 
to any disease, using the more refined GEM models and more 
sophisticated modeling capability currently available. 

 We review how the co-clinical trial project is aimed at over-
coming  four  fundamental  challenges  to  making  the  use  of 
preclinical models transformative in the real-time design of 
effective and informative clinical trials and ultimately, disease 
eradication: 

   1) 

  A  preclinical  to  clinical  working  model  is  extremely 
valuable,  but  still  very  slow  because  data  have  to  be 
accrued in the mouse model of interest and then trans-
lated to inform the clinical trial that will follow (often 
the  translation  of  the  relevant  information  does  not 
even occur).  

of  Medicine 

and  Pathology, 

Authors’  Affiliations:    1 Cancer  Genetics  Program,  Division  of  Genetics, 
 2 Preclinical  Murine 
Department 
Pharmacogenetics Facility, Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, 
3 Division  of  Hematology/Oncology,  Department  of  Medicine,   4 Division  of 
Signal Transduction, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer 
Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School; and   
5 Department  of  Systems  Biology,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston, 
Massachusetts
Corresponding Author:  Pier Paolo Pandolfi, Department of Medicine and 
Pathology,  Division  of  Genetics,  Beth  Israel  Deaconess  Medical  Center, 
Harvard  Medical  School,  330  Brookline  Avenue  CLS401,  Boston  MA 
02215.  Phone:  617-735-2121;  Fax:  617-735-2120;  E-mail:  ppandolf@
bidmc.harvard.edu 
doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0061
©2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

  2) 

  3) 

  4) 

  Pharmaceutical companies are reluctant to delay phase 
I/II  clinical  trials  pending  the  outcome  of  preclinical 
trials that could require 2 to 3 years to obtain conclu-
sive results.  
  The notion that the preclinical results in GEM models 
of cancer (as opposed to standard xenograft) are pre-
dictive  of  human  response  to  drugs  is  still  novel  and 
is not broadly accepted by pharmaceutical companies. 
Lack  of  success  in  such  efforts  in  “genetically  unde-
termined”  human  cell  line  xenograft  models  is  often 
considered ahead of efforts in GEM models, although 
these two approaches are fundamentally different.  
  Because GEM models are often generated in academic 
laboratories, the Material Transfer Agreements (MTA) 
granting animal transfers from academia to industry, 
as  well  as  drug  transfers  from  industry  to  academia, 
can require years of lead time.   

 Taken  as  a  whole,  these  challenges  deny  academic  scien-
tists and pharmaceutical companies the opportunity to share, 
in real time, valuable information obtained from preclinical 
studies, which could predict drug response in specific patients 
based  on  their  genetic  make-up  and  assist  in  the  design  of 
phase II and III human clinical trials. Finally, these obstacles 
impede  cancer  patients  from  receiving  the  appropriate  and 
effective treatment that could be developed from these trials. 
 In this article, we initially discuss the historical milestones 
that  led  to  eradication  of  APL  through  a  GEM-to-human 
strategy as an example of powerful applicability for our pro-
posed approach. We then describe the essential components 
required to implement the co-clinical trial idea and our vision 
for the integration of these elements to allow the application 
of the co-clinical approach as an innovative paradigm for the 
testing and development of new therapeutic modalities.  

  aPL Cure aS the Foundation oF 
the Co-CLiniCaL triaL ProJeCt 

 The  preclinical-to-clinical  approach  implemented  to  cure 
APL  undoubtedly  represents  the  foundation  and  inspira-
tion  for  the  co-clinical  trial  project.  The  ability  to  optimize 
therapeutic treatments in faithful GEM models of APL and 
to  stratify  patients  on  the  basis  of  genetic  criteria  had  a 

108 | CANCER DISCOVERY JULY 2011 

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on July 11, 2013. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research. 

dramatic impact on the evolution of treatment of APL with 
single  agents  or  drug  combinations,  and  ultimately  led  to 
disease eradication. 

 Here we briefly summarize the stepwise milestones on the 
journey  of  discovery  that  culminated  in  the  eradication  of 
this  formerly  lethal  leukemia.  Remarkably,  APL  is  now  cur-
able  with  the  sole  use  of  combined  targeted  therapies  (re-
viewed in ref. 1). 

 The  APL  story  started  at  the  bedside  with  the  cloning  of 
the APL fusion genes, and came full circle to end at the bed-
side, with clinical trials that have led to its cure. In the case of 
APL, the paradigm was to complete the mouse studies first 
and  then  to  bring  this  information  to  the  attention  of  the 
clinicians, rather than conduct parallel trials. The co-clinical 
trial project proposes to extend this effort far beyond the APL 
paradigm and to further accelerate this process of discovery, 
enabling a more rapid and successful return to the bedside. 

  APL is Not One but Many: Gene identification 
(1998–2004) 

 APL  is  characterized  by  a  distinctive  block  in  differentia-
tion  at  the  promyelocytic  stage  of  myeloid  hematopoietic 
differentiation and the invariable association with reciprocal 
and  balanced  chromosomal  translocations  involving  chro-
mosome 17 ( 2 ). In 1991, we and others cloned the breakpoint 
of  the  t(15;17)  translocation,  thereby  identifying  the  two 
genes involved at the breakpoint:  PML  on chromosome 15q22 
and the  RARα  gene on chromosome 17q21 ( 3 ). Although the 
t(15;17)  translocation  is  the  most  frequently  observed  mu-
tation  in  APL,  other  translocations,  in  which  chromosome 
17 is invariant, have also been described. During the period 
from  1998  to  2004,  each  variant  translocation  was  molecu-
larly cloned by our group as well as others, thereby leading to 
a new molecular classification for APL on the basis of these 
new genetic criteria ( Table 1 ; reviewed in ref. 4). 

  To  summarize,  research  showed  that  APL  is  not  one  but 
many, and that the genetic stratification was of relevance in 
dictating the biology of the disease and its therapeutic char-
acteristics ( Table 1 ). We all now accept that cancer is not one 
but many, and that therapy needs to be tailored according to 
genetics and molecular criteria. 

 Importantly, the APL paradigm was instructive at yet an-
other  level:  in  light  of  these  findings,  we  realized  that  the 
development  of  clinical  trials  in  the  conventional  manner 
would  not  be  feasible,  the  reason  being  that  APL  is  reason-
ably  rare,  representing  approximately  10%  of  all  myeloid 

views

leukemias.  Consequently,  there  are  not  enough  patients  to 
enroll if genetic stratification should be taken into account 
for guiding the design of such a trial.  

  faithful Mouse Modeling of APL (1994–1998) 

 The mouse modeling efforts proved complex, especially at 
that time, due to lack of appropriate expression vectors, pro-
moters,  and  regulatory  elements  to  accurately  direct  trans-
genic  expression  in  the  appropriate  hematopoietic/myeloid 
cellular compartment  in vivo.  

 Ultimately,  we  succeeded  in  generating  faithful  models 
of APL in transgenic mice harboring the various human fu-
sion genes ( Table 1 ). Indeed, the pathologic features of these 
leukemia  models  were  strikingly  similar  to  those  observed 
in human APL, even though mice do not spontaneously de-
velop  APL  ( Fig.  1 ).  Furthermore,  our  systematic  analysis  of 
the  role  of  the  various  fusion  genes  and  proteins  in  single 
and  double  transgenic  models  allowed  us  to  conclude  that 
although  the   X-RARα   fusion  gene  is  always  oncogenic  (e.g., 
 PML-RARα   or   PLZF-RARα ),  the  reciprocal  RARα-X  product 
(e.g., RARα-PML or RARα-PLZF generated by the reciprocal 
and  balanced  APL  chromosomal  translocations)  is  also  im-
portant in dictating the biological features and the response 
to therapy of these leukemias ( 5–10 ). 

  Historically, the generation of faithful GEM models of APL 
represented  a  fundamental  step  forward  in  convincing  the 
scientific and medical community that systematic modeling 
of human cancer in the mouse was indeed feasible.  

  Model validation (1997–1998) 

 Going  forward,  we  were  able  to  demonstrate  that  APL 
models in the mouse were not only faithful to the biological 
and pathologic features of the human disease, but also that 
their  leukemias  behaved  exactly  as  APL  in  human  patients 
when challenged with drugs. 

 An  initial  example  was  offered  by  the  realization  that 
leukemia  in   PML-RARα   mice  was  found  to  transiently  re-
spond to retinoic acid (RA) exactly as human t(15;17) APL 
(5–7).  As  in  human  APL,  RA  was  able  to  induce  complete 
remission  in  the  mouse,  but  leukemia  would  eventually 
relapse  if  treated  with  RA  alone.  In  addition,  leukemias 
in  APL   PML-RARα   mouse  models  would  often  become 
RA-resistant, as is the case for human t(15;17) APL treated 
solely  with  RA.  We  also  demonstrated  that  as  in  human 
t(11;17) APL, leukemia in  PLZF-RARα  mice was resistant to 
RA at presentation ( 10 ). 

 table 1.     Molecular classification for APL and its implications for treatment and therapy  

    Aberrant genes  
PML-RARα   
PLZF-RARα   
NPM-RARα   
NuMA-RARα   
STAT5b-RARα   

 Translocations  

 Response to chemotherapy  

 Response to RA treatment  

 Risk of treatment failure   

 t(15;17)  
 t(11;17)  
 t(5;17)  
 t(11;17)  
 t(17;17)  

 Good  
 Poor  
 Good  
 Good  

   

 Good  
 Poor  
 Good  
 Good  
 Poor  

 Low/intermediate  

 High  

 Low/intermediate  
 Low/intermediate  

     

JULY 2011 CANCER DISCOVERY | 109

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on July 11, 2013. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research. 

views

Hemopoietic
precursors

Bone marrow

Spleen

Cell
death

Self-renewal

Commitment

Figure 1.  Modeling APL in the mouse. 
Transgenic mice, in which the human PML-RARα 
fusion gene is under the control of the 
regulatory elements of the myeloid/
promyelocytic specific cathepsin-G gene, 
develop leukemias with classic APL features.

Maturation

Peripheral blood

Birth

1 Year

100% of the mice develop a
myeloproliferative disorder

10% of the mice develop

APL-like leukemia

These findings represented a defining moment that radi-
cally changed the perception of GEM models of human can-
cer  within  the  scientific  and  clinical  oncology  community. 
From that point forward, clinicians and physician scientists 
started to consider mouse models of human cancer not only 
as useful basic science tools for biological discovery, but also 
as  powerful  tools  for  preclinical  testing  of  novel  drugs  and 
drug combination therapies.

informing and Predicting Clinical Trials and 
Outcome (1998–2000)

Subsequently, our mouse models of APL began to inform 
clinical trials in place. We could advise the clinicians on how 
to  stratify  patients  for  clinical  trials  on  the  basis  of  genetic 
criteria,  using  information  accrued  in  preclinical  testing  of 
our mouse models of APL. As an example, we demonstrated 

that leukemia in PML-RARα transgenic mice was responsive 
to arsenic trioxide (As2O3), which later proved to be another 
powerful  weapon  for  the  treatment  of  APL,  although  once 
again leukemia in PLZF-RARα mice was found to be resistant 
(11)  (Fig.  2A).  Subsequently,  t(15;17)  APL  was  treated  suc-
cessfully  with  As2O3,  and  it  then  became  clear  that  t(11;17) 
APL patients would require additional therapeutic modalities 
beyond RA and As2O3.
Testing and Optimizing Combined Treatments 
(1998–2004)

On the basis of the predictive power of APL mouse mod-
els of distinct genotypes, we could optimize combined treat-
ments by utilizing these mouse APL models as a preclinical 
predictive engine. A decisive “home run” in this respect was 
the realization that although As2O3 and RA in combination 

A

As2O3

PML-RAR␣

PML-RAR␣
Leukemia

PML-RAR␣
Leukemia

As2O3

PLZF-RAR␣

Leukemia

PLZF-RAR␣

Leukemia

As2O3

PML-RAR␣

Degradation

Degradation

PLZF-RAR␣

As2O3

No

degradation

PLZF-RAR␣

No

degradation

Remission

Remission

No

remission

No

remission

B

PML-RAR␣
Leukemia

PML-RAR␣
Leukemia

PML-RAR␣
Leukemia

PML-RAR␣
Leukemia

As2O3

As2O3

As2O3 + RA

As2O3 + RA

Remission

Remission

Long-lasting

remission

Long-lasting

remission

Figure 2.  Preclinical trials in 
mouse models of APL. A, mouse 
models of APL respond 
differentially to As2O3. PLZF-
RARα leukemia proved resistant 
to therapy as it was resistant to 
RA as single agent. By contrast, 
PML-RARα leukemia proved 
exquisitely sensitive to As2O3, 
which triggers the degradation of 
the fusion protein, suggesting 
that this drug could be used 
successfully in large-scale 
clinical trials. B, treatment of 
PML-RARα mice with RA and 
As2O3 in combination leads 
to a longer lasting remission 
compared to the treatment with 
As2O3  alone. Blue, sick; purple, 
healthy.

110 | CANCER DISCOVERY JULY 2011 

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on July 11, 2013. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research. 

were  ineffective  in  PLZF-RARα  leukemias,  this  combination 
was  tremendously  effective  in  PML-RARα  leukemia  in  the 
mouse (11, 12).

These findings were even more relevant in light of the fact 
that  data  obtained  from  in  vitro  experiments  using  human 
leukemia  cell  lines  predicted  the  opposite  (13).  This  in vitro 
analysis suggested that the two drugs in combination would 
oppose each other (13). This analysis in turn resulted in sev-
eral  clinical  combination  trials  being  halted  in  many  aca-
demic centers.

By  contrast,  this  combination  in  mouse  models  was  not 
only  well  tolerated,  but  also  was  able  to  eradicate  APL  in 
PML-RARα leukemia models (Fig. 2B) (11, 12). These trans-
genic animals remained in complete remission and off treat-
ment, even though this drug combination was administered 
at  leukemia  presentation  for  a  short  period.  This  finding 
was  a  compelling  result  taking  into  account  that  the  PML-
RARα transgene remains expressed for the entire life of these 
animals.

On the basis of these convincing results, clinical trials com-
bining  both  As2O3  and  RA  were  subsequently  performed  in 
many academic centers worldwide. Today, the As2O3 and RA 
combination is considered the standard of care in the treat-
ment of t(15;17) APL (14). These two drugs specifically target 
the PML-RARα fusion protein by opposing its aberrant tran-
scriptional  activity  and  targeting  it  for  degradation.  As2O3 
and RA are offered at presentation to t(15;17) APL patients 
as  frontline  therapy  with  limited  toxicity,  in  the  absence  of 
chemotherapy as induction or consolidation treatment. With 
these two drugs, complete remission is obtained in 100% of 
cases,  leading  to  disease  eradication.  Hence,  the  “targeted 
therapy  devoid  of  chemotherapy”  of  APL  has  come  of  age 
from these efforts.

The preclinical effort in the mouse was decisive at inform-
ing  and  predicting  clinical  outcome.  The  APL  GEM  mod-
els  were  instrumental  at  multiple  stages:  1)  defining  the 
oncogene(s)  of  APL;  2)  identifying  the  druggable  target(s); 
3) determining the combined treatment that proved curative 
beyond misleading results obtained in vitro in cell lines; and 
4) the APL GEM models proved critical for the study and ef-
fective treatment of therapy-resistant APL.

Developing and Testing Novel Therapeutic 
Modalities for Therapy-Resistant APL 
(1998–2004)

In spite of the remarkable success, the subtype of APL asso-
ciated with PLZF-RARα fusion proteins remained a resilient 
subtype of APL, maintaining resistance to conventional che-
motherapy as well as to RA and As2O3.

Once  again,  GEM  models  proved  critical  to  test  novel 
therapeutic  modalities  for  therapy-resistant  APL.  To  this 
end, we recreated the dual complexity of human t(11;17) APL 
by  coexpressing  in  transgenic  animals  the  PLZF-RARα  and 
RARα-PLZF  fusion  proteins.  These  transgenic  mice  devel-
oped a classic APL-like leukemia that proved resistant to con-
ventional chemotherapy and to the combination of RA and 
As2O3 just as observed in human t(11;17) APL (8).

Utilizing  this  APL  model,  we  could  therefore  test  a 
novel  therapeutic  concept  and  a  novel  class  of  drugs:  his-
inhibitors  [HDACI  (the  rationale  for 
tone  deacetylase 

views

“transcription therapy” with HDACIs is reviewed in ref. 15)], 
which we predicted would revert in combination with RA the 
transcriptional  repressive  activity  of  the  PLZF-RARα  fusion 
protein (16).

Mouse  models  of  t(11;17)  APL  allowed  us  to  demon-
strate  not  only  the  efficacy  of  this  combination  in  therapy-
resistant APL, but also the limited toxicity of HDACIs (16). 
Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a novel experimen-
tal  HDACI,  proved  well  tolerated  and  capable  of  inducing 
complete  remission  in  leukemia  in  PLZF-RARα/RARα-PLZF 
double  transgenic  animals  when  administered  in  combina-
tion with RA (16).

Subsequently,  we  were  granted  approval  from  the  Food 
and Drug Administration to test in therapy-resistant human 
APL a combination of phenyl butyrate (a compound also ac-
tive as HDACI) and RA, because both drugs were already ap-
proved  for  clinical  use.  The  first  patient,  a  13-year-old  girl, 
attained  complete  molecular  remission  with  negligible  tox-
icity  after  receiving  a  therapeutic  regimen  that  was  entirely 
derived  from  the  regimen  optimized  in  mouse  models  of 
t(11;17) APL with SAHA plus RA (17). By now, SAHA is also 
approved for clinical use under the name vorinostat.

Can the aPL Paradigm Be rePLiCated?

Although the APL story exemplifies the tremendous util-
ity of a preclinical to clinical or mouse to human approach, 
there is little doubt that this line of attack could be exported 
to other forms of cancer and replicated in the immediate fu-
ture. This statement is based on a number of considerations. 
All  the  ingredients  for  this  approach  to  be  possible  are  at 
hand: a detailed understanding of the genetic basis of human 
cancer; faithful mouse models of several cancers; and a wide 
range of drugs available for testing in the immediate future.

However,  a  number  of  things  have  changed  since  1991 
when the PML-RARα fusion gene was originally cloned, and 
several other aspects also need to change if we want to accel-
erate this paradigm. It must be noted that in the case of APL, 
18 years elapsed from gene identification to cure. Therefore, 
although  success  ultimately  was  achieved,  the  time  period 
needed to eradicate APL was very lengthy.

What has changed 18 years later is that the volume of in-
formation has dramatically increased: researchers are flooded 
by  genetic  information,  the  relevance  of  which  needs  to  be 
carefully assessed. Moreover, many more drugs are available 
to be tested in clinical trials in multiple subtypes of cancer. 
This complexity and high volume will complicate the devel-
opment  of  clinical  trials  if  they  are  performed  in  the  tradi-
tional  manner.  For  instance,  patient  accrual  may  become  a 
serious issue because there will not be enough patients to test 
drugs singly or in combination once the disease is stratified 
according to molecular and genetic criteria (as is the case for 
APL, which is rare and has many subtypes).

This complexity could partially be ameliorated by the fact 
that mouse modeling of human cancer has reached a level of 
unprecedented sophistication. Researchers can now perform 
genetic modifications in the mouse that were inconceivable 
10 years ago.

Conversely,  four  fundamental  aspects  have  not  changed 
and should be taken into serious account if the ultimate goal 

JULY 2011 CANCER DISCOVERY | 111

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on July 11, 2013. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research. 

views

is to accelerate the process of drug testing using preclinical 
information from GEM models of human cancer:

the Co-CLiniCaL triaL ConCePt: 
SynChroniCity

1)  To  proceed  in  a  preclinical  to  clinical  fashion  would 
take a very long time, even in the most optimistic sce-
nario  of  an  immediate  translation  of  the  preclinical 
information  into  intelligent  clinical  trials,  as  it  was 
in APL.

2)  Pharmaceutical companies are reluctant to allow pre-
clinical testing of their drugs in mouse models by aca-
demic  laboratories  and  basic  scientists  because  such 
efforts  frequently  do  not  offer  the  needed  quality 
control that, in principle, a well-executed clinical trial 
could offer.

3)  Pharmaceutical companies are determined to perform 
clinical trials in human patients as soon as regulatory 
bodies allow them to do so, irrespective of the possible 
accrual  of  valuable  preclinical  information  in  mouse 
models of human cancer.

4)  Perhaps  the  most  serious  hurdle  is  the  fact  that  the 
“basic  science  academic  vector  of  discovery,”  which 
emanates from the basic academic laboratories to gen-
erate preclinical information, rarely meets the “clinical 
vector of discovery” that is sustained by the activity of 
clinicians  and  pharmaceutical  companies.  These  two 
worlds seldom occupy the same table, and the informa-
tion each one provides is infrequently integrated. The 
data released in scientific papers, even when published 
in prestigious journals, are rarely utilized in designing 
clinical trials. On the other hand, basic scientists, who 
often are not familiar with how to design clinical trials, 
rarely read clinical papers.

Taking into account these facts and potential hurdles, as 
well as utilizing the powerful example constituted by the APL 
paradigm, we have formulated the co-clinical trial project.

We believe that the most direct way to overcome the afore-
mentioned  hurdles  is  to  accelerate  the  process  of  data  in-
tegration  and  the  translation  of  preclinical  efforts  into  the 
clinic  as  well  as  to  facilitate  and  develop  an  infrastructure 
that allows the synchronization and real-time integration of 
preclinical and clinical efforts.

Many  clinical  trials  will  be  developed  in  the  immediate 
future,  as  the  pharmaceutical  industry  and  clinical  investi-
gators  (the  clinical  vector  of  discovery)  will  test  numerous 
new molecules for cancer treatment in phase I/II trials. This 
reality can be met and given greater incentive by creating an 
infrastructure whereby the “basic science academic vector” of 
preclinical testing operates in parallel with the clinical vector 
of discovery.

Specifically,  we  propose  that  each  clinical  trial  be  con-
ducted in parallel with preclinical trials in appropriate GEM 
models,  and  that  the  relevant  clinical,  biological,  and  phar-
macologic information (i.e., somatic mutational background, 
germline  single  nucleotide  polymorphism  variations,  re-
sponsiveness  to  specific  regimens,  imaging,  microarray,  and 
proteomics  profiles)  are  accrued,  analyzed  in  parallel,  and 
integrated to facilitate the identification of biomarkers that 
predict response to specific treatments (approach 1 in Fig. 3). 
Furthermore,  to  complement  the  GEM  models,  genetically 
stratified  human  cancer  explants  obtained  from  patient  bi-
opsies during clinical trials can be used to assess responsive-
ness in vivo using xenograft mouse models in NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid 
Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) mice (approach 2 in Fig. 3).

This  approach  can  immediately  be  developed  on  a  large 
scale  in  a  prospective  manner,  because  what  we  propose  is 
straightforward and relatively inexpensive vis-à-vis the cost of 
clinical trials in human patients. The simple working model 

Figure 3.  The co-clinical trial project. 
Synchronizing preclinical with clinical trials to  
be run in parallel in human patients and mouse 
models, either GEM models (1) or human 
xenograft models (2), will allow real-time 
integration of information. Blue, sick; purple, 
healthy.

Tumor
Genetic
alteration

DRUG

Real-time
integrated
information

1

DRUG

2

GEM

models

DRUG

Human xenograft

models

112 | CANCER DISCOVERY JULY 2011 

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on July 11, 2013. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research. 

A

B

C

C

C

views

 Figure 4.      Co-clinical trials in patients and in 
mouse models of human cancer.  The same drug 
and exactly the same protocol will be utilized in 
mouse models and human patients. Data will be 
accrued and analyzed in parallel toward disease 
stratification in primary tumors as well as in 
acquired treatment resistance. Blue, sick; 
purple, healthy.  

C +

acquired
genetic
alteration

DRUG

Real-time
integrated
information
1

Using the same
clinical protocol

Real-time
integrated
information

A

B

C

C

C + acquired

genetic
alteration

that  we  propose,  which  can  be  exported  beyond  cancer  re-
search  to  any  disease  and  biomedical  discipline,  is  exempli-
fied as follows. For example, when a novel experimental drug 
“X”  is  tested  in  the  clinic  against  prostate  cancer,  it  should 
be systematically tested in each GEM model of prostate can-
cer  that  is  considered  both  faithful  and  informative  by  the 
scientific  community.  Data  should  be  accrued  in  real  time 
and translated back to the clinic simultaneously, thereby al-
lowing  for  immediate  human  patient  stratification,  among 
other  things  ( Fig.  4 ).  Assuming  that  of  the  mouse  models 
of prostate cancer depicted in Figure 4, 1 (genotype  “C” ) re-
sponds to drug X but the other 2 fail to do so, we could im-
mediately translate all the mouse data for comparison with 
information obtained from human prostate cancer patients 
who  do  or  do  not  respond  to  drug  X.  This,  in  turn,  allows 
for  real-time  testing  of  the  hypothesis  that  genotype   “C”   is 
also  a  major  determinant  of  sensitivity  in  human  patients 
as  it  is  in  the  mice,  whereas  the  other  genotypes  are  major 
determinants  of  upfront  resistance.  Importantly,  even  the 
genotype  “C ” model will eventually relapse, allowing for the 

synchronous  analysis  and  identification  of  determinants  of 
acquired resistance ( Fig. 4 ). 

  This  working  model  can  be  applied  for  the  achievement 
of  several  fundamental  goals  (summarized  in   Table  2 ),  and 
at  once  solves  each  and  every  one  of  the  above-mentioned 
hurdles: 1) the general process will be tremendously acceler-
ated by the synchronicity of the analysis; 2) pharmaceutical 
companies will find it extremely appealing to perform clini-
cal trials with academic centers that offer this infrastructure 
and perform co-clinical trials with rigor and sophistication; 
and  3)  the  data  integration  will  bring  basic  scientists,  clini-
cians, and pharmaceutical companies to the same table. 

  In addition, the co-clinical trial project will enable the con-
duct of accelerated GEM model–based biomarker discovery. 
It is important to underline that, although cancers that de-
velop  in  a  specific  GEM  model  are  initiated  by  a  common 
genetic  alteration,  there  is  substantial  heterogeneity  in  the 
genomic profiles of the tumors that develop, as shown by dif-
ferences in mRNA expression signatures, gene copy number 
alterations, and the mutation status of other complementing 

 table 2.     fundamental goals of the co-clinical trial project  

     1)   Perform co-clinical assessment of novel agents while in phase I/II to permit rapid stratification of responder and resistant populations.  
   2)    Assess single agents or drug combinations in GEM models of genetically distinct and “rarer” cancer types/subsets, in which sizable 

patient accrual represents a major hurdle.  

   3)   Perform  in vivo  testing of drug combinations to determine tolerability, efficacy, and pharmacodynamics.  
   4)   Facilitate the prioritization of the most attractive combinations for assessment in humans.  
   5)   Allow the “postclinical” optimization of standard-of-care treatment modalities.  
   6)   Identify mechanisms of acquired resistance to agents/therapeutic modalities (often before clinical trials start).  
   7)   Assess the system impact of agents and combinations (e.g., tumor immune response or impact on tumor stroma and vasculature).  
   8)   Permit the co-clinical and preclinical identification of novel biomarkers.  
   9)   Determine the importance of the temporal sequence of genetic alterations in dictating response or resistance to treatment modalities.    

JULY 2011 CANCER DISCOVERY | 113

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on July 11, 2013. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research. 

views

genes. There is also substantial heterogeneity when the tumor 
becomes  resistant  to  a  given  treatment  modality.  In  turn, 
these data suggest that tumors in GEM models may reflect 
the  heterogeneity  of  human  tumors—even  those  initiated 
by the same genetic event—and therefore vary in response to 
treatment, enabling the rapid identification of biomarkers of 
sensitivity and resistance to a treatment modality.

the FundamentaL ComPonentS For 
Co-CLiniCaL triaL imPLementation

For  the  co-clinical  trial  project  to  succeed  and  set  a  new 
paradigm for drug testing and development, we need to cre-
ate  the  appropriate  infrastructure  and  educate  the  clinical 
and  preclinical  operators.  In  principle,  the  number  of  “pre-
clinical centers” behind the co-clinical trial project could be 
the same as the number of “clinical centers” that enroll pa-
tients in a given clinical trial.

We  have  identified  the  components  that,  in  our  opinion, 
are critical for the development of the co-clinical trial project 
(Fig. 5):

1)  A  “mouse  hospital”  with  a  state-of-the-art  infrastruc-
ture for in vivo mouse imaging and a mouse pharmacy.

2)  An infrastructure for comparative pathology.
3)  A  bioinformatics  infrastructure  for  data  mining  and 

analysis.

the mouSe hoSPitaL

The  basic  premise  of  a  co-clinical  trial  strategy  is  that 
GEM  models,  which  harbor  molecular  defects  causally  as-
sociated  with  human  cancers,  can  be  used  to  focus  treat-
ment paradigms at a fraction of the cost and time required 
for  human  clinical  trials.  In  concert  with  the  results  from 
phase I/II clinical trials, these mouse models can be used to 
evaluate therapeutic candidate monotherapy, multiple com-
bination therapy efficacy, and biomarker responses that can 
then  direct  the  design  of  early  phase  human  clinical  trials. 
Furthermore,  the  co-clinical  strategy  could  be  expanded  to 
help rescue failed clinical candidates and direct their reevalu-
ation against an appropriate oncogenic mutation.

The  global  mouse  genetics  community  has  generated  so-
phisticated resources that have great potential to support co-
clinical cancer trials. These resources include accurate mouse 

Integrated pathology

and

bioinformatic labs

Mouse modeling
of human disease

Integrated imaging

infrastructure

The mouse

hospital

Clinical
center

Mouse pharmacy

Pharmas

Figure 5.  Critical components of a co-clinical center. Fundamental 
components of the co-clinical effort (in red) and their relationship with 
the infrastructures and pharmaceutical companies.

models  of  multiple  human  cancer  types,  imaging  technolo-
gies ideally suited for determining physiologic and tumor re-
sponses to treatment, and comprehensive biomarker analysis 
centered  on  high-throughput  genomic  and  gene  expression 
platforms.

A co-clinical trials program requires rigorous attention to 
standardized protocols; expertise in mouse genetics, biology, 
and husbandry; pharmaceutical drug development; and effi-
cient communication among basic, clinical, and pharmaceu-
tical researchers. Programs must be designed to involve and 
educate  chemists,  pharmacologists,  biologists,  physicians, 
geneticists, clinical trial contract research organizations and 
their  study  monitors,  investors,  and  pharmaceutical  execu-
tives. Dosing regimens must be carefully controlled, as must 
measurements  of  response.  Sophisticated  imaging  and  bio-
response  measurement  equipment  is  also  required.  Data 
collection  and  management  must  be  organized  to  permit 
community access and integration.

We  therefore  propose  that,  to  ensure  standardized  pro-
cedures  and  the  requisite  attention  to  experimental  details, 
central  cancer  mouse  hospitals  (CCMH)  are  needed  where 
large-scale  mouse  trials  can  be  conducted  and  evaluated  by 
experts in close consultation with clinicians and pharmaceu-
tical  companies.  The  CCMHs  will  be  equipped  with  a  dedi-
cated vivarium, procedure rooms, and tissue culture facilities. 
A CCMH must also include comprehensive, high-throughput 
biomarker analysis of and host physiologic response to thera-
peutic treatment to support co-clinical human-mouse trials. 
Additionally, a state-of-the-art CCMH will vitally depend on 
multitechnology  comprehensive  small-animal  imaging  cen-
ters and a centralized mouse pharmacy.

Oncology imaging Center at the Mouse Hospital

We believe that to ensure standardized procedures and nec-
essary attention to technology application and implementa-
tion, an oncology imaging center (OIC) is needed to support 
large-scale mouse trials in close consultation with clinicians 
and pharmaceutical companies.

The  envisioned  OIC  technologies  would  include  compre-
hensive  noninvasive  macroscopic  imaging  systems,  such  as 
magnetic resonance imaging; micro-computed tomography; 
micro-positron  emission  tomography;  ultrasound;  and  flu-
orescence-mediated tomography. An OIC would offer several 
benefits.

First, the availability of an OIC will guarantee that in vivo 
imaging  protocols  for  mice  closely  match  clinical  protocols 
in terms of both data acquisition and data analysis.

Second, the establishment of an OIC will assure creation of 
state-of-the art facilities, imaging systems, supporting infra-
structure, and capabilities.

Third, standard operating procedures for all imaging mo-
dalities  and  organ-specific  imaging  protocols  will  be  estab-
lished and distributed. Standardized procedures will permit 
multiple  laboratories  to  compare  results  of  drug  efficacies, 
share information, and allow for establishing phenotype da-
tabases for all mouse models.

In the context of the co-clinical trial project, we postulate 
that imaging studies in mouse models will parallel the analy-
sis done in clinical trials (at a fraction of the cost); serve as 
a platform to rapidly test emerging new research directions; 

114 | CANCER DISCOVERY JULY 2011 
114 | CANCER DISCOVERY JULY 2011 

www.aacrjournals.org
www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on July 11, 2013. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research. 

and allow the development of new imaging approaches and 
agents, which could then be tested clinically. Thus, the fun-
damental opportunity is to analyze mouse imaging data sets 
similarly to clinical data sets and integrate the results to bet-
ter predict treatment response and outcomes.

A Mouse Pharmacy for the Mouse Hospital

The  biggest  challenge  in  obtaining  experimental  com-
pounds  for  testing  in  animal  models  is  the  lengthy  process 
needed to obtain MTAs from the pharmaceutical companies 
who hold patents on these drugs. MTAs can take more than 
a  year  to  complete  and  are  extremely  narrow  in  regard  to 
models that can be tested. Furthermore, they can invariably 
exclude  the  use  of  drug  combinations,  and  any  request  for 
a change in the MTA can require months. Additionally, the 
compounds obtained in this fashion cannot be shared with 
collaborators.

We propose to circumvent the complexity of the MTA pro-
cess and have compounds of interest for the co-clinical trial” 
project  synthesized  for  shared  use.  This  approach  has  many 
advantages. First, multiple laboratories can use the same com-
pounds in their mouse models and freely share information. 
Second,  combinations  of  agents  can  be  tested,  which  would 
otherwise be impossible with compounds obtained via MTAs.
Because  the  scientific  community  intends  to  use  these 
compounds  only  in  animal  models  or  in  cell  lines  for  non-
commercial  purposes,  and  because  by  the  time  the  com-
pounds  enter  phase  I  clinical  trials,  the  structures  have 
almost certainly been published in patents, there is no restric-
tion to access or use them.

ComParative PathoLogy Center

The  realization  of  the  co-clinical  trial  project  will  require 
extensive human/mouse comparative pathology expertise. As 
for the OICs, to ensure standardized procedures and technol-
ogy  application  and  implementation,  we  propose  the  devel-
opment of comparative pathology centers (CPC) to support 
co-clinical trials in close consultation with clinicians.

We  propose  the  creation  of  CPCs  that  constitute  a  state-
of-the-art  hub  for  oncologic  and  pathology-based  research, 
where  pathologists  work  with  molecular  biologists,  transla-
tional researchers, and clinical researchers to develop molecu-
lar pathology technologies and resources to support targeted 
cancer therapy. These include, for instance, the development 
of  tissue-based  assays  aimed  at  identifying,  validating,  and 
assessing  biomarkers  of  cancers  and  the  development  and 
analysis  of  experimental  models  of  cancers.  Overall,  CPCs 
will  be  comprised  of  molecular  pathologists  interested  in 
mouse models of cancer and their relevance and similarities 
to human tumors with the ultimate goal of patient stratifica-
tion using molecular biomarkers.

Co-CLiniCaL BioinFormatiCS CenterS 
For data Storage, mining, and anaLySiS
Through  co-clinical  trial  efforts,  we  will  collect  extensive 
data  from  mouse  models  concerning  specific  genetic  le-
sions that drive cancer initiation and progression. Such data 
will  include,  for  example,  large  sets  of  expression  transcript 

views

profiling,  comparative  genomic  hybridization  profiling, 
whole genome sequencing, immunohistochemical data, and 
morphologic data that will characterize these tumor models 
throughout their development at a pathologic and molecu-
lar  level.  These  models  will  be  evaluated  in  a  similar  man-
ner  for  the  response  to  various  single  agent  and  combined 
treatments that will be cross-referenced with data collected to 
characterize the primary models.

This  mouse  effort  will  be  coordinated  with  the  clinical 
counterpart to accrue and compile extensive data regarding 
the genetic profile of tumors before and after treatment. This 
review  will  include,  for  example,  analysis  of  major  cancer-
associated genes to define alterations to these genes in these 
tumors (i.e., p53, PTEN, and c-Myc genomic status) and how 
they relate to prognosis and treatment outcome.

Therefore,  all  data  collected  will  be  compiled,  compared, 
and cross-referenced to provide a comprehensive overview of 
how  the  response  from  preclinical  trials  in  mice  can  assist 
in  the  design  of  clinical  trials  and  inform  the  clinic  regard-
ing stratification of patients. Data integration is the founda-
tion of the “co-clinical trial” principle. Thus, a bioinformatics 
platform for mouse and human integrated normalization of 
data is critical to the successful realization of the project.

ConCLuSionS

The co-clinical trial project rests on a novel paradigm: par-
allel  testing  of  new  therapeutic  modalities  in  faithful  GEM 
models  and  patients  to  streamline  the  progression  from 
bench to bedside for experimental therapeutics or novel com-
binations  of  already  approved  drugs.  Notably,  these  mouse 
and human integrated efforts also can be developed postclin-
ically to optimize standard-of-care treatment modalities that 
are often randomly administered to all comers (see Table 2).
We  are  aware  that  tests  in  animals  for  co-clinical  tri-
als  are  expensive,  involving  not  only  the  cost  of  drugs,  but 
also  the  operating  cost  of  the  “mouse  hospital.”  However, 
these  expenditures  are  trivial  compared  to  human  clinical 
trials. Perhaps the biggest challenge is obtaining the quanti-
ties  of  investigational  drugs  needed  for  the  co-clinical  tri-
als. Initially, pharmaceutical companies may be reluctant to 
provide  these  drugs  for  free  and  will  resist  blanket  MTAs 
across  institutions,  hence  the  need  for  a  mouse  pharmacy. 
However, it is becoming clear that pharmaceutical companies 
may  find  it  extremely  appealing  to  have  access  to  the  pre-
publication information that originates from the co-clinical 
trial  project.  In  addition,  many  of  the  ongoing  trials  with 
drugs  that  target  components  of  signaling  pathways  will 
fail  as  single  agents  in  phase  I/II  because  the  majority  of 
patients  in  clinical  trials  will  have  combinations  of  muta-
tions that will circumvent the effect of the drug. The critical 
information  from  co-clinical  trials  is  to  predict  which  mu-
tational  events  will  result  in  resistance  to  the  drugs  and  to 
exclude  patients  with  these  mutations  from  phase  I/II  tri-
als, thus enhancing the likelihood that a drug will benefit a 
specific  genetically  determined  patient  population  in  early 
phase clinical trials. This information will in turn accelerate 
drug  approval,  albeit  for  a  narrowly  defined  population  of 
patients,  and  ultimately  allow  new  clinical  trials  with  com-
binations of approved drugs where broader efficacy is more 

JULY 2011 CANCER DISCOVERY | 115
JULY 2011 CANCER DISCOVERY | 115

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on July 11, 2013. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research. 

views

likely. Furthermore, this information could diminish clinical 
trial failure due to insufficient patient enrollment because of 
patients  being  misdirected  into  the  wrong  trial.  Conversely, 
the co-clinical approach can also enhance the negative predic-
tive value of a drug early in the drug development process: for 
example, if a drug does not work in any of the faithful GEM 
models of prostate cancer, it will likely not work in a phase 
I/II  human  clinical  trial.  This  information  will  reduce  the 
enormous costs associated with a failed phase III clinical trial 
involving many hundreds of patients and the investment of 
several billion dollars.

Finally, this integrated approach has already started to de-
velop for the benefit of cancer patients at several US institu-
tions, and will soon spread worldwide. Indeed, it is important 
to underscore that the co-clinical trial project could be easily 
exported  to  any  medical  center  and  the  approach  could  be 
applied to other biomedical disciplines and diseases (e.g., de-
generative and metabolic disorders), whenever faithful mouse 
models  are  available  and  clinical  trials  with  experimental 
drugs are ongoing. The co-clinical trial project was originally 
launched in prostate and lung cancers, with the initial sup-
port  of  stimulus  grants  from  the  National  Cancer  Institute 
(NCI). Additionally, the co-clinical trial project is at the core 
of our Stand Up to Cancer–supported “dream team,” which is 
targeting the phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway in women’s 
cancers. For each of the human clinical trials designed by in-
terinstitutional teams of clinicians and scientists, parallel tri-
als are being conducted in GEM models of women’s cancers, 
using the same therapies. The mouse models are being gener-
ated at the participating institutions (Beth Israel Deaconess, 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
MD  Anderson,  Dana-Farber  Cancer  Institute,  Vanderbilt, 
Columbia, and Vall d’Hebron) and the results are shared with 
all the team members at quarterly meetings. The early obser-
vations  from  the  mouse  clinical  trials  are  already  influenc-
ing hypotheses that will be evaluated in the parallel human 
clinical  trials.  We  anticipate  that  these  and  other  ongoing 
co-clinical trials will provide the proof of concept that estab-
lishes the value of this new paradigm.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of interest

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.
The  Editor-in-Chief  of  Cancer  Discovery  is  an  author  of  this  ar-
ticle. In keeping with the AACR’s Editorial Policy, the paper was peer 
reviewed and a member of the AACR’s Publications Committee ren-
dered the decision concerning acceptability.

Acknowledgments

We are indebted to Cheryl Marks and Dinah Singer from the NCI 
for their inspired support of this project. We also acknowledge the 
Mouse  Model  of  Human  Cancer  Consortium’s  critical  role,  as  en-
couraged by the NCI, in expanding the boundaries of mouse model 
science  so  that  this  game-changing  opportunity  exists.  Finally,  we 
thank  the  current  members  of  the  Pandolfi  laboratory  for  critical 
discussion.

Received March 17, 2011; revised March 28, 2011; accepted May 

24, 2011; published online July 18, 2011.

RefeReNCes
  1.  Nasr R, Guillemin MC, Ferhi O, Soilihi H, Peres L, Berthier C, et al. 
Eradication of acute promyelocytic leukemia-initiating cells through 
PML-RARA degradation. Nat Med 2008;14:1333–42.

  2.  Rowley JD.Chromosomal patterns in myelocytic leukemia. N Engl J 

Med 1973;289:220–1.

  3.  Pandolfi PP, Grignani F, Alcalay M, Mencarelli A, Biondi A, LoCoco 
F,  et  al.  Structure  and  origin  of  the  acute  promyelocytic  leukemia 
myl/RAR  alpha  cDNA  and  characterization  of  its  retinoid-binding 
and transactivation properties. Oncogene 1991;6:1285–92.

  4.  Piazza  F,  Gurrieri  C,  Pandolfi  PP.  The  theory  of  APL.  Oncogene 

2001;20:7216–22.

  5.  He LZ, Tribioli C, Rivi R, Peruzzi D, Pelicci PG, Soares V, et al. Acute 
leukemia with promyelocytic features in PML/RARalpha transgenic 
mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:5302–7.

  6.  Grisolano JL, Wesselschmidt RL, Pelicci PG, Ley TJ.Altered myeloid 
development and acute leukemia in transgenic mice expressing PML-
RAR alpha under control of cathepsin G regulatory sequences. Blood 
1997;89:376–87.

  7.  Brown  D,  Kogan  S,  Lagasse  E,  Weissman  I,  Alcalay  M,  Pelicci  PG, 
et  al.  A  PMLRARalpha  transgene  initiates  murine  acute  promyelo-
cytic leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:2551–6.

  8.  He LZ, Bhaumik M, Tribioli C, Rego EM, Ivins S, Zelent A, et al. Two 

critical hits for promyelocytic leukemia. Mol Cell 2000;6:1131–41.

  9.  Rego  EM,  Ruggero  D,  Tribioli  C,  Cattoretti  G,  Kogan  S,  Redner 
RL, et al. Leukemia with distinct phenotypes in transgenic mice ex-
pressing  PML/RAR  alpha,  PLZF/RAR  alpha  or  NPM/RAR  alpha. 
Oncogene 2006;25:1974–9.

 10.  He LZ, Guidez F, Tribioli C, Peruzzi D, Ruthardt M, Zelent A, et al. 
Distinct  interactions  of  PML-RARalpha  and  PLZF-RARalpha  with 
co-repressors  determine  differential  responses  to  RA  in  APL.  Nat 
Genet 1998;18:126–35.

 11.  Rego EM, He LZ, Warrell RP, Jr, Wang ZG, Pandolfi PP. Retinoic acid 
(RA) and As2O3 treatment in transgenic models of acute promyelo-
cytic leukemia (APL) unravel the distinct nature of the leukemogenic 
process induced by the PML-RARalpha and PLZF-RARalpha oncop-
roteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:10173–8.

 12.  Lallemand-Breitenbach V, Guillemin MC, Janin A, Daniel MT, Degos 
L, Kogan SC, et al. Retinoic acid and arsenic synergize to eradicate 
leukemic  cells  in  a  mouse  model  of  acute  promyelocytic  leukemia. 
J Exp Med 1999;189:1043–52.

 13.  Shao W, Fanelli M, Ferrara FF, Riccioni R, Rosenauer A, Davison K, 
et al. Arsenic trioxide as an inducer of apoptosis and loss of PML/
RAR  alpha  protein  in  acute  promyelocytic  leukemia  cells.  J  Natl 
Cancer Inst 1998;90:124–33.

 14.  Nasr  R,  de  The  H.  Eradication  of  acute  promyelocytic  leukemia-
initiating cells by PML/RARA-targeting. Int J Hematol 2010;91:742-7.
for  cancer.  Oncogene 

 15.  Pandolfi  PP.  Transcription 

therapy 

2001;20:3116–27.

 16.  He LZ, Tolentino T, Grayson P, Zhong S, Warrell RP, Jr, Rifkind RA, 
et al. Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce remission in transgenic 
models  of  therapy-resistant  acute  promyelocytic  leukemia.  J  Clin 
Invest 2001;108:1321–30.

 17.  Warrell RP, Jr, He LZ, Richon V, Calleja E, Pandolfi PP. Therapeutic 
targeting  of 
leukemia 
by  use  of  an  inhibitor  of  histone  deacetylase.  J  Natl  Cancer  Inst 
1998;90:1621–5.

in  acute  promyelocytic 

transcription 

116 | CANCER DISCOVERY JULY 2011 

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org 

on July 11, 2013. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research. 

