J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
Copyright Ó 2006 by the American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

Vol. 65, No. 2
February 2006
pp. 162–175

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Neuregulin Growth Factors and Their ErbB Receptors Form

a Potential Signaling Network for Schwannoma Tumorigenesis

Mark S. Stonecypher, BS, Abhik Ray Chaudhury, MBBS, Stephanie J. Byer, BS,

and Steven L. Carroll, MD, PhD

Abstract

Sporadic and neuroﬁbromatosis type 2-associated schwannomas
contain a glial growth factor (GGF)-like activity that has been hy-
pothesized to promote neoplastic Schwann cell mitogenesis. It is not
known whether this GGF-like activity is neuregulin-1 (NRG-1), an
epidermal growth factor (EGF)-related molecule that regulates the
proliferation, survival, and differentiation of developing Schwann
cells, the related factor NRG-2, or another NRG/EGF ligand. We
report
that neoplastic Schwann cells within schwannomas over-
express multiple a and b transmembrane precursors from the class II
and class III NRG-1 subfamilies. NRG-2 a and b transcripts are
similarly overexpressed in some tumors. Of the other 8 known NRG/
EGF ligands, only heparin-binding EGF, epiregulin, and TGFa are
detectable in schwannomas. Neoplastic Schwann cells almost uni-
formly express erbB2 and erbB3, 2 membrane receptor tyrosine
kinases mediating NRG-1 and NRG-2 action. Expression of the NRG
receptor erbB4 and EGF receptor is also evident in schwannomas, but
is more limited, occurring in only a subset of these tumors. ErbB2, the
preferred dimerization partner for all erbB kinases, is constitutively
phosphorylated in schwannomas. These observations suggest that
autocrine, paracrine, and/or
juxtacrine NRG-1/NRG-2 signaling
promotes schwannoma pathogenesis and that this signaling pathway
may be an important therapeutic target in schwannomas.

Key Words: Epidermal growth factor, erbB receptors, Neuregulin,
Neuroﬁbromatosis, Schwannoma.

INTRODUCTION

Schwannomas, the third most common type of primary
nervous system neoplasm, are derived from Schwann cells, the
myelinating glia of peripheral nerves. These benign peripheral
nerve sheath tumors arise most frequently from sensory

From the Departments of Cell Biology (MSS, SLC) and Pathology (SJB,
SLC), The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama;
and the Department of Pathology (ARC), Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio.

Send correspondence and reprint requests to: Dr. Steven L. Carroll, Division
of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, The University of Alabama
at Birmingham, 1720 Seventh Avenue South, SC843, Birmingham, AL
35294-0017; E-mail: carroll@path.uab.edu

This study was supported by National Institute of Neurological Diseases and

Stroke grant R01 NS048353.

162

nerves, with common sites of occurrence including nerves in
the head and neck region, cranial and spinal nerve roots, and
nerves along the extensor surfaces of the extremities (1).
Schwannomas typically occur as single lesions in otherwise
normal patients. However, individuals with the autosomal-
dominant tumor susceptibility syndrome neuroﬁbromatosis
type 2 (NF2) characteristically develop bilateral vestibular
nerve (acoustic) schwannomas and multiple schwannomas of
spinal dorsal nerve roots (2, 3). Multiple subcutaneous and
spinal root schwannomas are also a feature of schwannoma-
tosis, a rare genetic disorder distinct from NF2 (4). Sporadic,
NF2-, and schwannomatosis-associated schwannomas fre-
quently occur in conﬁned spaces within the cranium and spinal
column, where their impingement on nerves and the central
neuraxis results in considerable patient morbidity. Surgical
resection is the standard approach to treating these tumors but
can be rendered difﬁcult by tumor size, multiplicity, or
location. The alternative is radiotherapy or radiosurgery, both
of which have shown limited success, particularly when
treating larger neoplasms (5). Given these limitations, there is
considerable interest in deﬁning the molecular abnormalities
promoting schwannoma tumorigenesis and using this in-
formation to develop new, more effective treatments for these
tumors.

alterations

The genetic

involved in schwannoma
pathogenesis are poorly understood. It is known that patients
with NF2 carry a germline mutation in the NF2 tumor-
suppressor gene on chromosome 22q12 and, in keeping with
the proposed function of this gene, develop schwannomas
when the remaining functional copy of the NF2 gene is lost (6,
7). Both sporadic and NF2-associated schwannomas demon-
strate a near-universal loss of expression of merlin (8–10), the
product of the NF2 locus. Merlin (also known as schwanno-
min) is related to the ERM (ezrin, radixin, and moesin)
proteins and has been found to modulate cell motility and to
suppress mitogenesis (3). Based on these actions, it is thought
that a loss of merlin expression in Schwann cells leads to
inappropriate Schwann cell growth and the formation of
schwannomas. Other genetic abnormalities such as chromo-
some 1p loss (11) and 9q34 gain (12) have also been identiﬁed
in small subsets of schwannomas, but the essential genes
within these regions remain to be deﬁned.

Overexpression of growth factors and/or their receptors
may also contribute to the pathogenesis of sporadic and NF2-
associated schwannomas. In 1986, Brockes et al reported that

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

ErbB Ligand Overexpression in Schwannomas

extracts from 3 NF2-associated vestibular schwannomas and
5 of 7 sporadic vestibular schwannomas contained a Schwann
cell growth-promoting activity similar to that present in par-
tially puriﬁed preparations of bovine pituitary glial growth
factor (GGF) (13). Pituitary GGF was subsequently puriﬁed
and cloned, leading to the ﬁnding that pituitary-derived GGF
proteins were members of the neuregulin-1 (NRG-1) family of
growth factors, a group of epidermal growth factor (EGF)-
related molecules that act through erbB membrane tyrosine
kinases to stimulate the proliferation, survival, and migration
of Schwann cells during development (14–16). The GGF-like
activity present in schwannomas, however, has never been
deﬁnitively identiﬁed. Although it is tempting to assume that
this activity similarly represents NRG-1 proteins, other NRG-
related molecules, including NRG-2, NRG-3, and NRG-4,
have recently been identiﬁed. Some of these molecules have
biochemical and functional characteristics similar to NRG-1,
raising the question of whether the GGF-like activity in
schwannomas instead corresponds to one of these other growth
factors. As an initial step toward deﬁning the GGF-like activity
present in schwannomas, we have systematically analyzed the
expression of speciﬁc isoforms of NRG-1 and NRG-2 and of
all the other known NRG and EGF family growth factors in
human schwannomas. Because each erbB kinase differs in its
afﬁnity for these ligands, we have also examined the expres-
sion of all 4 erbB receptors in schwannomas and ascertained
whether there is evidence of constitutive erbB activation in
these tumors.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study Cases

Experiments described in this article were approved by
the Institutional Review Boards for Human Use of
the
University of Alabama at Birmingham and Washington
University School of Medicine. Parafﬁn blocks of human
schwannoma cases were obtained from the ﬁles of
the
Departments of Pathology of Washington University School of
Medicine (St. Louis, MO) and the University of Alabama
School of Medicine (Birmingham, AL). Frozen, surgically re-
sected schwannoma tissue was provided by the Southern
Division of the Cooperative Human Tissue Network/University
of Alabama at Birmingham Tumor Bank and the University of
Alabama Brain Tumor Bank.

Antisera and Immunohistochemical Reagents

We have previously described the production and char-
acterization of a rabbit polyclonal antibody that recognizes the
EGF-like common domain found in all biologically active
NRG-1 isoforms (a ‘‘pan NRG-1’’ antibody) (17). A mouse
monoclonal antibody recognizing an epitope in the EGF
receptor (EGFR; residues 996–1002) was obtained from MP
Biomedicals (clone c11; Irvine, CA). A mouse monoclonal
anti-erbB2 antibody directed toward the C-terminus of human
c-neu (residues 1242–1255) was purchased from Oncogene
Research Products (Ab-3; La Jolla, CA). The mouse IgM
monoclonal antibody RTJ.1 recognizes the C-terminal domain
of erbB3; this antibody and an isotype matched negative con-
trol clone (C48-6) was obtained from BD Biosciences

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

PharMingen (San Diego, CA). Afﬁnity puriﬁed rabbit poly-
clonal antisera for EGFR (sc-03), erbB3 (sc-285), erbB4 (sc-
283), and the NRG-1 ‘‘a’’-carboxy terminal domain (sc-348)
were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz,
CA). A mouse monoclonal antibody recognizing erbB2
phosphorylated on Tyr1248 (clone PN2A) was purchased from
Lab Vision Corporation (Fremont CA). A rabbit anti-S100b
polyclonal antibody (antibody Z0311) was obtained from
DAKO (Glostrup, Denmark) and a mouse anti-S100b mono-
clonal antibody (clone 15E2-E2-A1) was purchased from
Chemicon (Temecula, CA). Nonimmune mouse and rabbit
IgGs were obtained from Pierce (Rockford, IL). Horseradish
peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated donkey antirabbit and donkey
antimouse secondary antibodies were from Jackson Immuno-
Research Laboratories, Inc. (West Grove, PA). Tyramide signal
ampliﬁcation reagents,
including streptavidin–horseradish
peroxidase, biotinyl
tyramide, ampliﬁcation diluent, and
blocking reagent, were purchased from Perkin-Elmer Life and
Analytical Science Products (Renaissance TSA-Indirect kit;
Boston, MA). DAB peroxidase substrate (SK-4100) was ob-
tained from Vector Laboratories (Burlingame, CA).

Immunoblotting

reagent

in TRIzol

Lysates for immunoblotting were prepared by homog-
enizing specimens
(Invitrogen Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Protein pellets were dissolved in 1% sodium dodecyl
sulfate (SDS) supplemented with protease (Sigma #P8340)
and phosphatase (Sigma #P5726) inhibitors diluted 1:100–
1:250. Protein concentrations were determined with a modiﬁed
Lowry method (DC Protein Assay; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA),
and equivalent quantities of protein lysates were resolved
using 8% SDS polyacrylamide gels. Proteins were transferred
to PVDF membranes by electroblotting for 180 minutes at
0.5 A in transfer buffer (25 mM Tris [pH 8.3], 0.192 M gly-
cine, 20% methanol). Nonspeciﬁc binding was blocked by
incubating membranes in 5% nonfat dry milk in TBST (0.15
M NaCl, 10 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 0.05% Tween-20) before
incubation with primary antibody. The following primary
antibody concentrations were used for immunoblotting: pan
NRG-1 (1:5000), EGFR (sc-03; 1:1000), erbB2 (Oncogene
Ab-3; 1:500), erbB3 (sc-285; 1:1000), and erbB4 (sc-283;
1:1000). Horseradish peroxidase conjugated donkey antirabbit
and donkey antimouse secondary antibodies (Jackson Im-
munoresearch Laboratories) were used at a 1:10000 dilution in
5% nonfat dry milk/TBST. Immunoreactive species were de-
tected by enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce).

Schwannomas commonly show highly variable degrees
of collagenization. This variability can markedly alter the
relative contribution intracellular and extracellular proteins
make to the ﬁnal protein composition of tumor lysates. In
keeping with this, our preliminary experiments demonstrated
that using GAPDH, b-actin, or ERK-2 immunoreactivity as
a loading control for schwannoma lysates was problematic.
Consequently, we veriﬁed equivalent loading and transfer by
Coomassie staining PVDF membranes posttransfer. Speciﬁc-
ity of immunoblotting was determined in parallel experiments
in which primary antibodies were preincubated with a 5- to

163

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

Stonecypher et al

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

10-fold excess of the appropriate immunizing peptide before
probing blots.

Immunohistochemistry

Immunohistochemistry for NRG-1 and its erbB recep-
tors was performed using a highly sensitive staining protocol
we have previously developed and validated (18). In brief,
after deparafﬁnization of 4- to 5-mm sections in xylenes and
graded alcohols, antigen rescue was performed by gently
boiling slides in 10 mM citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 15 minutes
and then allowing them to cool
to room temperature for
15 minutes. Nonspeciﬁc binding was blocked by incubating
sections for 15 minutes with TNB blocking buffer (0.1 M Tris-
HCl [pH 7.5]/0.15 M NaCl/0.5% blocking reagent [Perkin-
Elmer]) at room temperature. Sections were then incubated
overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies diluted in blocking
buffer (pan NRG-1, 1:250-1:500; EGFR [clone c11], 1:100;
erbB2 [Oncogene Ab-3], 1:100; erbB3 [clone RTJ.1], 1:100;
erbB4 [sc-283], 1:500; and phosphorylated erbB2 [clone
PN2A], 1:500). Adjacent sections of each tumor were stained
with anti-S100b antibody as a positive control. After 3 rinses
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 10 minutes per rinse),
sections were incubated for one hour at room temperature with
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (di-
luted 1:500 in blocking buffer). After 3 washes in PBS,
biotinyl tyramide (diluted 1:50 in ampliﬁcation diluent) was
applied to tissue sections for 10 minutes at room temperature.
Sections were again washed 3 times in PBS, following which
they were incubated with streptavidin-HRP (diluted 1:100 in
TNB) for 45 minutes. After 3 ﬁnal washes with PBS, immu-
noreactive structures were visualized by diaminobenzidine
deposition. To conﬁrm the speciﬁcity of staining, control sec-
tions were incubated with nonimmune rabbit or mouse
immunoglobulin in place of the primary antibodies; no stain-
ing was observed in these experiments. When the immunizing
peptide was available, the speciﬁcity of staining was further
conﬁrmed by preincubating antisera with either the immuni-
zing peptide or a nonrelated peptide (10 ng/mL);
in all
instances, preincubation with the immunizing peptide, but not
the nonrelated peptide, abolished or markedly reduced the
staining pattern observed with primary antibody alone.

For double-label immunohistochemistry, sections were
processed as described and incubated with a rabbit polyclonal
antibody recognizing the subset of NRG-1 transmembrane
precursors with an ‘‘a’’ variant carboxy terminus (antibody sc-
348; 1:500 dilution) and a mouse anti-S100b monoclonal
antibody (1:100 dilution). NRG-1-immunoreactive structures
were labeled as described except
that Cy3-conjugated
streptavidin was used for detection rather than streptavidin-
HRP. Sections were then incubated with a FITC-conjugated
antimouse secondary antibody to label S100b-immunoreac-
tive cells. After 3 PBS rinses, sections were mounted using 1:1
PBS:glycerol and examined by ﬂuorescence microscopy.

Reverse Transcriptase–Polymerase Chain
Reaction Analyses of NRG-1 Isoforms Expressed
in Schwannoma Biopsy Specimens

Our designation of NRG-1 domains follows the nomen-
clature of Peles and Yarden (19). The common forward

164

oligonucleotide used for ampliﬁcation of sequences encoding
the EGF-like and juxtamembrane domains of NRG-1
corresponds to nucleotides 631–648 of human neu differen-
tiation factor (NDF; GenBank accession no. U02326) (20).
The reverse oligonucleotide used for PCR of NRG-1 trans-
membrane precursor cDNAs represents nucleotides 811–828
(encoding a portion of the transmembrane domain sequence)
of human NDF. This oligonucleotide pair will amplify se-
quences encoding all possible combinations of EGF-like and
juxtamembrane sequences found in NRG-1 transmembrane
isoform mRNAs. Secreted NRG-1 isoform cDNAs were
ampliﬁed using a reverse oligonucleotide corresponding to
nucleotides 482–502 of a human NDFb3 splice variant
(GenBank accession no. U02327) (20) in combination with
the common forward oligonucleotide.

Total RNA was isolated from schwannomas using
TRIzol reagent following the manufacturer’s recommenda-
tions. Single-stranded cDNA for use as a polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) template was reverse transcribed from total
cellular RNA in a 20-mL reaction containing random hexamer
primers and Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse tran-
scriptase (RT) (Superscript Plus; Life Technologies, Gaithers-
burg, MD). After completion of reactions, samples were
diluted to 100 mL with distilled water, boiled for 5 minutes,
and stored at –80°C until use.

Two microliters of each cDNA was used as a PCR
template in reactions performed for 35 cycles of 94°C for one
minute, 55°C for one minute, and 72°C for 2 minutes. PCR
products were ligated to pCR4-TOPO and ligations trans-
formed into Escherichia coli (TOP10 strain) as recommended
by the manufacturer (Invitrogen). The sequence of these clones
was determined by cycle sequencing using an automated
sequencer (ABI Model 373A DNA Sequencing System;
Applied Biosystems, Inc., Foster City, CA).

Real-Time Quantitative Reverse
Transcriptase–Polymerase Chain Reaction

One microgram of total RNA isolated from normal
nerve or schwannomas as described was reverse-transcribed in
a 20-mL reaction containing random hexamer primers and
Moloney murine leukemia virus RT; a parallel reaction, per-
formed identically except for the addition of RT, was used to
verify an absence of genomic DNA contamination. After
completion of RT, samples were diluted to 100 mL with
distilled water, boiled for 5 minutes, and stored at –80°C until
used in real-time PCR experiments.

Real-time quantitative PCR was performed using an
ABI 7500 Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Inc.).
Assays for NRG-1, NRG-2, and erbB cDNA levels were
performed using TaqMan MGB probes labeled with FAM dye
(ABI Assay-on-Demand Gene Expression assays) in a 20-mL
reaction containing 2 mL of cDNA, ROX passive reference
dye, and TaqMan Universal PCR mix (Applied Biosystems,
Inc.); this reaction mix was supplemented with uracil N-
glycosylase to minimize the possibility that spurious results
could be produced by carryover of contaminating PCR
products. The speciﬁc primer sets used and the regions hy-
bridizing to the FAM-labeled probes are as follows:

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

ErbB Ligand Overexpression in Schwannomas

1. EGFR: Hs00193306_m1, probe sequence starts at nu-

5. Betacellulin: 279–298 and 740–717, GenBank accession

cleotide 2715 of NM005228.

no. NM001729.

2. ErbB2: Hs00170433_m1, probe sequence starts at nucle-

6. Epiregulin: 2548–2571 and 3071–3049, GenBank acces-

otide 2139 of NM004448.

sion no. NM001432.

3. ErbB3: Hs00176538_m1, probe sequence starts at nu-

7. Epidermal growth factor: 3288–3311 and 3690–3671,

cleotide 273 of NM001982.

GenBank accession no. NM001963.

4. ErbB4: Hs00171783_m1, probe sequence starts at nucle-

8. Transforming growth factor a: 881–897 and 1348–1325,

otide 1524 of NM005235.

5. NRG-1a: Hs01103794_m1, probe hybridizes to sequences
at the junction of the EGF-like common and a domains.
6. NRG-1b: Hs00247624_m1, probe hybridizes to sequences
at the junction of the EGF-like common and b domains.
7. NRG-1 class I/II isoforms: Hs00247620_m1, probe and
amplicon are within sequences encoding the immunoglob-
ulin-like domain.

8. NRG-1 class III isoforms: Hs00247641_m1, probe hybrid-
izes to sequences at the junction of the SMDF amino
terminal and EGF-like common domains.

9. NRG-2a: Hs00993410_m1, probe hybridizes to sequences
at the junction of the EGF-like common and a domains.
10. NRG-2b: Hs00993401_m1, probe hybridizes to sequen-
the junction of the EGF-like common and b

ces at
domains.

Levels of 18S ribosomal cDNA were assayed in parallel
reactions using TaqMan MGB probes labeled with VIC dye
(Applied Biosystems 4319413E). Assays for 18S and target
transcripts were performed in triplicate for each cDNA.

Experimental

results were analyzed using Applied
Biosystems Sequence Detection Software (version 1.3.1.22).
The relative quantity of each target transcript was established
by normalizing the level of the corresponding cDNA to that of
18S cDNA in the same RT reaction. Controls lacking added
template were performed in parallel with each primer set to
verify an absence of contamination.

Reverse Transcriptase–Polymerase Chain
Reaction Analyses of NRG-3, NRG-4, and
Epidermal Growth Factor Family Ligand
Expression in Schwannomas

One microgram of total RNA isolated from schwanno-
mas as described was reverse transcribed in a 20-mL reaction
containing oligo-dT primer and Moloney murine leukemia
virus RT; a parallel reaction, performed identically except for
the addition of RT, was used to verify an absence of genomic
DNA contamination. Two microliters of each cDNA was used
as a PCR template in reactions performed for 35 cycles of
94°C for one minute, 55°C for one minute, and 72°C for
2 minutes. The sequences of the primers used in these
experiments correspond to the following nucleotides of the
indicated archived sequences:
1. NRG-2: 926–949 and 1251–1230, GenBank accession no.

NM013984.

2. NRG-3: 169–189 and 607–587 (set 1); 79–102 and 529–

510 (set 2), GenBank accession no. AK098823.

3. NRG-4: 66–87 and 475–453, GenBank accession no.

NM138573.

GenBank accession no. NM003236.

9. Amphiregulin: 574–597 and 1010–990 (set 1); 103–126
and 614–591 (set 2), GenBank accession no.NM001657.
PCR products were resolved on 1.5% agarose gels and
visualized by ethidium bromide staining. Parallel reactions
lacking cDNA were performed to verify an absence of
contamination in these experiments.

RESULTS

Human Schwannomas Express Multiple
NRG-1-Immunoreactive Proteins

At least 15 structurally distinct NRG-1 proteins are
produced from a single gene through a combination of
alternative mRNA splicing and alternative promoter use (21).
All of these proteins contain an EGF-like domain that directly
binds to and activates NRG-1 receptors (22). We therefore
focused initially on determining whether the NRG-1 EGF-like
domain was detectable in human schwannomas. Lysates
prepared from 6 surgically resected human schwannomas
(Table 1) were immunoblotted and probed using a ‘‘pan NRG-
1’’ antibody that recognizes the amino terminal (common)
portion of the NRG-1 EGF-like domain. Multiple NRG-1-
immunoreactive species were detectable in all 6 schwannomas
with sizes ranging from 150 to 58 kD (Fig. 1A). The masses of
the larger (150 and 120 kD) NRG-1 proteins labeled by this
antibody were similar to those of the NRG-1 isoforms we have
previously detected in brain and spinal cord lysates (17) and
likely represent NRG-1 transmembrane precursor proteins. The
other NRG-1-immunoreactive species detectable in schwan-
nomas (90, 65, 60, and 58 kD polypeptides) were too small to
be transmembrane precursors and had masses consistent with
either directly secreted NRG-1 isoforms or extracellular do-
main sequences released by proteolytic cleavage of NRG-1
transmembrane precursors (17, 21, 23). Comparing the NRG-
1 proteins detected in schwannomas with those evident in
normal eighth cranial nerve, we found that the most prominent
(58 kD) NRG-1 protein in normal nerve comigrated with

TABLE 1. Characteristics of Human Schwannomas Used for
Protein and RNA Analyses

Case No.

Diagnosis

Location

Age/Race/Gender

1
2
3
4
5
6

Schwannoma
Schwannoma
Schwannoma
Schwannoma
Schwannoma
Schwannoma

Sacral spinal nerve
Sacral spinal nerve
Vestibular nerve
Thoracic spinal nerve
Vestibular nerve
Thoracic spinal nerve

48/H/M
31/H/F
35/W/F
31/W/F
38/W/F
22/B/F

4. Heparin-binding EGF: 753–776 and 1158–1135, GenBank

accession no. NM001945.

H, hispanic; W, white; B, black.

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

165

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

Stonecypher et al

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

a protein present in the majority of the schwannomas tested.
However, schwannomas also consistently demonstrated prom-
inent expression of several higher-molecular-weight NRG-1
isoforms that were detectable in normal nerve only with long
exposures, suggesting that
the tumors expressed distinct
proﬁles of NRG-1 isoforms. In both schwannomas and eighth
cranial nerve, labeling of NRG-1-immunoreactive proteins
was abolished or markedly diminished by preincubating the
primary antibody with immunizing peptide (data not shown).
To further establish the identity of the proteins labeled
by the pan NRG-1 antibody, schwannoma lysates were probed
with an antibody that recognizes an epitope within the carboxy
terminus of a major subset of NRG-1 isoforms (trans-
membrane precursors with an ‘‘a’’ variant carboxy terminus).
This antibody labeled several proteins in schwannomas that
ranged in size from 55 to 150 kD (Fig. 1B). The larger
polypeptides detected by the ‘‘a’’ carboxy terminus antibody
(150 and 120 kD) comigrate with the larger species labeled by
the pan NRG-1 antibody, consistent with the notion that these
molecules are NRG-1 transmembrane precursors. The anti-
NRG-1 ‘‘a’’ carboxy terminus antibody also labeled several
smaller proteins in the eighth cranial nerve and in a subset of
schwannomas. These smaller (80, 70, 65, and 55 kD) proteins
are too small to be full-length NRG-1 transmembrane pre-
cursor proteins and likely represent proteolytic cleavage prod-
ucts of NRG-1 transmembrane precursors. Labeling of all of
the polypeptides detected by the anti-‘‘a’’ carboxy terminus
antibody in schwannomas and the eighth cranial nerve was
abolished or markedly diminished by preincubating the pri-
mary antibody with immunizing peptide (data not shown).
Considered together,
these ﬁndings indicate that multiple
NRG-1 proteins are present in schwannomas, at least some of
which are NRG-1 transmembrane precursors.

NRG-1 protein in schwannomas could be primarily
associated with neoplastic Schwann cells or alternatively be
derived from nonneoplastic elements within the tumors (e.g.
vasculature or cells in the tumor capsule). To establish the
distribution of NRG-1 in schwannomas, we immunostained
parafﬁn sections prepared from a second series of 6 tumors
(Table 2) using the pan NRG-1 antibody. NRG-1 immuno-
reactivity was readily detectable in 4 of these neoplasms (Fig.
2A, B). Immunostaining of neoplastic Schwann cells was
eliminated when the pan NRG-1 antibody was replaced
with nonimmune rabbit IgG (Fig. 2C) and was markedly

FIGURE 1. Multiple NRG-1-immunoreactive species are ex-
pressed in human schwannomas. (A) Lysates of normal eighth
cranial nerve and 6 schwannomas probed with a ‘‘pan-NRG-1’’
antibody recognizing the epidermal growth factor-like com-
mon domain found in all NRG-1 isoforms. (B) An antibody
recognizing the ‘‘a’’ variant carboxy terminus, a domain found
in a major subset of NRG-1 transmembrane precursors,
recognizes multiple proteins in human schwannomas and
eighth cranial nerve. Arrows to the left of these 2 panels
indicate the immunoreactive species and their molecular
weights. Numbers above each schwannoma lane correspond
to the cases indicated in Table 1.

TABLE 2. ErbB and NRG Immunoreactivity in Human Schwannomas

Case No.

Location

Age/Race/Gender

ErbB-1

ErbB-2

ErbB-3

ErbB-4

PN2A

7
8
9
10
11
12

Vestibular nerve
Thoracic spinal nerve
Thoracic spinal nerve
Thoracic spinal nerve
Vestibular nerve
Vestibular nerve

W, white; B, black.

37/W/F
22/B/F
71/W/M
71/W/M
74/W/F
57/B/M

+
2
+
+
2
2

+
+
+
+
+
+

+
2
+
+
2
+

+
2
2
2
2
+

2
+
+
2
+
+

166

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

ErbB Ligand Overexpression in Schwannomas

FIGURE 2.
Immunohistochemical
demonstration of NRG-1 like protein
expression in a human schwanno-
mas. (A) Section stained with the
pan NRG-1 antibody. (B) Enlarged
view of the area indicated by the box
in (A). (C) Replacing the pan NRG-1
antibody with nonimmune IgG abol-
ishes this staining. Sections illustrat-
ed in (A–C) have been lightly
counterstained with hematoxylin.
(D–F) Double-label immunoﬂuores-
cence in a human schwannoma
immunostained for NRG-1 trans-
membrane precursors with an ‘‘a’’
variant carboxy terminus (D) and
S100b (E). These images are merged
in panel (F). Scale bars = 50 mm.

diminished when the primary antibody was preincubated with
the immunizing peptide before staining tumor sections.

To determine whether NRG-1 immunoreactivity was
associated with neoplastic Schwann cells in schwannomas,
double-label immunohistochemistry was performed using the
anti-‘‘a’’ carboxy terminus rabbit polyclonal antibody in
combination with a mouse anti-S100b monoclonal antibody.
Immunoreactivity for this subset of NRG-1 proteins was
evident as punctuate staining scattered diffusely throughout
schwannomas (Fig. 2D). A comparison of the distribution of
NRG-1 and S100b immunoreactivity showed that
these
antigens extensively colocalized within the tumors (Fig. 2E,
F). Because the epitope recognized by the anti-‘‘a’’ carboxy
terminus antibody is not thought to be released from cells
synthesizing NRG-1 transmembrane precursors, these ﬁndings
also suggest that neoplastic Schwann cells within schwanno-
mas are the source of at least a portion of the NRG-1 protein
detectable in these peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

Schwannomas Overexpress a Complex Mixture
of a and b Transmembrane Precursors From the
Class II and Class III NRG-1 Subfamilies

The presence of multiple, variably sized NRG-1 proteins
in schwannomas suggested that these tumors express several
structurally and functionally distinct NRG-1 isoforms. Structural
variation in the NRG-1 EGF-like domain and adjacent regions
has particularly important functional implications. The NRG-1
EGF-like domain is composed of an invariant amino terminal
(common) domain that can be fused to either an a or a b
domain (Fig. 3), resulting in the production of isoforms that
differ in their afﬁnity for the NRG-1 receptors and in their
ability to elicit at least some responses such as mitogenesis
(21). A structurally variable juxtamembrane domain is found
immediately carboxy terminal to the EGF-like domain; one
variant of this domain (‘‘3’’ isoforms) contains a termination
codon and thus allows the protein to be directly secreted,

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

167

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

Stonecypher et al

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

(24), raising the question of whether much of the NRG-1
protein we detected in the eighth cranial nerve was axon-
derived. Because mRNAs are largely excluded from axons,
measurements of NRG-1 mRNA levels are likely to produce
a more accurate comparison of the levels of NRG-1 expression
per cell in normal and neoplastic Schwann cells. We therefore
compared the levels of NRG-1 a and b transcripts in normal
nerves and schwannomas arising from these same nerves.
Performing real-time quantitative PCR with TaqMan primers
speciﬁc for NRG-1a or NRG-1b cDNAs and normalizing the
resulting data to the levels of 18S ribosomal RNA present in
the same cDNAs, we found that both types of transcripts were
detectable in the normal eighth cranial nerve and spinal nerve
root. The expression of NRG-1a mRNA was elevated in 4 of
the 5 schwannomas (Fig. 4A), being found at levels ranging
from 1.6 to over 4,000 times greater than that found in normal
nerve. NRG-1b mRNA expression was increased in all 5 of the
schwannomas we tested (Fig. 4B), with levels varying from
4.3- to 312-fold greater than those present in normal nerve.
Three major NRG-1 subfamilies (class I [neu differen-
tiation factor (NDF)], class II [GGF], and class III [sensory and
motor neuron-derived factor (SMDF)/cysteine-rich domain]
isoforms) have been identiﬁed, each of which is characterized
by subfamily-speciﬁc amino terminal sequences with distinct
functional characteristics. To determine which of these 3
subfamilies are expressed in schwannomas, we performed RT-
PCR analyses using primers speciﬁc for the amino terminal
sequences of each subfamily. We found that class II and class
III transcripts were readily detected in schwannomas, whereas
class I mRNA expression was not evident in these tumors (data
not shown). To compare the relative levels of expression of the
major NRG-1 subfamilies in schwannomas with that in normal
eighth cranial nerve, we performed real-time quantitative PCR
using TaqMan primers speciﬁc for the immunoglobulin-like
(Ig-like) domain present in class II isoforms or primers speciﬁc
for the class III amino terminal domain. Again, we found that
both primer sets detected these mRNAs in normal nerve. The
expression of class II NRG-1 mRNA was consistently
increased in the 5 schwannomas we examined (Fig. 4C),
with levels ranging from 1.3- to 137-fold greater than that
found in normal nerve. Class III NRG-1 transcript levels were
likewise elevated in 4 schwannomas (Fig. 4D), with levels 3.2-
to 1430-fold higher than the levels detected in normal nerve.
We conclude that human schwannomas overexpress a complex
mixture of NRG-1 mRNAs encoding a and b transmembrane
precursors from the class II and III subfamilies.

A Subset of Schwannomas Overexpress
NRG-2 a and b Isoforms

Neuregulin-2 (NRG-2 [25, 26]; also known as Don-1
[27] and neural- and thymus-derived activator for erbB kinases
(NTAK [28]) is a NRG-1-related growth factor represented by
6 alternatively spliced isoforms derived from a single gene.
NRG-2 is heparin-binding (28) and stimulates phosphoryla-
tion of the NRG-1 receptor subunits erbB2, erbB3, and erbB4
(25–28). Because these features are shared with the GGF-like
activity previously identiﬁed in human schwannomas (13), we
examined the potential expression of NRG-2 transcripts in the

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

FIGURE 3. Schwannomas express mRNAs encoding a complex
mixture of a and b NRG-1 isoforms. Structural diagrams of the
protein structures predicted by partial NRG-1 cDNAs isolated
from schwannomas are indicated to the left. Boxes in these
structural diagrams indicate each protein domain, with the size
of the box being directly proportional to the size of that
domain; lines connecting boxes are included only to indicate
structural linkage between domains. Domains are as follows:
EGF, the NRG-1 EGF-like common domain; a or b, NRG-1 EGF-
like a or b variant domains; 1, 2, or 4 variant juxtamembrane
domains; transmembrane, the initial portion of the trans-
membrane domain of NRG-1 transmembrane precursor
proteins. Ratios indicated adjacent to each juxtamembrane
domain indicate the frequency with which clones encoding
that structural variant were identiﬁed when polymerase chain
reaction-generated clones were sequenced.

immunoblot analyses, we found that

whereas the other 3 (1, 2, or 4 variants) are fused to membrane-
spanning sequences in NRG-1 transmembrane precursors
(Fig. 3). To determine whether the NRG-1 isoforms expressed
in human schwannomas demonstrated structural variability in
these regions, we used RT-PCR to amplify sequences encoding
the EGF-like common, EGF-like variant, juxtamembrane, and
transmembrane domains of NRG-1 transmembrane precur-
sors. Using RNA isolated from 5 of the same tumors used for
our
these NRG-1
sequences were uniformly detectable in all 5 schwannomas
(data not shown). To further examine the structure of these
NRG-1 transmembrane precursor mRNAs, we cloned the PCR
products derived from 2 tumors and sequenced 21 independent
subclones. We found that the NRG-1 transmembrane pre-
cursor transcripts expressed in schwannomas were structurally
diverse and included mRNAs encoding NRG-1 a2, b1, and b2
isoforms (Fig. 3). Using these same schwannoma cDNA
templates, we also attempted to amplify sequences encoding
the EGF-like common, EGF-like variant, and ‘‘3’’ juxtamem-
brane domains of directly secreted NRG-1 isoforms. Although
these primers produced a PCR product of the expected size
from control templates, we could not detect secreted NRG-1
isoform transcripts in any of the 5 schwannomas tested (data
not shown).

The NRG-1 protein we detected in a normal eighth
cranial nerve and schwannomas by immunoblot analyses is
potentially produced by cells endogenous to both tissue types.
However,
is known that NRG-1 protein is transported
anterogradely and retrogradely along axons in peripheral nerve

it

168

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

ErbB Ligand Overexpression in Schwannomas

FIGURE 4. Real-time quantitative poly-
merase chain reaction assays
for
mRNAs encoding speciﬁc NRG-1 iso-
forms in schwannomas and normal
nerve. Comparison of the levels of
mRNAs encoding NRG-1a (A), NRG-
1b (B), class II isoforms (C), and class
III isoforms (D) in human schwanno-
mas and their nerve of origin (normal
eighth cranial [left panels] or normal
spinal nerve root [right panels]). (A–D)
Bars indicate the relative levels of
expression, with expression in normal
nerve arbitrarily designated as 1; note
that the values indicated by the bars
are expressed on a log10 scale. Ninety-
ﬁve percent conﬁdence intervals are
indicated for each bar. Numbers in
parentheses below the bars indicate
the fold change converted from log10.
The designation of each schwannoma
corresponds to the case numbers in-
dicated in Table 1.

same 5 schwannomas described above. In initial RT-PCR
experiments performed using primers speciﬁc for amino
terminal domain sequences present in all NRG-2 isoforms, we
readily detected NRG-2 mRNA in all 5 schwannomas (data
not shown). To compare the levels of expression of NRG-2
transcripts in schwannomas with that in normal nerve, we then
quantitated the levels of NRG-2 mRNA in these tissues.
Because the EGF-like domain of NRG-2, like that of NRG-1,
is alternatively spliced to produce isoforms with distinct
effects on cell growth and erbB phosphorylation (29), we

performed these analyses using real-time PCR with TaqMan
primers speciﬁc for NRG-2a or NRG-2b cDNAs and nor-
malized the resulting data to the levels of 18S ribosomal RNA
present in the same RT reactions. We found that the expression
of NRG-2a was elevated in 3 of 5 schwannomas with levels of
mRNA 1.8- to 10.0-fold higher than the levels found in normal
nerve (Fig. 5). The expression of NRG-2b transcripts was
likewise upregulated 1.7- to 5.3-fold relative to normal nerve
in the same 3 schwannomas that overexpressed NRG-2a
mRNA.

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

169

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

Stonecypher et al

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

FIGURE 5. Real-time quantitative poly-
merase chain reaction assays com-
paring the level of expression of
mRNAs encoding NRG-2a (top panel)
and b (bottom panel) isoforms in
human schwannomas and their nerve
of origin. Bars indicate the relative
levels of expression with expression in
normal nerve arbitrarily designated as
1; note that
these are values are
expressed on a log10 scale. Ninety-
ﬁve percent conﬁdence intervals are
indicated for each bar. Numbers in
parentheses below the bars indicate
the fold change converted from log10.
The designation of each schwannoma
corresponds
to the case numbers
indicated in Table 1.

Expression of Other NRG and Epidermal Growth
Factor Family Ligands in Human Schwannomas
The expression of erbB4 and EGFR in smaller subsets of
schwannomas (see subsequently)
raised the question of
whether other NRG and EGF family ligands capable of ac-
tivating these receptors might be expressed in schwannomas.
To test this hypothesis, we used RT-PCR to amplify sequences
encoding neuregulin-3 (NRG-3), neuregulin-4 (NRG-4), heparin-
binding EGF (HB-EGF), betacellulin, epiregulin, EGF, trans-
forming growth factor-a (TGFa), and amphiregulin. Tran-
scripts encoding HB-EGF and epiregulin, 2 ligands capable of
activating either erbB4 or EGFR, were evident in 4 of the
5 schwannomas (Fig. 6). We also found evidence that the
EGFR ligand TGFa was expressed in all 5 of these tumors. In
contrast, mRNAs for NRG-3, NRG-4, betacellulin, EGF, or
amphiregulin were undetectable in all of the schwannomas we
examined.

Schwannomas Express Multiple ErbB Kinases
and Demonstrate Constitutive Activation of
ErbB Signaling

NRG-1 and NRG-2 bind directly to the erbB3 and erbB4
membrane tyrosine kinases and subsequently induce hetero-
dimerization with erbB2 or, alternatively, in the case of erbB4,
homodimerization to form active signaling complexes (30,
31). To determine whether human schwannomas express the
erbB receptors necessary for responsiveness to NRG-1 or
NRG-2, we immunoblotted lysates of the same schwannomas
examined for NRG-1 expression (Table 1) and probed these
immunoblots with antibodies recognizing erbB2, erbB3, or
erbB4. ErbB2 and erbB3 were the most commonly expressed
erbB kinases in schwannomas, with a protein of the expected
185 kD size being detected in all 6 schwannomas by the anti-

170

erbB2 and anti-erbB3 antibodies (Fig. 7). Expression of erbB4
was more restricted, with an erbB4-immunoreactive protein
being readily identiﬁable in 3 of the 6 schwannomas. The
erbB2-, erbB3-, and erbB4-like immunoreactive polypeptides
found in schwannomas comigrated with erbB proteins de-
tected by these antibodies in normal eighth cranial nerve (Fig.
7 and longer exposures of these same blots [data not shown]).
We conclude that one or more cell type within schwannomas

FIGURE 6. Reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction
analyses of the expression of mRNAs encoding NRG-3, NRG-4,
and multiple EGF family ligands in human schwannomas.
The identity of each ligand is indicated to the left of the
corresponding panel. Numbers above each lane indicate
the case number corresponding to the clinical
information
presented in Table 1. Thick bars to the right of the panels
indicate the receptors capable of binding each ligand. HB-EGF,
heparin-binding epidermal growth factor; EGF, epidermal
growth factor; TGFa, transforming growth factor a.

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

ErbB Ligand Overexpression in Schwannomas

in 2 tumors (Fig. 8C). Paradoxically,

the
mRNA evident
expression of erbB4 transcripts was lower in all 5 schwanno-
mas than in normal nerve; we did note, however, that erbB4
mRNA accumulated to relatively higher
in the
3 schwannomas with the highest levels of erbB4 protein by
immunoblot (tumors 3, 4, and 6; Fig. 8D). The expression of
EGFR messenger RNA in schwannomas was lower or
equivalent to that observed in normal nerve in nearly all
tumors with only one schwannoma (4, the same tumor that
exhibited increased levels of EGFR protein in immunoblot
analyses) showing a very slight increase in EGFR mRNA
levels (Fig. 8A).

levels

To establish whether expression of speciﬁc erbB kinases
was associated with neoplastic Schwann cells, we immuno-
stained sections of the same schwannomas examined for
NRG-1 expression (Table 2) using antibodies recognizing
EGFR, erbB2, erbB3, or erbB4. Focal immunoreactivity for
EGFR was found in 3 of the 6 tumors, being evident as
cytoplasmic staining associated with patches of tumor cells
(Fig. 9A). In contrast, strong erbB2 immunoreactivity was
associated with the membranes and cytoplasm of tumor cells
throughout all 6 of the tumors (Fig. 9B). The anti-erbB3
mouse monoclonal antibody RTJ.1 similarly produced strong
staining of the membranes and cytoplasm of tumor cells in 4 of
the 6 neoplasms (Fig. 9C). An anti-erbB4 rabbit polyclonal
antiserum labeled tumor cells in 2 schwannomas (Fig. 9D), but
did so with a pattern distinct from that seen with the other 3
anti-erbB antibodies. ErbB4 immunoreactivity in tumor cells
was prominently associated with tumor cell nuclei as well as
the cytoplasm and membranes of these cells; the presence of
nuclear erbB4 immunoreactivity in schwannoma cells is con-
sistent with previous reports demonstrating that erbB4 can be
proteolytically cleaved and its carboxy terminus translocated
into the nucleus (31). In all instances, replacing the primary
antibody with nonimmune immunoglobulin or, when possible,
preincubating the primary antibody with the immunizing
peptide abolished erbB immunoreactivity in schwannomas.

ErbB2 is the preferred dimerization partner for all other
erbB receptors. Dimerization is accompanied by phosphory-
lation of multiple tyrosine residues in the carboxy terminal
including Tyr1248, a residue whose
sequences of erbB2,
phosphorylation is linked to activation of the ERK/MAP
kinase-signaling pathway. To determine whether erbB signal-
ing is constitutively activated in schwannomas, we immuno-
stained sections of these tumors with PN2A, a mouse monoclonal
antibody that recognizes erbB2 phosphorylated on Tyr1248.
PN2A immunoreactivity was readily identiﬁed in 4 of the
6 schwannomas, producing a punctate pattern of cytoplasmic
staining in a major subset of tumor cells (Fig. 9E) that was not
evident when the primary antibody was replaced with non-
immune IgG (Fig. 9F). We conclude that erbB signaling is
constitutively activated in at least some schwannomas.

DISCUSSION

There is extensive evidence indicating that inactivating
and missense mutations of the NF2 tumor-suppressor gene
play a key role in the pathogenesis of schwannomas. We have
hypothesized that inappropriate signaling by as yet unknown

171

FIGURE 7. Western blot analyses of erbB expression in
schwannomas. The speciﬁc erbB receptor examined is in-
dicated to the left of each blot. Numbers above each
schwannoma lane correspond to the cases indicated in Table
1. Longer exposures of the epidermal growth factor receptor
and erbB2 blots demonstrated the presence of relatively low
level of each of these receptors in normal eighth cranial nerve
(data not shown).

expresses the complement of erbB receptors required for
responsiveness to NRG-1 and NRG-2.

The EGF receptor (EGFR, also known as erbB1) is
capable of heterodimerizing with and ‘‘crosstalking’’ to the
NRG-1 receptors. Furthermore, expression of the EGFR is
increased in other types of peripheral nerve sheath tumors
(32), including a subset of malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors (33). To determine whether EGFR expression is
similarly inappropriately expressed in schwannomas, we also
probed normal eighth cranial nerve and schwannoma lysates
with an anti-EGFR antibody. With long exposures, a protein of
the expected 170-kD size was weakly detectable in normal
eighth cranial nerve using this antibody (data not shown).
However, only one of the 6 schwannomas tested expressed
detectable levels of EGFR protein (Fig. 7).

Our immunoblot analyses indicated that erbB2 and
erbB3 (and less
frequently, erbB4) were expressed in
schwannomas. To determine whether the expression of erbB
mRNAs was increased in schwannomas relative to their nerves
of origin, we performed real-time quantitative PCR assays on
normal eighth cranial nerve, normal spinal nerve, and
schwannoma cDNAs using TaqMan primer sets speciﬁc for
each erbB kinase. The levels of erbB transcripts established in
these assays were normalized to the levels of 18S ribosomal
RNA in the same cDNA. As shown in Figure 8, all 4 tran-
scripts were present to varying degrees in normal nerve and in
all of the tested schwannomas. Levels of erbB2 mRNA were
elevated in 4 of the schwannomas relative to normal nerve
(1.6- to 23-fold; Fig. 8B), with increased levels of erbB3

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

Stonecypher et al

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

FIGURE 8. Real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction compar-
ing the levels of expression of
epidermal growth factor receptor,
erbB2, erbB3, and erbB4 mRNAs in
schwannomas to that detectable in
normal nerve. Bars indicate relative
levels of expression, with expression
in normal nerve arbitrarily designat-
ed as 1; note that these are values are
expressed on a log10 scale. Ninety-ﬁve
percent conﬁdence intervals are in-
dicated for each bar. Numbers in
parentheses below the bars indicate
the fold change converted from log10.
The designation of each schwannoma
corresponds to the case numbers
indicated in Table 1.

growth factors also contributes to this process and, based on
the results presented here, propose that NRG-1 and/or NRG-2
proteins are among the growth factors promoting schwannoma
tumorigenesis. In support of this hypothesis, we have found
that neoplastic Schwann cells within schwannomas express
multiple a and b transmembrane precursors from the class II
and III NRG-1 subfamilies as well as NRG-2 a and b
isoforms. Furthermore, schwannomas express transcripts
encoding NRG isoforms at levels much higher than those
found in normal nerve. We have also found that schwannomas

consistently express erbB2 and erbB3, 2 receptor tyrosine
kinases that mediate NRG-1 and NRG-2 responses. These
observations, considered together with our demonstration of
constitutive erbB2 phosphorylation in schwannomas, are con-
sistent with the hypothesis that autocrine, paracrine, and/or
juxtacrine NRG-1 and/or NRG-2 signaling in neoplastic
Schwann cells promotes schwannoma tumorigenesis. Our
results also raise intriguing questions about the role speciﬁc
NRG-1 and NRG-2 isoforms play in this process, how NRG-1
and NRG-2 actions in schwannomas differ from the actions of

172

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

ErbB Ligand Overexpression in Schwannomas

schwannomas

FIGURE 9. Representative sections of
human
immuno-
stained for epidermal growth factor
(EGFR) (A), erbB2 (B),
receptor
erbB3 (C), erbB4 (D), or erbB2
phosphorylated on residue 1248
(pTyr1248; [E]). Staining for each of
these antigens was abolished in con-
trol sections in which the primary
antibody was replaced with nonim-
mune mouse antibody (EGFR, pTyr1248)
or IgM nonspeciﬁc control antibody
(erbB3) or when the primary antibody
was preincubated with the immu-
nizing peptide (erbB2, erbB4); an
example of this is indicated in the
last panel (F). All sections have been
lightly counterstained with hema-
toxylin. Scale bar = 50 mm.

these same growth factors in other types of peripheral nerve
sheath tumors such as neuroﬁbromas and malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs), and the potential for in-
teractions between NRG-1/NRG-2 signaling and signaling by
other erbB ligands expressed in schwannomas.

Our real-time quantitative PCR analyses indicate that
schwannomas overexpress both a and b isoforms of NRG-1
and, to a lesser extent, NRG-2. NRG-1b is a potent mitogen
for nonneoplastic human (15, 34), monkey (35), and rat (16,
36) Schwann cells, suggesting that
these NRG isoforms
promote inappropriate proliferation of neoplastic Schwann
cells in schwannomas. In contrast, NRG-1a does not promote
Schwann cell proliferation (36). However, this does not mean
that NRG-1 a proteins have no effects on neoplastic Schwann
cells. In microarray experiments comparing the effects NRG-
1a and NRG-1b have on the transcriptome of nonneoplastic
Schwann cells, we have conﬁrmed that NRG-1a stimulation
triggers a number of transcriptional alterations in these glia

(S. L. Carroll and M. S. Stonecypher, unpublished observations).
The effects NRG-2 a and b have on Schwann cell mitogenesis
have not yet been studied in detail, but NRG-2 a and b
isoforms similarly differ in their ability to stimulate the pro-
liferation of breast cancer cell lines (29). Considered together
with previous work indicating that NRG-1 and NRG-2 elicit
distinct biologic responses in at least some cell types (37),
these observations suggest that NRG-1a, NRG-1b, NRG-2a,
and NRG-2b will have isoform-speciﬁc effects on neoplastic
Schwann cells.

The expression of multiple transmembrane precursors
from the class II and class III NRG-1 subfamilies likely further
diversiﬁes NRG-1 signaling in human schwannomas. Class II
(GGF) NRG-1 proteins are heparin-binding molecules that are
released from the cells synthesizing them. After release, GGF
proteins act as paracrine or autocrine signaling molecules that
accumulate at high concentrations in structures such as the
basement membranes that individually invest neoplastic Schwann

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

173

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

Stonecypher et al

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

cells within schwannomas. In contrast, class III NRG-1 pro-
teins remain membrane-associated and likely function only as
juxtacrine signaling molecules (21). Our data thus supports
a model in which NRG-1 promotes schwannoma formation in
a complex process involving paracrine, autocrine, and/or
juxtacrine signaling.

Before this study, there have been conﬂicting reports as
to whether NRG receptors are expressed in human schwan-
nomas. Hansen and Linthicum found that vestibular schwan-
nomas demonstrated immunoreactivity for erbB2, erbB3, and
NRG-1 (38). However, 2 other groups recently reported that
erbB2 (39, 40) and erbB3 (40) expression is absent or only
very weakly detectable in schwannomas. Using immunoblot,
RT-PCR, real-time quantitative PCR, and immunohistochem-
ical analyses, we found that erbB2 and erbB3 were readily
detectable in schwannomas. ErbB2 and erbB3 were also the
most commonly expressed erbB kinases in schwannomas,
with protein and mRNA for
these receptors uniformly
expressed in our ﬁrst series of tumors (Table 1) and 4 of 6
neoplasms demonstrating immunoreactivity for both kinases
in our second series (Table 2). To further conﬁrm the immu-
nohistochemical ﬁndings described in this article, we sub-
sequently immunostained a third series of 29 eighth cranial
nerve schwannomas (27 sporadic, 2 NF2-associated) using
different erbB2 and erbB3 antibodies (data not shown);
immunoreactivity for both erbB2 and erbB3 was present in
27 of these tumors, including both NF2-associated schwan-
nomas. We conclude that erbB2 and erbB3 are indeed
expressed by neoplastic Schwann cells within nearly all
schwannomas and that
these tumor cells are potentially
responsive to NRG-1 and NRG-2 produced endogenously in
schwannomas.

In contrast

to relatively slowly growing and benign
schwannomas, neuroﬁbromas can become quite large and
transform into aggressive sarcomas (i.e. MPNSTs). We have
recently demonstrated that autocrine and/or paracrine NRG-
1/erbB signaling promotes neoplastic Schwann cell pro-
liferation in human neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs (41) and that
transgenic mice expressing the NRG-1 isoform GGFb3 in
myelinating Schwann cells develop neoplasms with morpho-
logic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural features highly
similar to those of human MPNSTs (42). Because our earlier
work and the ﬁndings described here indicate that
in-
appropriate NRG/erbB signaling may be an important factor
in the pathogenesis of neuroﬁbromas, MPNSTs, and schwan-
nomas,
it must be asked why inappropriate NRG-1/erbB
signaling in these 3 different types of peripheral nerve sheath
tumors is associated with such major differences in clinical
behavior. In part, this is likely explained by differences in the
genetic abnormalities that accompany NRG/erbB signaling in
each tumor type. As noted, schwannomas typically develop
mutations in the NF2 tumor-suppressor gene. In contrast,
neuroﬁbromas demonstrate loss of neuroﬁbromin expression
and, as they progress and become MPNSTs, abnormalities in
additional tumor-suppressor genes, including p53, INK4A, and
p27kip1 (43). Another possibility is that schwannomas, neuro-
ﬁbromas, and MPNSTs are derived from cells corresponding
to different stages of differentiation in the Schwann cell line-
age and that NRG/erbB signaling has distinct effects in these

174

different contexts. This hypothesis is consistent with the
observation that schwannomas typically show features highly
similar to mature Schwann cells, whereas MPNSTs demon-
strate a capacity for divergent differentiation reminiscent of
multipotent neural crest stem cells (43). Finally, it is evident
that schwannomas and neuroﬁbromas/MPNSTs have signif-
icant differences in their pattern of NRG and erbB expression.
Of particular note, we have detected NRG-2 expression in
schwannomas (this work), whereas we did not ﬁnd evidence
for NRG-2 expression in neuroﬁbromas or MPNSTs (41). In
addition, although we only occasionally found evidence of
increased EGFR expression in schwannomas, many neuro-
ﬁbromas and MPNSTs express elevated levels of this receptor
(32, 41).

Of the other 8 NRG and EGF ligands, only HB-EGF,
epiregulin, and TGFa were expressed in the majority of the
schwannomas we examined. In contrast, relatively high-level
expression of erbB4, which is activated by HB-EGF and
epiregulin, was evident only in a subset of these neoplasms,
whereas detectable expression of EGFR protein, which is the
receptor for all 3 of these ligands, was evident in only one tu-
mor. Nonetheless, we cannot exclude the possibility that HB-
EGF, epiregulin, or TGFa also contributes to the pathogenesis
of at least a subset of schwannomas expressing erbB4 and
EGFR. Both erbB4 and EGFR are capable of heterodimerizing
with erbB2 and erbB3 (44), indicating that ligands activating
erbB4 and EGFR can ‘‘crosstalk’’ with erbB2 and erbB3 and
thus modify cellular responses triggered by NRG-1 or NRG-2
stimulation. In addition, NRG-1 and NRG-2 can also act
through erbB4; because each of the 4 erbB kinases activate
distinct proﬁles of cytoplasmic-signaling effectors (44), NRG
actions in erbB4-expressing schwannomas may differ from
those evident in tumors lacking this kinase.

In summary, our ﬁndings support the hypothesis that
autocrine, paracrine, and/or juxtacrine signaling by multiple
NRG-1 and NRG-2 isoforms promotes the pathogenesis of
human schwannomas. Because erbB neutralizing antibodies
such as Herceptin and small molecular erbB inhibitors are
effective in treating other tumor types, these observations
suggest that inhibiting the NRG/erbB signaling may be an
effective means of treating patients with surgically unresect-
able schwannomas. Establishing the role individual erbB
kinases and speciﬁc NRG-1 and NRG-2 isoforms play in
schwannoma tumorigenesis will be important for the de-
velopment of innovative new approaches to treating these
peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Dr. Kevin A. Roth (Department of

Pathology, UAB) for helpful comments on the manuscript.

REFERENCES

1. Woodruff JM, Kourea HP, Louis DN, et al. Schwannoma. In: Kleihues P,
Cavenee WK, eds. Pathology and Genetics of Tumors of the Nervous
System, 1st ed. Lyon: IARC Press; 2000:164–66

2. Reed N, Gutmann DH. Tumorigenesis in neuroﬁbromatosis: New insights

and potential therapies. Trends Mol Med 2001;7:157–62

3. Xiao G-H, Chernoff J, Testa JR. NF2: The wizardry of merlin. Genes

Chromosomes Cancer 2003;38:389–99

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 65, Number 2, February 2006

ErbB Ligand Overexpression in Schwannomas

4. MacCollin M, Woodﬁn W, Kronn D, et al. Schwannomatosis: A clinical

26. Chang H, Riese DJ, Gilbert W, et al. Ligands for ErbB-family receptors

and pathologic study. Neurology 1996;46:1072–79

encoded by a neuregulin-like gene. Nature 1997;387:509–12

5. Rowe JG, Radatz MW, Walton L, et al. Gamma knife stereotactic radio-
surgery for unilateral acoustic neuromas. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
2003;74:1536–42

6. Gusella JF, Ramesh V, MacCollin M, et al. Merlin: The neuroﬁbromatosis

2 tumor suppressor. Biochim Biophys Acta 1999;1423:M29–36

7. Gutmann DH. The neuroﬁbromatoses: When less is more. Hum Mol

Genet 2001;10:747–55

8. Sainz J, Huynh DP, Figueroa K, et al. Mutations of the neuroﬁbromatosis
type 2 gene and lack of the gene product in vestibular schwannomas. Hum
Mol Genet 1994;3:885–91

9. Huynh DP, Maunter V, Baser ME, et al. Immunohistochemical detection of
schwannomin and neuroﬁbromin in vestibular schwannomas, ependymo-
mas and meningiomas. J Neuropath Exp Neurol 1997;56:382–90

10. Hitotsumatsu T, Iwaki T, Kitamati T et al. Expression of neuroﬁbromatosis
2 protein in human brain tumors: An immunohistochemical study. Acta
Neuropathol 1997;93:225–32

11. Leone PE, Bello MJ, Mendiola M, et al. Allelic status of 1p, 14q, and 22q and
NF2 gene mutations in sporadic schwannomas. Int J Mol Med 1998;1:889–92
12. Warren C, James LA, Ramsden RT, et al. Identiﬁcation of recurrent
regions of chromosome loss and gain in vestibular schwannomas using
comparative genomic hybridisation. J Med Genet 2003;40:802–806

27. Busﬁeld SJ, Michnick DA, Chickering TW, et al. Characterization of
a neuregulin-related gene, Don-1, that is highly expressed in restricted
regions of the cerebellum and hippocampus. Mol Cell Biol 1997;17:
4007–14

28. Higashiyama S, Horikawa M, Yamada K, et al. A novel brain-derived
member of the epidermal growth factor family that interacts with erbB3
and erbB4. J Biochem 1997;122:675–80

29. Nakano N, Higashiyama S, Kajihara K, et al. NTAKa and b isoforms
tumor cell growth by means of different receptor

stimulate breast
combinations. J Biochem 2000;127:925–30

30. Citri A, Skaria KB, Yarden Y. The deaf and the dumb: The biology of

erbB-2 and erbB-3. Exp Cell Res 2003;284:54–65

31. Carpenter G. ErbB-4: Mechanism of action and biology. Exp Cell Res

2003;284:66–77

32. DeClue JE, Heffelﬁnger S, Benvenuto G, et al. Epidermal growth factor
receptor expression in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1-related tumors and NF1
animal models. J Clin Invest 2000;105:1233–41

33. Perry A, Kunz SN, Fuller CE, et al. Differential NF1, p16, and EGFR
patterns by interphase cytogenetics (FISH) in malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor
(MPNST) and morphologically similar spindle cell
neoplasms. J Neuropath Exp Neurol 2002;61:702–709

13. Brockes JP, Breakeﬁeld XO, Martuza RL. Glial growth factor-like activity

34. Levi ADO, Bunge RP, Lofgren JA, et al. The inﬂuence of heregulins on

in Schwann cell tumors. Ann Neurol 1986;20:317–22

human Schwann cell proliferation. J Neurosci 1995;15:1329–40

14. Dong Z, Brennan A, Liu N, et al. Neu differentiation factor is a neuron–
glia signal and regulates survival, proliferation and maturation of rat
Schwann cell precursors. Neuron 1995;15:585–96

15. Morrissey TK, Levi ADO, Nuijens A, et al. Axon-induced mitogenesis of
human Schwann cells involves heregulin and p185erbB2. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1995;92:1431–35

16. Rahmatullah M, Schroering A, Rothblum K, et al. Synergistic regulation
of Schwann cell proliferation by heregulin and forskolin. Mol Cell Biol
1998;18:6245–52

17. Carroll SL, Miller ML, Frohnert PW, et al. Expression of neuregulins and
their putative receptors, ErbB2 and ErbB3, is induced during Wallerian
degeneration. J Neurosci 1997;17:1642–59

18. Gerecke KM, Wyss JM, Karavanova I, et al. ErbB transmembrane tyrosine
kinase receptors are differentially expressed throughout the adult rat
central nervous system. J Comp Neurol 2001;433:86–100

19. Peles E, Yarden Y. Neu and its ligands: From an oncogene to neural

factors. Bioessays 1993;15:815–24

20. Wen D, Suggs SV, Karunagaran D, et al. Structural and functional aspects
of the multiplicity of neu differentiation factors. Mol Cell Biol 1994;14:
1909–19

21. Falls DL. Neuregulins: Functions, forms, and signaling strategies. Exp

Cell Res 2003;284:14–30

22. Fischbach GD, Rosen KM. ARIA: A neuromuscular junction neuregulin.

Annu Rev Neurosci 1997; 20:429–58

23. Ben-Baruch N, Yarden Y. Neu differentiation factors: A family of
alternatively spliced neuronal and mesenchymal factors. Proc Soc Exp
Biol Med 1994;206:221–27

24. Sandrock AW Jr, Goodearl ADJ, Yin Q-W, et al. ARIA is concentrated
in nerve terminals at neuromuscular junctions and at other synapses.
J Neurosci 1995;15:6124–36

35. Adalid-Avellana V, Bachelin C, Lachapelle F, et al. In vitro and in vivo
behaviour of NDF-expanded monkey Schwann cells. Eur J Neurosci
1998;10:291–300

36. Raabe TD, Clive DR, Neuberger TJ, et al. Cultured neonatal Schwann
cells contain and secrete neuregulins. J Neurosci Res 1996;46:
263–70

37. Crovello CS, Lai C, Cantley LC, et al. Differential signaling by the epi-
dermal growth factor-like growth factors neuregulin-1 and neuregulin-2.
J Biol Chem 1998;273:26954–61

38. Hansen MR, Linthicum FH Jr. Expression of neuregulin and activation of
erbB receptors in vestibular schwannomas: Possible autocrine loop
stimulation. Otol Neurotol 2004;25:155–59

39. Schlegel J, Muenkel K, Trenkle T, et al. Expression of the ERBB2/neu and
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 gene products in reactive and neoplastic
Schwann cell proliferation. Int J Oncol 1998;13:1281–84

40. O’Reilly BF, Kishore A, Crowther JA, et al. Correlation of growth factor
receptor expression with clinical growth in vestibular schwannomas. Otol
Neurotol 2004;25:791–96

41. Stonecypher MS, Byer SJ, Carroll SL. Activation of the neuregulin-1/
erbB signaling pathway promotes the proliferation of neoplastic Schwann
cells in human malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Oncogene 2005;
24:5589–605

42. Huijbregts RPH, Roth KA, Schmidt RE, et al. Hypertrophic neuropathies
and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in transgenic mice
overexpressing glial growth factor b3 in myelinating Schwann cells.
J Neurosci 2003;23:7269–80

43. Carroll SL, Stonecypher MS. Tumor suppressor mutations and growth
factor signaling in the pathogenesis of NF1-associated peripheral nerve
sheath tumors. I. The role of tumor suppressor mutations. J Neuropath
Exp Neurol 2004;63:1115–23

25. Carraway KL, Weber JL, Unger MJ, et al. Neuregulin-2, a new ligand of

44. Yarden Y, Sliwkowski M. Untangling the erbB signaling network. Nat

ErbB3/ErbB4-receptor tyrosine kinases. Nature 1997;387:512–16

Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001;2:127–37

q 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

175

' 2006 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of 
this article is prohibited.   

