REVIEWS

Cellular senescence: when bad things 
happen to good cells

Judith Campisi* and Fabrizio d’Adda di Fagagna‡
Abstract | Cells continually experience stress and damage from exogenous and endogenous 
sources, and their responses range from complete recovery to cell death. Proliferating cells 
can initiate an additional response by adopting a state of permanent cell-cycle arrest that is 
termed cellular senescence. Understanding the causes and consequences of cellular 
senescence has provided novel insights into how cells react to stress, especially genotoxic 
stress, and how this cellular response can affect complex organismal processes such as the 
development of cancer and ageing.

Cellular senescence was formally described more than 
four decades ago when Hayflick and colleagues showed 
that normal cells had a limited ability to proliferate in 
culture1 (see BOX 1 for descriptions of different types 
of senescence). These classic experiments showed that 
human fibroblasts initially underwent robust cell division  
in culture. However, gradually — over many cell doub­
lings — cell proliferation (used here interchangeably 
with cell growth) declined. Eventually, all cells in the 
culture lost the ability to divide. The non­dividing cells 
remained viable for many weeks, but failed to grow 
despite the presence of ample space, nutrients and 
growth factors in the medium.

Soon after this discovery, the finding that normal 
cells do not indefinitely proliferate spawned two 
important hypotheses. At the time, both were highly 
speculative and seemingly contradictory. The first 
hypothesis stemmed from the fact that many cancer 
cells proliferate indefinitely in culture. Cellular senes­
cence was proposed to be an anti­cancer or tumour­
suppressive mechanism. In this context, the senescence 
response was considered beneficial because it protected 
organisms from cancer, a major life­threatening disease.  
The second hypothesis stemmed from the fact that 
tissue regeneration and repair deteriorate with age. 
Cellular senescence was proposed to recapitulate the 
ageing, or loss of regenerative capacity, of cells in vivo. 
In this context, cellular senescence was considered 
deleterious because it contributed to decrements in 
tissue renewal and function. For many years, these 
hypotheses were pursued more or less independ­
ently. However, as an understanding of the senescence 
response grew, these hypotheses coalesced, bringing 
new insights to the fields of cancer and ageing. Here, 
we review recent progress in understanding the causes 

of cellular senescence, and the evidence that it is impor­
tant for suppressing cancer and a possible contributor 
to ageing.

Senescence in an evolutionary context
To understand how cellular senescence can be both bene­
ficial and detrimental, and the origins of its regulation, 
it is important to understand the nature of cancer and 
the evolutionary theory of ageing. Cancer is often fatal 
and therefore poses a major challenge to the longevity 
of organisms with renewable tissues. Tissue renewal is 
essential for the viability of complex organisms such 
as mammals. However, cell proliferation is essential 
for tumorigenesis, and renewable tissues are at risk of 
developing cancer2. Moreover, cancer initiates and, to 
a large extent, progresses owing to somatic mutations3, 
and proliferating cells acquire mutations more readily 
than non­dividing cells4. The danger that cancer posed 
to longevity was mitigated by the evolution of tumour­
suppressor mechanisms. One such mechanism was  
cellular senescence, which stops incipient cancer cells 
from proliferating5–7.

The environment in which cellular senescence 
evolved was replete with extrinsic hazards such as 
infection, predation and starvation. Hence, organismal 
lifespans were relatively short owing to death from 
these hazards. Therefore, tumour­suppressor mecha­
nisms needed to be effective for only a relatively short 
interval (a few decades for humans, several months 
for mice). Should such mechanisms be deleterious 
later (for example, if the regenerative capacity were 
to decline or if dysfunctional senescent cells were to 
accumulate), there would be little selective pressure 
to eliminate the harmful effects. Therefore, some 
tumour­suppressor mechanisms can be both beneficial 

Renewable tissue
A tissue in which cell 
proliferation is important for 
tissue repair or regeneration. 
Renewable tissues typically 
contain, but sometimes recruit, 
mitotic cells upon injury or cell 
loss.

*Life Sciences Division, 
Lawrence Berkeley  
National Laboratory,  
1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley,  
California 94720, USA;  
and Buck Institute for  
Age Research, 8001 
Redwood Boulevard, Novato, 
California 94945, USA. 
‡IFOM Foundation,  
FIRC Institute of Molecular 
Oncology, Via Adamello 16, 
20139 Milan, Italy.  
e-mails: jcampisi@lbl.gov; 
fabrizio.dadda@ifom-ieo-
campus.it
doi:10.1038/nrm2233 
Published online  
1 August 2007

nATurE rEvIEwS | molecular cell biology 

 vOluME 8 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | 729

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  R E V I E W S

 Box 1 | A hitchhiker’s guide to senescence nomenclature
• Senescence derives from senex, a Latin word meaning old man or old age.  

In organismal biology, senescence describes deteriorative processes that follow 
development and maturation, and the term is used interchangeably with ageing.

• The term senescence was applied to cells that ceased to divide in culture1, based on 

the speculation that their behaviour recapitulated organismal ageing. Consequently, 
cellular senescence is sometimes termed cellular ageing or replicative senescence.

• Cells that are not senescent are termed pre-senescent, early passage, proliferating or, 

sometimes, young.

• Telomere shortening provided the first molecular explanation for why many cells 

cease to divide in culture61,68. Dysfunctional telomeres trigger senescence through 
the p53 pathway. This response is often termed telomere-initiated cellular 
senescence.

• Some cells undergo replicative senescence independently of telomere 

shortening16,53,101. This senescence is due to stress, the nature of which is poorly 
understood. It increases p16 expression and engages the p16–retinoblastoma protein 
(pRB) pathway. This response is termed stress-induced or premature senescence, 
stasis or M0 (mortality phase 0).

• Certain mitogenic oncogenes or the loss of anti-mitogenic tumour-suppressor genes 

induce senescence in normal cells83,92,93,95. This is known as oncogene-induced 
senescence.

• Cells that do not divide indefinitely are said to have a finite or limited replicative  

(or proliferative) lifespan and are (replicatively) mortal. Cells that proliferate 
indefinitely are termed (replicatively) immortal.

• Immortal cells are not necessarily transformed (tumorigenic) cells. Although 

historically the terms immortalization and transformation have been used 
interchangeably, the replicative lifespan of cells can be expanded indefinitely by the 
expression of telomerase without the phenotypic changes that are associated with 
malignant transformation138.

• Telomere-initiated senescence is sometimes termed M1 (mortality phase 1)153.  

Some cells (for example, fibroblasts) undergo telomere-initiated senescence with few 
signs of genomic instability. Other cells (for example, some epithelial cells) arrest with 
obvious signs of genomic instability and are termed agonescent154.

• Human cells that escape telomere-initiated senescence (M1) or agonescence owing 
to the loss of p53 function can proliferate until they enter a state that is termed crisis, 
mitotic catastrophe or M2 (mortality phase 2)153. This state is characterized by 
extensive genomic instability and cell death.

Antagonistic pleiotropy
The hypothesis that genes or 
processes that were selected 
to benefit the health and 
fitness of young organisms can 
have unselected deleterious 
effects that manifest in older 
organisms and thereby 
contribute to ageing.

Mitotic cell
A cell that has the ability to 
proliferate. In vivo, mitotic cells 
often exist in a reversible 
growth-arrested state that is 
termed quiescence or G0 
phase, but such cells can be 
stimulated to proliferate in 
response to appropriate 
physiological signals.

Post-mitotic cell
A cell that has permanently 
lost the ability to proliferate, 
usually due to differentiation.

and deleterious, depending on the age of the organ­
ism8. This concept — that a process can be beneficial 
to young organisms but harmful to old organisms — is 
the essence of antagonistic pleiotropy, an important evo­
lutionary theory of ageing9. There is now substantial 
evidence that cellular senescence is indeed a potent 
tumour­suppressor mechanism6,7,10,11, and there is also 
mounting — but still largely circumstantial — evidence  
that cellular senescence promotes ageing12–14.

Characteristics of senescent cells
Complex organisms such as mammals contain both 
mitotic cells and post-mitotic cells (BOX 2). Cellular senes­
cence is confined to mitotic cells, from which cancer can 
arise. Although mitotic cells can proliferate, they can also 
spend long intervals in a reversibly arrested state termed 
quiescence or G0. Quiescent cells resume proliferation in 
response to appropriate signals, including the need for 
tissue repair or regeneration. by contrast, post­mitotic 
cells permanently lose the ability to divide owing to  
differentiation.

Mitotic cells can senesce when they encounter poten­
tially oncogenic events (discussed below). when this 
occurs, the cells cease proliferation (known as growth 
arrest), in essence irreversibly. They often become resis­
tant to cell­death signals (apoptosis resistance) and they 
acquire widespread changes in gene expression (altered 
gene expression). Together, these features comprise the 
senescent phenotype (FIG. 1).

Growth arrest. The hallmark of cellular senescence is an 
inability to progress through the cell cycle. Senescent cells 
arrest growth, usually with a DnA content that is typical 
of G1 phase, yet they remain metabolically active15–18. 
Once arrested, they fail to initiate DnA replication despite 
adequate growth conditions. This replication failure is 
primarily caused by the expression of dominant cell­
cycle inhibitors (see below). In contrast to quiescence, 
the senescence growth arrest is essentially permanent 
(in the absence of experimental manipulation) because 
senescent cells cannot be stimulated to proliferate by 
known physiological stimuli.

The features and stringency of the senescence growth 
arrest vary depending on the species and the genetic 
background of the cell. For example, most mouse fibro­
blasts senesce with a G1 DnA content, although a defect 
in the stress­signalling kinase MKK7 primarily induces 
a G2–M arrest19. likewise, some oncogenes (see below) 
cause a fraction of cells to senesce with a DnA content 
that is typical of G2 phase20–22. Furthermore, tumour cells 
can senesce with G2­ or S­phase DnA contents. Although 
tumour cells usually proliferate indefinitely in culture, 
some of them retain the ability to undergo a senescence­
like arrest, especially in response to certain anti­cancer 
therapies23. Finally, human and rodent cells differ strik­
ingly in the stringency of the senescence growth arrest24. 
like human cells, many mouse and rat cells have a finite 
proliferative capacity in culture, although, as discussed 
below, the mechanisms that limit this proliferation 
probably differ. However, rodent cell cultures frequently 
acquire spontaneous variants that can divide indefinitely. 
Such variants are exceedingly rare in human cultures.

Apoptosis resistance. Apoptosis entails the controlled 
destruction of cellular constituents and their ultimate 
engulfment by other cells25. like senescence, apoptosis is 
an extreme response to cellular stress and is an important 
tumour­suppressive mechanism26. but, whereas senes­
cence prevents the growth of damaged or stressed cells, 
apoptosis quickly eliminates them.

Many (but not all) cell types acquire resistance to  
certain apoptotic signals when they become senescent. 
For example, senescent human fibroblasts resist ceramide­ 
induced apoptosis but endothelial cells do not27. Senescent 
human fibroblasts also resist apoptosis caused by growth­
factor deprivation and oxidative stress, but do not resist 
apoptosis caused by engagement of the Fas death recep­
tor28,29. resistance to apoptosis might partly explain why 
senescent cells are so stable in culture. This attribute 
might also explain why the number of senescent cells 
increases with age, although, as discussed below, several  
factors probably contribute to this phenomenon.

730 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | vOluME 8 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group   Box 2 | Mitotic and post-mitotic cells
Mitotic cells are capable of proliferation, and they include the epithelial, stromal 
(fibroblastic) and vascular (endothelial) cells that comprise the major renewable tissues 
and organs such as the skin, intestines, liver, kidney and so on. They also comprise major 
components of the haematopoietic system, and cells such as the glia, which support 
the survival and function of non-dividing neurons. Mitotic cells also include the 
undifferentiated stem and progenitor cells that provide many of these tissues with the 
differentiated cells that are required for their function. Mitotic cells are susceptible to 
malignant transformation (that is, transformation into a cancer cell). They are also 
susceptible to undergoing cellular senescence when challenged by stimuli that have 
the potential to cause cancer.

Post-mitotic cells are incapable of proliferation. They include the differentiated 

neurons and muscle cells that comprise the brain, heart and skeletal muscle. Recent 
findings suggest that tissues that are composed mainly of post-mitotic cells can 
undergo limited repair and regeneration; however, this regeneration is not due to the 
proliferation of post-mitotic cells, but rather to the recruitment of mitotic stem cells or 
their progeny (progenitor cells)155–157. Because they have already lost the ability to 
proliferate, post-mitotic cells do not undergo cellular senescence as currently defined.

Post-mitotic and senescent cells are irreversibly blocked from re-entering the cell 

cycle. The mechanisms that prevent these cells from undergoing cell division are 
incompletely understood, but probably share some common effectors.

It is not clear what determines whether cells undergo 
senescence or apoptosis. One determinant is cell type; for 
example, damaged fibroblasts and epithelial cells tend to 
senesce, whereas damaged lymphocytes tend to undergo 
apoptosis. The nature and intensity of the damage or 
stress may also be important30,31. Most cells are capable 
of both responses. Moreover, manipulation of pro­ and 
anti­apoptotic proteins can cause cells that are destined 
to die by apoptosis to senesce and, conversely, cause cells 
that are destined to senesce to undergo apoptosis30–32. 
The senescence and apoptosis regulatory systems there­
fore communicate — probably through their common 
regulator, the p53 tumour suppressor protein31. The 
mechanisms by which senescent cells resist apoptosis are 
poorly understood. In some cells, resistance might be due 
to expression changes in proteins that inhibit, promote or 
implement apoptotic cell death33,34. In others, p53 might 
preferentially transactivate genes that arrest proliferation, 
rather than those that facilitate apoptosis35.

Altered gene expression. Senescent cells show striking 
changes in gene expression, including changes in known 
cell­cycle inhibitors or activators35–41. Two cell­cycle 
inhibitors that are often expressed by senescent cells are  
the cyclin­dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKIs) p21  
(also termed CDKn1a, p21Cip1, waf1 or SDI1) and  
p16 (also termed CDKn2a or p16InK4a)6,7. These CDKIs 
are components of tumour­suppressor pathways that are 
governed by the p53 and retinoblastoma (prb) proteins, 
respectively. p53 and prb are transcriptional regulators, 
and the pathways they govern are frequently disrupted 
in cancer42. both pathways can establish and maintain 
the growth arrest that is typical of senescence. p21 is 
induced directly by p53 (ReFs 35,43) but the mechanisms 
that induce p16, a tumour suppressor in its own right, are 
incompletely understood44. ultimately, p21 and p16 main­
tain prb in a hypophosphorylated and active state but, as 
discussed below, their activities are not equivalent.

Quiescence
A reversible non-dividing state 
from which cells can be 
stimulated to proliferate in 
response to physiological 
signals.

Senescent phenotype
The combination of changes in 
cell behaviour, structure and 
function that occur upon 
cellular senescence. For most 
cell types, these changes 
include an essentially 
irreversible growth arrest, 
resistance to apoptosis and 
many alterations in gene 
expression.

Oncogene
A gene that contributes to the 
malignant transformation of 
cells. Oncogenes can be 
cellular or viral in origin. 
Cellular oncogenes are usually 
mutant or overexpressed forms 
of normal cellular genes. Viral 
oncogenes can also originate 
from cellular genes, acquiring 
mutations during viral capture, 
but they can also be distinctly 
viral in origin.

Chromatin
The DNA and complex of 
associated proteins that 
determine the accessibility of 
large DNA regions to the 
transcription machinery and 
other large protein complexes. 

R E V I E W S

Senescent cells also repress genes that encode proteins 
that stimulate or facilitate cell­cycle progression (for 
example, replication­dependent histones, c­FOS, cyclin A,  
cyclin b and pCnA (proliferating cell nuclear anti­
gen))45–48. Some of these genes are repressed because E2F, 
the transcription factor that induces them, is inactivated 
by prb. In some senescent cells, E2F target genes are 
silenced by a prb­dependent reorganization of chromatin 
into discrete foci that are termed senescence­associated 
heterochromatin foci (SAHFs)45.

Interestingly, many changes in gene expression 
appear to be unrelated to the growth arrest. Many 
senescent cells overexpress genes that encode secreted 
proteins that can alter the tissue microenvironment36–41. 
For example, senescent fibroblasts overexpress proteins 
that remodel the extracellular matrix or mediate local 
inflammation. As discussed below, these findings raise 
the possibility that as senescent cells increase with age, 
they might contribute to age­related decrements in 
tissue structure and function8,12. The mechanisms that 
are responsible for the senescence­associated secretory 
phenotype are unknown.

Senescence markers. Several markers can identify senes­
cent cells in culture and in vivo. However, no markers 
are exclusive to the senescent state. A poorly understood 
feature of these markers is that, aside from the decline 
in DnA replication, all of them require several days  
to develop.

An obvious marker for senescent cells is the lack 
of DnA replication, which is typically detected by the 
incorporation of 5­bromodeoxyuridine or 3H­thymidine, 
or by immunostaining for proteins such as pCnA and 
Ki­67. Of course, these markers do not distinguish 
between senescent cells and quiescent or differentiated 
post­mitotic cells. The first marker to be used for the 
more specific identification of senescent cells was the 
senescence­associated β­galactosidase (SA­βgal)49. This 
marker is detectable by histochemical staining in most 
senescent cells. However, it is also induced by stresses 
such as prolonged confluence in culture. The SA­βgal 
probably derives from the lysosomal β­galactosidase 
and reflects the increased lysosomal biogenesis that 
commonly occurs in senescent cells50. In addition, p16 
— an important regulator of senescence — is now used 
to identify senescent cells51. p16 is expressed by many, 
but not all, senescent cells52,53 and it is also expressed 
by some tumour cells, especially those that have lost 
prb function44. recently, three proteins were identi­
fied in a screen for genes that were expressed following 
oncogene­induced senescence, and the proteins were 
subsequently used to identify senescent cells: DEC1 
(differentiated embryo­chondrocyte expressed­1), 
p15 (a CDKI) and DCr2 (decoy death receptor­2)54. 
The specificity and significance of these proteins for 
senescent cells are not yet clear, but they are promising 
additional markers.

Some  senescent  cells  can  also  be  identified  by 
the cytological markers of SAHFs45 and senescence­ 
associated DnA­damage foci (SDFs)16,20,55,56. SAHFs are 
detected by the preferential binding of DnA dyes, such as 

nATurE rEvIEwS | molecular cell biology 

 vOluME 8 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | 731

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  R E V I E W S

Pre-senescent cell

Dysfunctional
telomeres

Non-telomeric
DNA damage

Strong mitogenic
signals

Chromatin perturbations
and other non-genotoxic
stresses

Senescent phenotype

Growth arrest

Apoptosis
resistance

Altered gene
expression

Figure 1 | The senescent phenotype induced by multiple 
stimuli. Mitotically competent cells respond to various 
Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
stressors by undergoing cellular senescence. These 
stressors include dysfunctional telomeres, non-telomeric 
DNA damage, excessive mitogenic signals including those 
produced by oncogenes (which also cause DNA damage), 
non-genotoxic stress such as perturbations to chromatin 
organization and, probably, stresses with an as-yet-
unknown etiology. The senescence response causes 
striking changes in cellular phenotype. These changes 
include an essentially permanent arrest of cell 
proliferation, development of resistance to apoptosis  
(in some cells), and an altered pattern of gene expression. 
The expression or appearance of senescence-associated 
markers such as senescence-associated β-galactosidase, 
p16, senescence-associated DNA-damage foci (SDFs) and 
senescence-associated heterochromatin foci (SAHFs) are 
neither universal nor exclusive to the senescent state and 
therefore are not shown.

4′,6­diamidino­2­phenylindole (DApI), and the presence 
of certain heterochromatin­associated histone modifica­
tions (for example, H3 lys9 methylation) and proteins 
(for example, heterochromatin protein­1 (Hp1)). SAHFs 
also contain E2F target genes, which SAHFs are thought 
to silence. In mouse cells, pericentromeric chromatin 
also preferentially binds DApI, contains modified 
histones and proteins found in SAHFs, and forms cyto­
logically detectable foci. However, there is no evidence 
that these foci contain E2F target genes; indeed, they are 
also present in proliferating cells. because pericentro­
meric foci are much more prominent in mouse cells than 
human cells57,58, they can be mistaken for SAHFs. SDFs, 
by contrast, are present in senescent cells from mice and 
humans and contain proteins that are associated with 
DnA damage (for example, phosphorylated histone 
H2AX (γ­H2AX) and p53­binding protein­1 (53bp1)). 
As discussed below, these foci result from dysfunctional 
telomeres and other sources of DnA damage.

Causes of cellular senescence
what causes cells to senesce? The first clues came from 
understanding why normal human cells do not pro­
liferate indefinitely in culture (BOX 1), but subsequent 
studies showed that senescence can be induced by 
many stimuli (FIG. 1).

This point is demonstrated by the behaviour of many 
mouse cells. In contrast to most human cells, cells from 
laboratory mice have long telomeres (>20 kb) and many 
express telomerase. nonetheless, many mouse cells 
senesce after only a few doublings under standard culture 
conditions. This arrest is due to the supraphysiological  
oxygen level (20%) that is used in standard culture 
protocols. A 20% oxygen level, to which mouse cells are 
much more sensitive than human cells, causes severe 
DnA damage and, in the absence of efficient repair 

732 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | vOluME 8 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

Telomere-dependent senescence. Telomeres are stretches 
of repetitive DnA (5′­TTAGGG­3′ in vertebrates) and 
associated proteins that cap the ends of linear chromo­
somes and protect them from degradation or fusion by 
DnA­repair processes59. The precise telomeric structure is 
not known, but mammalian telomeres are thought to end 
in a large circular structure, termed a t­loop60. because 
standard DnA polymerases cannot completely replicate 
DnA ends — a phenomenon called the end­replication 
problem — cells lose 50–200 base pairs of telomeric DnA 
during each S phase61 (FIG. 2). Human telomeres range 
from a few kilobases to 10–15 kb in length, so many cell 
divisions are possible before the end­replication problem 
renders telomeres critically short and dysfunctional. Only 
one or a few such telomeres are sufficient to trigger senes­
cence62,63. The end­replication problem is a major (but 
not the sole) reason why normal cells do not proliferate 
indefinitely (BOX 1).

Dysfunctional telomeres trigger a classical DnA­ 
damage response (DDr)16,55,56,64 (FIG. 3). The DDr enables 
cells to sense damaged DnA, particularly double­strand 
breaks (DSbs), and to respond by arresting cell­cycle pro­
gression and repairing the damage if possible. Although 
the severity of the damage is probably an important factor, 
little is known about how cells choose between transient 
DDr activation and the persistent DDr signalling that is 
evident in many senescent cells. Many proteins partici­
pate in the DDr, including protein kinases (for example, 
ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and checkpoint­2 
(CHK2)), adaptor proteins (for example, 53bp1 and 
MDC1 (mediator of DnA damage checkpoint protein­1)) 
and chromatin modifiers (for example, γ­H2AX). Many 
of these proteins localize to the DnA­damage foci that are 
detected in senescent cells. In cells that senesce owing to 
dysfunctional telomeres, these foci also contain a subset 
of telomeres, suggesting that dysfunctional telomeres 
resemble DSbs.

The end­replication problem can be circumvented 
by telomerase. This enzyme contains a catalytic protein 
component (telomerase reverse transcriptase; TErT) and 
a template rnA component, and adds telomeric DnA 
repeats directly to chromosome ends65. Most normal 
cells do not express TErT, or express it at levels that are 
too low to prevent telomere shortening66,67. by contrast, 
germ­line cells and many cancer cells express TErT. 
Moreover, ectopic TErT expression in normal human 
cells simultaneously prevents telomere shortening and 
senescence caused by the end­replication problem68. 
However, telomerase cannot prevent senescence caused 
by non­telomeric DnA damage or other senescence 
inducers69.

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  Germline cells,
cancer cells
(telomerase-positive)

Normal cells +
telomerase,
cancer cells

Normal somatic cells
(telomerase-negative)

h
t
g
n
e

l
 

e
r
e
m
o
e
T

l

Chromosome
Telomeric DNA

Senescence

Cell division

Figure 2 | Telomere-dependent senescence. Telomeres are stretches of a repetitive 
DNA sequence and associated proteins (magenta) that are located at the termini of 
Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
linear chromosomes (blue). The telomeric ends form a circular protective cap termed the 
t-loop, which may help to prevent the termini from triggering a full DNA-damage 
response (DDR). Telomere lengths are maintained by the enzyme telomerase, which is 
expressed by cells that comprise the germline as well as many cancer cells. Most normal 
somatic cells do not express this enzyme, or express it only transiently or at levels that are 
too low to prevent telomere shortening caused by the end-replication problem. In such 
cells, telomere lengths decline with each cell cycle. Eventually, one or a few telomeres 
become sufficiently short and malfunction, presumably owing to loss of the protective 
protein–DNA structure. Dysfunctional telomeres trigger a DDR, to which cells respond 
by undergoing senescence.

mechanisms, DSbs. both the damage and replicative 
failure are mitigated by culturing mouse cells at a (lower) 
physiological oxygen level70.

DNA-damage-initiated senescence. Severe DnA damage 
that occurs anywhere in the genome — especially damage 
that creates DSbs — causes many cell types to undergo 
senescence15,70. In culture, such cells harbour SDFs for 
many weeks or longer (J.C. and F.d’A.d.F., unpublished 
observations). There is as yet no firm evidence that these 
persistent foci contain irreparable DSbs. whatever their 
nature, they may provide constitutive signals to p53 to 
maintain the senescence growth arrest.

both damage­ and telomere­initiated senescence 
depend strongly on p53 and are usually accompanied 
by expression of p21 (ReFs 15,16,55) (FIG. 4). However, 
in many cells, DnA damage and dysfunctional telo­
meres also induce p16, albeit with delayed kinetics. p16, 
then, provides a second barrier to prevent the growth 
of cells with severely damaged DnA or dysfunctional 
telomeres52,71,72.

Many chemotherapeutic drugs cause severe DnA 
damage. As expected, such drugs induce senescence in 
normal cells. Surprisingly, they also induce senescence  
in some tumour cells, both in culture and in vivo73. 
Tumour cells with wild­type, as opposed to mutant, p53 
are more likely to senesce in response to chemotherapy, at 

Euchromatin
Chromatin that is in an open 
conformation and hence 
accessible. Also termed active 
chromatin.

Heterochromatin
Chromatin that is in a closed 
conformation and hence 
inaccessible. Also termed silent 
or inactive chromatin. 
Chromatin probably exists in 
many forms between the 
extremes of euchromatin and 
heterochromatin.

R E V I E W S

least in cell culture and cancer­prone mouse models74–76, 
consistent with a pivotal role for p53 in damage­induced 
senescence. Of practical importance, DnA­damaging 
therapies are more likely to be efficacious in tumours 
that senesce, compared with those that do not73–76.

Senescence caused by chromatin perturbation. The 
chromatin state determines the extent to which genes 
are active (euchromatin) or silent (heterochromatin), and 
depends mainly on histone modifications (for example, 
acetylation and methylation). Interestingly, chemical 
histone deacetylase inhibition (HDAi), which promotes 
euchromatin formation, induces senescence17,77. The 
mechanism by which this occurs is poorly understood, 
and may differ depending on the species and cell type. 
For example, in human fibroblasts, HDAi sequentially 
induces p21 and p16 expression, and the senescence 
growth arrest critically depends on the presence of prb. 
by contrast, in mouse fibroblasts, the p53 pathway is 
more important for the senescence response to HDAi 
(ReF. 77). because HDAi can induce ATM kinase activity78,  
HDAi might cause senescence in some cells by initiating 
a p53­dependent DDr.

The finding that HDAi causes senescence appears 
to conflict with the role of heterochromatin and SAHFs 
in establishing and maintaining the senescent growth 
arrest45. likewise, HDAi­induced senescence seems to 
be in conflict with the finding that downregulation of a 
histone acetyl transferase, which promotes heterochrom­
atin formation, induces senescence79. It is not known how 
senescence can be triggered both by heterochromatin  
disruption and by activities that are associated with 
heterochromatin formation. both manipulations cause 
extensive but incomplete changes in chromatin organ­
ization, so each may alter the expression of different 
critical genes, and the response may be cell­type specific. 
understanding this paradox could be important, because 
HDAi holds promise for treating certain cancers80. 

Oncogene-induced senescence. Oncogenes are mutant 
versions of normal genes that have the potential to trans­
form cells in conjunction with additional mutations. 
normal cells respond to many oncogenes by undergoing 
senescence. This phenomenon was first observed when 
an oncogenic form of rAS, a cytoplasmic transducer 
of mitogenic signals, was expressed in normal human 
fibroblasts18. Subsequently, other members of the rAS 
signalling pathway (for example, rAF, MEK, MOS and 
brAF), as well as pro­proliferative nuclear proteins (for 
example, E2F­1), were shown to cause senescence when 
overexpressed or expressed as oncogenic versions22,81–83.
because oncogenes that induce senescence stimulate 
cell growth, the senescence response may counteract 
excessive mitogenic stimulation, which puts cells at risk of 
oncogenic transformation. This idea is supported by the 
finding that mouse cells that are cultured in serum­free 
medium (which reduces the high mitogenic pressure of 
serum) resist rAS­induced senescence84. likewise, some 
rodent cells do not replicatively senesce (BOX 1) in serum­
free medium, which suggests that excessive mitogenic 
stimulation is responsible for their senescence85,86.

nATurE rEvIEwS | molecular cell biology 

 vOluME 8 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | 733

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  R E V I E W S

DNA-damage
sensors

P
H2AX

P
H2AX

NBS1

MRE11

RAD50

RFC2
RAD17

RFC3
RFC4

RFC5

HUS1

RPA

R

A

D

9

RAD1

Upstream kinases

ATM

ATR

DNA-damage
mediators
(adaptors)

MDC1

53BP1

BRCA1

Claspin

Downstream kinases

CHK2

CHK1

Effectors

p53

CDC25

SMC1

Transient cell-cycle arrest

Apoptosis

Senescence

Figure 3 | The DNa-damage response. DNA damage in the form of DNA double-strand 
Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
breaks and other DNA discontinuities is thought to be sensed by a host of factors such as 
replication protein A (RPA) and replication factor C (RFC)-like complexes (which contain 
the cell-cycle-checkpoint protein RAD17). These complexes recruit the 911 complex 
(RAD9–HUS1–RAD1). Damage is also sensed by the MRN complex (MRE11–RAD50–
NBS1). Detection of DNA damage then leads to the activation of upstream protein 
kinases such as ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and ATM and Rad-3 related (ATR), 
which trigger immediate events such as phosphorylation of the histone variant H2AX. 
The modified chromatin recruits multiple proteins. Some of these proteins augment 
signalling by the upstream kinases, participate in transducing the damage signal and 
optimize repair activities by other proteins, the identity of which depends on the nature 
of the damage and position in the cell cycle (for example, the DNA end-stabilizing 
heterodimers Ku70/80, DNA ligases such as ligase IV, exonucleases such as MRE11,  
DNA helicases such as BLM). Several adaptor proteins, including MDC1, 53BP1, BRCA1 
and claspin, orchestrate the orderly recruitment of DNA-damage response proteins, as 
well as the function of downstream kinases such as checkpoint-1 (CHK1) and CHK2, 
which propagate the damage signal to effector molecules such as SMC1, CDC25 and  
the tumour suppressor p53. The effector molecules halt cell-cycle progression, either 
transiently or permanently (senescence), or trigger cell death (apoptosis). 53BP1, p53-
binding protein-1; BRCA1, breast cancer type-1 susceptibility protein; HUS1, 
hydroxyurea-sensitive-1 protein; MDC1, mediator of DNA damage checkpoint protein-1; 
MRE11, meiotic recombination-11 protein; NBS1, Nijmegen breakage syndrome-1 
protein; SMC1, structural maintenance of chromosomes protein-1. 

Is  oncogene­induced  senescence  distinct  from 
chromatin or telomere/damage­induced senescence? 
perhaps not; for example, oncogenic rAS induces p16 
and the formation of SAHFs45,87,88. Moreover, although 
oncogene­induced senescence does not entail telomere 
shortening, many oncogenes induce a robust DDr 
owing to the DnA damage that is caused by aberrant 
DnA replication. This DDr has a causal role in both the 
initiation and maintenance of oncogene­induced senes­
cence because its experimental downregulation prevents 
senescence, allows cell proliferation and predisposes cells 
to oncogenic transformation20,89.

Oncogene­induced senescence was first identified 
in cultured cells and does not occur in all cells90,91, so is 
it physiologically relevant? recent findings show that 
oncogenes elicit a senescence response that curtails the 
development of cancer83,92–95. In mice, strong mitogenic 

signals that are caused by activated oncogenes, or loss of 
the tumour suppressor protein pTEn (which dampens 
mitogenic signals), cause benign lesions that consist of 
senescent cells. likewise, benign naevi in human skin 
contain cells that express oncogenic brAF and are 
senescent. These findings suggest that oncogene­induced 
senescence occurs and suppresses tumorigenesis in vivo. 
Tumorigenesis requires additional mutations — notably  
in p53 or p16 — that prevent or perhaps reverse the 
senescence growth arrest92,93,95.

Stress and other inducers of senescence. Sustained sig­
nalling by certain anti­proliferative cytokines, such as 
interferon­β, also causes senescence. Acute interferon­β 
stimulation reversibly arrests cell growth, but chronic 
stimulation increases intracellular oxygen radicals and 
elicits a p53­dependent DDr and senescence96. likewise, 
chronic signalling by transforming growth factor­β,  
an inhibitor of epithelial cell proliferation, induces senes­
cence by promoting p16–prb­dependent heterochromatin  
formation97,98.

Finally, the loosely defined phenomenon referred 
to as cell­culture stress, or ‘culture shock’, can induce 
p16­dependent, telomere­independent senescence. For 
example, human keratinocytes and mammary epithelial 
cells spontaneously express p16 and senesce with long 
telomeres under standard culture conditions. This does 
not occur when the cells are cultured on feeder layers 
(‘lawns’ of fibroblasts), but after many doublings on 
feeder layers, the cells eventually undergo telomere­
dependent senescence99. These findings suggest that, 
in addition to hyperphysiological growth conditions, 
inadequate growth conditions also induce senescence.

Some cells lack a p16­dependent senescence response 
because the gene encoding p16 is silenced, often by DnA 
methylation100,101. Many human cell cultures, including 
fibroblasts, are heterogeneous and replicatively senesce 
as mosaics; some cells senesce due to the expression of 
p16 and others senesce due to telomere shortening and 
a p53­dependent DDr16,52,53. The stimuli that induce p16 
are poorly understood. In some cells, oxidative stress 
induces p16 (ReFs 70,102), but this is not always the case53. 
Oncogenic rAS can induce p16 by phosphorylating and 
activating ETS transcription factors87, but expression 
of p16 is controlled by multiple factors, including the 
chromatin state44,77,103.

The expression of p16 and a loss of p16 inducibility 
also occur in vivo. Expression of p16 increases with age 
in many murine tissues51,104, and was recently shown to 
increase in murine haematopoietic, neuronal and pancre­
atic stem or progenitor cells in vivo105–107. This expression 
prevents stem­cell proliferation, possibly by inducing 
senescence. Moreover, human mammary epithelial cells 
spontaneously silence p16 via promoter methylation 
in vivo108 such that, as in culture, the adult breast epithelial  
compartment is mosaic for the expression of p16.

Control by the p53 and p16–pRB pathways
The senescence growth arrest is established and main­
tained by the p53 and p16–prb tumour suppressor 
pathways  (FIG. 4). These pathways interact but can  

734 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | vOluME 8 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  independently halt cell­cycle progression. To some 
extent, they also respond to different stimuli. In addition, 
there are both cell­type­specific and species­specific  
differences in the propensity with which cells engage one 
or the other pathway, and in the ability of each path­
way to induce senescence. Finally, although most cells 
senesce owing to engagement of the p53 pathway, p16–
prb pathway, or both, there are examples of senescence  
that appear to be independent of these pathways21,83. 
These examples raise the possibility of a p53­ and  
p16–prb­independent senescence pathway(s).

The p53 pathway. Stimuli that generate a DDr (for 
example, ionizing radiation and telomere dysfunction) 
induce senescence primarily through the p53 pathway. 
This pathway is regulated at multiple points by proteins 
such as the E3 ubiquitin­protein ligase HDM2 (MDM2 
in mice), which facilitates p53 degradation, and the  
alternate­reading­frame protein (ArF), which inhibits 
HDM2 activity42. p21 is a crucial transcriptional target 
of p53 and mediator of p53­dependent senescence109. 
However, p21 also mediates a transient DnA­damage­
induced growth arrest. So what determines whether cells 
senesce or arrest transiently? The answer is currently 
unknown. One possibility is that rapid DnA repair 
quickly terminates p53–p21 signalling, whereas slow, 
incomplete or faulty repair results in sustained signal­
ling and senescence. whatever the case, experimental 
reduction in p53, p21 or DDr proteins (for example, 
ATM or CHK2) prevents telomere­ or damage­induced 
senescence, and, in some cells (for example, those that 
express little or no p16 or oncogenic rAS), it can even 
reverse the senescence growth arrest20,52,55,64,109,110. The 
proliferation of damaged cells with a reduced DDr or 
p53 function often cannot be sustained, however, because 
telomeres eventually become severely eroded, leading to 
a state of extensive genomic instability and cell death that 
is termed crisis or mitotic catastrophe (BOX 1). rare muta­
tional or epigenetic events can activate TErT expression 
or recombination mechanisms to elongate telomeres111. 
Such cells are at a high risk of malignant transformation 
because they can replicate indefinitely and harbour muta­
tions and chromosomal abnormalities.

The DDr and p53 pathway provide a first line of 
defence against cancer by preventing the growth of cells 
with severely damaged DnA, which are at risk of develop­
ing and propagating oncogenic mutations112,113. However, 
the loss of p53 or an intact DDr — either before cells 
experience damage or after damage­induced senescence 
— usually leads to mitotic catastrophe, which acts as  
a second barrier that must be overcome by telomere 
stabilization111.

The p16–pRB pathway. Stimuli that produce a DDr 
can also engage the p16–prb pathway, but this usually 
occurs secondary to engagement of the p53 pathway71,72. 
nonetheless, some senescence­inducing stimuli act pri­
marily through the p16–prb pathway. This is particularly 
true of epithelial cells, which are more prone than fibro­
blasts to inducing p16 and arresting proliferation, at least in 
culture. Furthermore, there are species­specific differences:  

R E V I E W S

Senescence signals

ARF

HDM2

p53

p21

p16

CDKs

pRB

E2F

Cell
proliferation

Senescence
growth arrest

Figure 4 | Senescence controlled by the p53 and p16–
prb pathways. Senescence-inducing signals, including 
Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
those that trigger a DNA-damage response (DDR), as well 
as many other stresses (FIG. 1), usually engage either the 
p53 or the p16–retinoblastoma protein (pRB) tumour 
suppressor pathways. Some signals, such as oncogenic 
RAS, engage both pathways. p53 is negatively regulated by 
the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase HDM2 (MDM2 in mice), 
which facilitates its degradation, and HDM2 is negatively 
regulated by the alternate-reading-frame protein (ARF). 
Active p53 establishes the senescence growth arrest in 
part by inducing the expression of p21, a cyclin-dependent 
kinase (CDK) inhibitor that, among other activities, 
suppresses the phosphorylation and, hence, the 
inactivation of pRB. Senescence signals that engage the 
p16–pRB pathway generally do so by inducing the 
expression of p16, another CDK inhibitor that prevents 
pRB phosphorylation and inactivation. pRB halts cell 
proliferation by suppressing the activity of E2F, a 
transcription factor that stimulates the expression of genes 
that are required for cell-cycle progression. E2F can also 
curtail proliferation by inducing ARF expression, which 
engages the p53 pathway. So, there is reciprocal regulation 
between the p53 and p16–pRB pathways. Interactions 
among ARF, HDM2, p53, p21, CDKs, pRB and E2F also occur 
in other cell contexts — for example, during the DDR and 
reversible or transient growth arrest — so it not yet clear 
how senescence, as opposed to quiescence or transient 
growth arrest, is established. It is noteworthy, however, that 
at least in cell-culture studies, upregulation of p16 is not 
part of the immediate DDR and does not occur during 
transient growth arrests or quiescence.

for example, experimental disruption of telomeres pri­
marily engages the p53 pathway in mouse cells but both 
the p53 and p16–prb pathways in human cells114.

Oncogenic rAS induces p16 expression by activating 
ETS transcription factors; ETS activity is counteracted 
by ID proteins87, which are downregulated in senescent 
cells115. It is not clear how other senescence­causing stimuli  
induce p16 expression. One possible mechanism is the 
reduced expression of polycomb InK4a repressors such 

nATurE rEvIEwS | molecular cell biology 

 vOluME 8 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | 735

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  R E V I E W S

as bMI1 (ReFs 53,116) and CbX7 (ReF. 117). Consistent with 
this idea, bMI1 or CbX7 overexpression extends the repli­
cative lifespan of human and mouse fibroblasts53,103,117.

p16 and p21 are both CDKIs; hence, both can keep 
prb in an active, hypophosphorylated form, thereby 
preventing E2F from transcribing genes that are needed 
for proliferation42. However, p16 and p21 are clearly not 
equivalent118. Cells that senesce solely due to p53–p21 
activation can resume growth after inactivation of the p53 
pathway, and do so for many cell doublings until crisis or 
mitotic catastrophe occurs20,52,55,64,110. However, although 
cells that senesce due to oncogenic rAS (which induces 
p16 expression) can resume limited proliferation20, 
cells that fully engage the p16–prb pathway for several 
days usually cannot resume growth even after inactiva­
tion of p53, prb or p16 (ReF. 52). Moreover, the loss of 
p16–prb activity upregulates p53 and p21 expression in 
part because E2F also stimulates ArF expression119,120. 
Despite reciprocal regulation between the p53 and 
p16–prb pathways (FIG. 4), there are differences in how 
cells respond when one or the other pathway mediates  
a senescence response.

The p16–prb pathway is crucial for generating 
SAHFs, which silence the genes that are needed for  
proliferation45. SAHFs require several days to develop, 
during which time there are transient interactions 
among chromatin­modifying proteins such as HIrA 
(histone repressor A), ASF1a (anti­silencing function­1a)  
and Hp1  (ReF. 88). ultimately, each SAHF contains 
portions of a single condensed chromosome, which is 
depleted for the linker histone H1 and enriched for Hp1 
and the histone variant macroH2A121,122. like the growth 
arrest, once established, SAHFs no longer require p16 
or prb for maintenance45. These findings suggest that 
the p16–prb pathway can establish self­maintaining  
senescence­associated heterochromatin. This activity 
may be due to the ability of prb to complex with histone­
modifying enzymes that form repressive chromatin123. 
Although SAHFs are not present in all senescent cells, 
the p16–prb pathway might establish chromatin states 
that are functionally, if not cytologically, equivalent to 
SAHFs in cells that do not develop these structures. 

Significance of senescence in vivo
Hayflick’s observations1 were made using cultured  
cells, and much of our current understanding of the 
causes and consequences of senescence still derives 
from cell cultures. Only during the past decade or so 
has cellular senescence been shown to occur and to be 
important in vivo.

Senescent cells in vivo. Senescence­associated markers 
(see above) have been used to identify senescent cells 
in vivo, with the caveat that none of these markers are 
exclusive to the senescent state. In rodents, primates 
and humans, senescent cells are found in many renew­
able tissues, including the vasculature, haematopoietic 
system, many epithelial organs and the stroma12,49,51,124. 
notably, cells that express one or more senescence 
markers are relatively rare in young organisms, but their 
number increases with age. How abundant are senescent  

cells in aged organisms? Estimates vary widely depend­
ing on the study, species and tissue, ranging from <1% 
to >15%. It is difficult to know the cause of the senes­
cence response from these studies. However, among 
the senescence markers that accumulate with age are 
SDFs that co­localize with telomeres, suggesting that, 
at least in some tissues, telomere dysfunction causes 
senescence in vivo.

Cells that express senescence markers are also found 
at sites of chronic age­related pathology, such as osteo­
arthritis and atherosclerosis125–127. Thus, senescent cells 
are associated with ageing and age­related diseases 
in vivo, as suggested by Hayflick’s early experiments. In 
addition, senescent cells are associated with benign dys­
plastic or preneoplastic lesions83,92–94 and benign prostatic 
hyperplasia128, but not with malignant tumours. They 
are also found in normal and tumour tissues following 
DnA­damaging chemotherapy73–76. These findings sup­
port the second speculation from Hayflick’s experiments 
— that cellular senescence suppresses the development 
of cancer. Senescent cells are therefore found at appropri­
ate times and places for their proposed roles in tumour 
suppression and ageing.

why do senescent cells accumulate in vivo? The 
answer to this question is not known. recent findings 
suggest that senescent cells, at least those induced by 
acute p53 activation in murine tumour models, can 
be cleared by host mechanisms such as the immune 
system129,130. virtually nothing is known about how 
senescent cells are recognized by the immune system, 
whether additional mechanisms clear them in vivo or 
whether clearance mechanisms change with age or in 
age­related diseases. likewise, nothing is known about 
whether the senescent cells found in vivo have escaped 
clearance or are in the process of being cleared.

Cellular senescence and cancer. Senescence­inducing 
stimuli are potentially oncogenic, and cancer cells must 
acquire mutations that allow them to avoid telomere­
dependent and oncogene­induced senescence2,93,131–133. 
These mutations typically occur in the p53 and p16–prb 
pathways. Of course, these pathways have multiple activ­
ities, all of which may contribute to their tumour sup­
pressor activities. nonetheless, there are several instances 
in which loss of the senescence response appears to be 
a crucial, albeit insufficient, step in the development of 
cancer. For example, genetically engineered mice that 
are deficient in a histone methyltransferase or p53 con­
tain cells that fail to senesce in response to appropriate 
stimuli; these mice are invariably cancer­prone92,93,134. 
likewise, cells from patients with li­Fraumeni syndrome, 
which carry mutations in p53 or CHK2 (ReFs 135,136), 
overcome senescence much more readily than normal 
cells137; humans with these mutations are also cancer­
prone. Finally, as noted earlier, some preneoplastic lesions 
contain large numbers of cells that express senescence 
markers, which suggests that a senescence response halts 
their progression to malignancy.

Cellular senescence probably suppresses tumorigenesis 
because cancer development requires cell proliferation2,  
so any mechanism that stringently prevents cell growth 

736 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | vOluME 8 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  Functional tissue

Damaged tissue

Apoptotic cell

Senescent cell

Mutated cell

Dysfunctional cell

Senescent cell

Cancerous cell

Figure 5 | Potential deleterious effects of senescent cells. Damage to cells within 
tissues can result in several outcomes. Of course, the damage may be completely 
Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
repaired, restoring the cell and tissue to its pre-damaged state. Excessive or irreparable 
damage, however, can cause cell death (apoptosis), senescence or an oncogenic 
mutation. The division of a neighbouring cell, or a stem or progenitor cell, usually 
replaces apoptotic cells. Cell division, however, increases the risk of fixing DNA damage 
as an oncogenic mutation, leaving the tissue with pre-malignant or potentially malignant 
cells. Senescent cells, by contrast, may not be readily replaced; in any case, their number 
can increase with age. Senescent cells secrete various factors that can alter or inhibit the 
ability of neighbouring cells to function, resulting in dysfunctional cells. They can also 
stimulate the proliferation and malignant progression of nearby premalignant cells. 
Therefore, an accumulation of senescent cells can both compromise normal tissue 
function and facilitate cancer progression.

will, a priori, prevent cancer. However, failure to senesce 
is usually insufficient for malignant transformation. 
This is particularly true for replicative senescence; for 
example, telomerase prevents telomere­initiated senes­
cence, but does not confer malignant properties on 
cells138. likewise, the inactivation of p16, p21 or certain 
DDr genes — or even p53 or prb (for example, by viral 
oncogenes) — increases the replicative lifespan of human 
cells but does not transform them per se20,109,139. Such 
cells usually enter crisis, from which rare replicatively 
immortal cells (which have overcome the end­replication  
problem) can arise139. Even then, the immortal cells may 
not be tumorigenic until they acquire mutations that 
activate mitogenic oncogenes such as rAS or inactivate 
tumour suppressors that dampen mitogenic signals such 
as pTEn83,92,93,140. Thus, genetic or epigenetic events that 
avert replicative senescence are necessary but insufficient 
for malignant tumorigenesis.

Senescence reversal can occur if cells senesce without 
fully engaging the p16–prb pathway and subsequently 
lose p53 function52. It is not known whether this occurs 
in vivo. However, cells with silenced (methylated) 
p16 exist in apparently normal tissue108; should such 
cells senesce (for example, in response to telomere 
dysfunction or DnA damage) and subsequently lose 
p53 function, they could, in principle, resume prolifera­
tion. likewise, senescent p16­negative cells in dysplastic 
naevi83 could acquire a mutation that inactivates p53 

R E V I E W S

function and revert to a proliferating state. non­dividing 
cells can acquire mutations4 so these scenarios are not 
impossible, but it is not clear whether they are plausible. 
whatever the case, it is apparent that senescence poses 
a formidable but not insurmountable barrier to cancer 
progression.

Cellular senescence and ageing. The link between cellular 
senescence and ageing is more tentative than the link 
to cancer12. As noted earlier, the number of senescent 
cells increases with age, and senescent cells are present 
at sites of age­related pathology. Further, recent findings 
implicate p16­dependent senescence in three hallmarks 
of ageing — decrements in neurogenesis, haematopoiesis 
and pancreatic function105–107. p16 expression increases 
with age in the stem and progenitor cells of the mouse 
brain, bone marrow and pancreas, where it suppresses 
stem­cell proliferation and tissue regeneration. This rise 
in p16­positive stem cells is apparent in early middle­age. 
Strikingly, the age­related decline in stem­cell growth 
and tissue regeneration is substantially retarded in mice 
that have been genetically engineered to lack p16 expres­
sion. However, as expected, these mice die prematurely 
(in late middle­age) of cancer.

The age­dependent rise in p16­positive stem and 
progenitor cells is consistent with the idea that stem­cell 
senescence might at least partly explain the age­related 
decline in brain and bone­marrow function and the 
development of type II diabetes. However, it is not yet 
known whether the p16­positive stem and progenitor 
cells are in fact senescent. So, it is possible that both the 
tumour­suppressive and pro­ageing activities of p16 are 
partly due to growth suppression without senescence. 
nonetheless, these findings suggest that the tumour­ 
suppressive activity of p16 might be inextricably linked 
to its pro­ageing effects. A similar trade­off between 
tumour suppression and ageing is seen in mice with 
constitutively hyperactive forms of p53 — animals that 
express these forms are remarkably tumour­free, but 
show multiple signs of accelerated ageing141,142, which 
are at least partly due to their increased sensitivity to 
senescence­inducing stimuli142.

A second mechanism by which senescent cells might 
contribute to ageing comes from their altered pattern of 
gene expression — specifically, the upregulation of genes 
that encode extracellular­matrix­degrading enzymes, 
inflammatory cytokines and growth factors, which can 
affect the behaviour of neighbouring cells or even distal 
cells within tissues12 (FIG. 5). These secreted factors can 
disrupt the normal tissue structure and function in 
cell­culture models (for example, the functional and 
morphological differentiation of mammary epithelial 
cells or epidermal keratinocytes)143,144. Moreover, factors  
secreted by senescent cells can stimulate the growth 
and angiogenic activity of nearby premalignant cells, 
both in culture and in vivo145–149. Therefore, senescent 
cells, which themselves cannot form tumours, may fuel 
the progression of nearby premalignant cells, thereby 
— ironically — facilitating the development of cancer 
in ageing organisms. Together, these findings support 
the idea that the senescence response is antagonistically 

nATurE rEvIEwS | molecular cell biology 

 vOluME 8 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | 737

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  R E V I E W S

pleiotropic, and balances the benefits of suppressing  
cancer in young organisms against promoting the  
development of deleterious ageing phenotypes8,12.

Future questions and directions
Despite the transition from cell­culture curiosity to 
potential regulator of cancer and ageing, cellular senes­
cence remains enigmatic and continues to pose a host 
of questions. precisely how do the p53 and p16–prb 
pathways establish and, equally importantly, maintain 
the senescent growth arrest? both of these tumour­
suppressor pathways also cause transient or reversible 
cell­cycle arrests, so how are their activities modified 
by senescence­inducing signals? For that matter, how 
do cells ‘decide’ whether to undergo a transient growth 
arrest, senescence or apoptosis in response to damage 
or stress signals? The signals that induce p16, both in 
culture and in vivo, are especially obscure at present.

likewise, little is known about the mechanisms that 
are responsible for the apparently deleterious senescent 
secretory phenotype. How and why does this phenotype 
develop? Finally, how does the senescence response bal­
ance tumour suppression, tissue regeneration and ageing 
phenotypes? Clearly, it would not be desirable to reverse 

the senescence growth arrest — this would allow dam­
aged, stressed or oncogene­expressing cells to proliferate 
and therefore increase the risk of cancer. but will it be pos­
sible to eliminate the deleterious (pro­ageing) aspects of 
cellular senescence (for example, the senescent secretory 
phenotype) without reversing the tumour­suppressive  
growth arrest? The generation of engineered mice 
that carry additional copies of properly regulated p53  
(ReF. 150) or p16 and ArF151, or have reduced activity 
of the negative p53 regulator MDM2 (ReF. 152), lend 
hope to this possibility. These mice develop little can­
cer without signs of accelerated ageing. However, the 
lifespans of these mice were not significantly longer 
than control mice, despite cancer being a major cause 
of death in mice. It remains to be seen whether other, 
possibly non­lethal, age­related pathologies were accel­
erated or exacerbated. The existence of these mice also 
raises the possibility that there is (or can be) little or no 
trade­off between tumour suppression and longevity, if 
not between tumour suppression and ageing phenotypes 
or certain age­related pathologies. whatever the case, 
it might be possible, through specific interventions, to 
ameliorate any antagonistically pleiotropic effects that 
tumour suppressors might have.

3.   Bishop, J. M. Cancer: the rise of the genetic paradigm. 

Genes Dev. 9, 1309–1315 (1995).
References 2 and 3 describe the characteristics of 
cancer cells and the importance of mutations in 
cancer development.

4.   Busuttil, R. A., Rubio, M., Dolle, M. E., Campisi, J. & 

Vijg, J. Mutant frequencies and spectra depend on 
growth state and passage number in cells cultured 
from transgenic lacZ-plasmid reporter mice. DNA 
Repair 5, 52–60 (2006).

1.   Hayflick, L. The limited in vitro lifetime of human 
diploid cell strains. Exp. Cell Res. 37, 614–636 
(1965).
A classic paper that describes the limited 
replicative lifespan of normal human cells.

2.   Hanahan, D. & Weinberg, R. A. The hallmarks of 

cancer. Cell 100, 57–70 (2000).

5.   Sager, R. Senescence as a mode of tumor suppression. 

Environ. Health Perspect. 93, 59–62 (1991).

6.   Campisi, J. Cellular senescence as a tumor-suppressor 

mechanism. Trends Cell Biol. 11, 27–31 (2001).

7.   Braig, M. & Schmitt, C. A. Oncogene-induced 

senescence: putting the brakes on tumor 
development. Cancer Res. 66, 2881–2884 (2006).

8.   Campisi, J. Cancer and ageing: rival demons? Nature 

Rev. Cancer 3, 339–349 (2003).

9.   Kirkwood, T. B. & Austad, S. N. Why do we age? 

Nature 408, 233–238 (2000).

10.   Dimri, G. P. What has senescence got to do with 

cancer? Cancer Cell 7, 505–512 (2005).

11.   Wright, W. E. & Shay, J. W. Cellular senescence as a 

tumor-protection mechanism: the essential role of 
counting. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 11, 98–103  
(2001).

12.   Campisi, J. Senescent cells, tumor suppression and 
organismal aging: good citizens, bad neighbors. Cell 
120, 513–522 (2005).

13.   Hornsby, P. J. Cellular senescence and tissue aging 

in vivo. J. Gerontol. 57, 251–256 (2002).
References 5–13 describe the historic and current 
evidence that cellular senescence suppresses the 
development of cancer. In addition, references 8 
and 9 explain the concept of antagonistic 
pleiotropy.

14.   Kim, W. Y. & Sharpless, N. E. The regulation of  

INK4/ARF in cancer and aging. Cell 127, 265–275 
(2006).

15.   DiLeonardo, A., Linke, S. P., Clarkin, K. & Wahl, G. M. 
DNA damage triggers a prolonged p53-dependent G1 
arrest and long-term induction of Cip1 in normal 
human fibroblasts. Genes Dev. 8, 2540–2551 (1994).

16.   Herbig, U., Jobling, W. A., Chen, B. P., Chen, D. J. & 

Sedivy, J. Telomere shortening triggers senescence of 
human cells through a pathway involving ATM, p53, 
and p21(CIP1), but not p16(INK4a). Mol. Cell 14, 
501–513 (2004).

17.   Ogryzko, V. V., Hirai, T. H., Russanova, V. R.,  

Barbie, D. A. & Howard, B. H. Human fibroblast 
commitment to a senescence-like state in response to 
histone deacetylase inhibitors is cell cycle dependent. 
Mol. Cell. Biol. 16, 5210–5218 (1996).

18.   Serrano, M., Lin, A. W., McCurrach, M. E., Beach, D. 
& Lowe, S. W. Oncogenic ras provokes premature cell 
senescence associated with accumulation of p53 and 
p16INK4a. Cell 88, 593–602 (1997).

19.   Wada, T. et al. MKK7 couples stress signaling to G2/M 
cell-cycle progression and cellular senescence. Nature 
Cell Biol. 6, 215–226 (2004).

20.   Di Micco, R. et al. Oncogene-induced senescence is a 

DNA damage response triggered by DNA hyper-
replication. Nature 444, 638–642 (2006).

21.   Olsen, C. L., Gardie, B., Yaswen, P. & Stampfer, M. R. 

Raf-1-induced growth arrest in human mammary 
epithelial cells is p16-independent and is overcome in 
immortal cells during conversion. Oncogene 21, 
6328–6339 (2002).

22.   Zhu, J., Woods, D., McMahon, M. & Bishop, J. M. 

Senescence of human fibroblasts induced by 
oncogenic raf. Genes Dev. 12, 2997–3007 (1998).

23.   Shay, J. W. & Roninson, I. B. Hallmarks of senescence 
in carcinogenesis and cancer therapy. Oncogene 23, 
2919–2933 (2004).
References 15–23 show that many potentially 
oncogenic stimuli can induce a senescence 
response.

24.   Itahana, K., Campisi, J. & Dimri, G. P. Mechanisms of 

cellular senescence in human and mouse cells. 
Biogerontology 5, 1–10 (2004).

25.   Ellis, R. E., Yuan, J. Y. & Horvitz, H. R. Mechanisms 
and functions of cell death. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 7, 
663–698 (1991).

26.   Green, D. R. & Evan, G. I. A matter of life and death. 

Cancer Cell 1, 19–30 (2002).

27.   Hampel, B., Malisan, F., Niederegger, H., Testi, R. & 

Jansen-Durr, P. Differential regulation of apoptotic cell 
death in senescent human cells. Exp. Gerontol. 39, 
1713–1721 (2004).

28.   Chen, Q. M., Liu, J. & Merrett, J. B. Apoptosis or 

senescence-like growth arrest: influence of cell-cycle 
position, p53, p21 and bax in H2O2 response of 
normal human fibroblasts. Biochem. J. 347, 543–551 
(2000).

29.   Tepper, C. G., Seldin, M. F. & Mudryj, M. Fas-mediated 
apoptosis of proliferating, transiently growth-arrested, 
and senescent normal human fibroblasts. Exp. Cell 
Res. 260, 9–19 (2000).

30.   Rebbaa, A., Zheng, X., Chou, P. M. & Mirkin, B. L. 
Caspase inhibition switches doxorubicin-induced 
apoptosis to senescence. Oncogene 22, 2805–2811 
(2003).

31.   Seluanov, A. et al. Change of the death pathway in 

senescent human fibroblasts in response to DNA 
damage is caused by an inability to stabilize p53.  
Mol. Cell. Biol. 21, 1552–1564 (2001).

32.   Crescenzi, E., Palumbo, G. & Brady, H. J. Bcl-2 activates 

a programme of premature senescence in human 
carcinoma cells. Biochem. J. 375, 263–274 (2003).

33.   Marcotte, R., Lacelle, C. & Wang, E. Senescent 
fibroblasts resist apoptosis by downregulating 
caspase-3. Mech. Ageing Dev. 125, 777–783 (2004).
34.   Murata, Y. et al. Death-associated protein 3 regulates 
cellular senescence through oxidative stress response. 
FEBS Lett. 580, 6093–6099 (2006).

35.   Jackson, J. G. & Pereira-Smith, O. M. p53 is 

preferentially recruited to the promoters of growth 
arrest genes p21 and GADD45 during replicative 
senescence of normal human fibroblasts. Cancer Res. 
66, 8356–8360 (2006).

36.   Chang, B. D. et al. Molecular determinants of terminal 

growth arrest induced in tumor cells by a 
chemotherapeutic agent. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
99, 389–394 (2002).

37.   Mason, D. X., Jackson, T. J. & Lin, A. W. Molecular 

signature of oncogenic ras-induced senescence. 
Oncogene 23, 9238–9246 (2004).

38.   Shelton, D. N., Chang, E., Whittier, P. S., Choi, D. & 

Funk, W. D. Microarray analysis of replicative 
senescence. Curr. Biol. 9, 939–945 (1999).

39.   Trougakos, I. P., Saridaki, A., Panayotou, G. &  

Gonos, E. S. Identification of differentially expressed 
proteins in senescent human embryonic fibroblasts. 
Mech. Ageing Dev. 127, 88–92 (2006).

40.   Yoon, I. K. et al. Exploration of replicative senescence-

associated genes in human dermal fibroblasts by 
cDNA microarray technology. Exp. Gerontol. 39, 
1369–1378 (2004).

41.   Zhang, H., Pan, K. H. & Cohen, S. N. Senescence-specific 
gene expression fingerprints reveal cell-type-dependent 
physical clustering of up-regulated chromosomal loci. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 3251–3256 (2003).
References 36–41 describe the many changes in 
gene expression that are linked to the senescence 
response.

738 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | vOluME 8 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  66.   Effros, R. B., Dagarag, M. & Valenzuela, H. F. In vitro 

90.   Benanti, J. A. & Galloway, D. A. Normal human 

70.   Parrinello, S. et al. Oxygen sensitivity severely limits 

94.   Collado, M. et al. Identification of senescent cells in 

42.   Sherr, C. J. & McCormick, F. The RB and p53 

pathways in cancer. Cancer Cell 2, 103–112 (2002).

43.   Espinosa, J. M., Verdun, R. E. & Emerson, B. M.  

p53 functions through stress- and promoter-specific 
recruitment of transcription initiation components 
before and after DNA damage. Mol. Cell 12,  
1015–1027 (2003).

44.   Gil, J. & Peters, G. Regulation of the INK4b–ARF–

INK4a tumour suppressor locus: all for one or one for 
all. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 7, 667–677 (2006).

45.   Narita, M. et al. Rb-mediated heterochromatin 

formation and silencing of E2F target genes during 
cellular senescence. Cell 113, 703–716 (2003).
The first description of senescence-associated 
heterochromatin foci.

46.   Pang, J. H. & Chen, K. Y. Global change of gene 

expression at late G1/S boundary may occur in human 
IMR-90 diploid fibroblasts during senescence. J. Cell 
Physiol. 160, 531–538 (1994).

47.   Seshadri, T. & Campisi, J. Repression of c-fos 

transcription and an altered genetic program in 
senescent human fibroblasts. Science 247, 205–209 
(1990).

48.   Stein, G. H., Drullinger, L. F., Robetorye, R. S.,  

Pereira-Smith, O. M. & Smith, J. R. Senescent cells fail 
to express CDC2, CYCA, and CYCB in response to 
mitogen stimulation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci USA 88, 
11012–11016 (1991).

49.   Dimri, G. P. et al. A novel biomarker identifies 

senescent human cells in culture and in aging skin 
in vivo. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 9363–9367 
(1995).
First description of a senescence-associated 
marker that allowed the identification of senescent 
cells in vivo.

50.   Lee, B. Y. et al. Senescence-associated β-galactosidase 

is lysosomal β-galactosidase. Aging Cell 5, 187–195 
(2006).

51.   Krishnamurthy, J. et al. Ink4a/Arf expression is a 

biomarker of aging. J. Clin. Invest. 114, 1299–1307 
(2004).

52.   Beausejour, C. M. et al. Reversal of human cellular 

senescence: roles of the p53 and p16 pathways. 
EMBO J. 22, 4212–4222 (2003).

53.   Itahana, K. et al. Control of the replicative life span of 
human fibroblasts by p16 and the polycomb protein 
Bmi-1. Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 389–401 (2003).

54.   Collado, M. & Serrano, M. The power and the promise 
of oncogene-induced senescence markers. Nature Rev. 
Cancer 6, 472–476 (2006).

55.   d’Adda di Fagagna, F. et al. A DNA damage checkpoint 

response in telomere-initiated senescence. Nature 
426, 194–198 (2003).

56.   Takai, H., Smogorzewska, A. & de Lange, T. DNA 

damage foci at dysfunctional telomeres. Curr. Biol. 13, 
1549–1556 (2003).
References 55 and 56, along with reference 16, 
provide the first direct evidence that dysfunctional 
telomeres trigger a DNA-damage response.

during the cell cycle of human diploid fibroblasts.  
J. Cell Sci. 99, 255–263 (1991).

58.   Cerda, M. C., Berrios, S., Fernandez-Donoso, R., 
Garagna, S. & Redi, C. Organisation of complex 
nuclear domains in somatic mouse cells. Biol. Cell 91, 
55–65 (1999).

59.   d’Adda di Fagagna, F., Teo, S. H. & Jackson, S. P. 

Functional links between telomeres and proteins of 
the DNA-damage response. Genes Dev. 18,  
1781–1799 (2004).

large duplex loop. Cell 97, 503–514 (1999).

61.   Harley, C. B., Futcher, A. B. & Greider, C. W. Telomeres 

shorten during aging of human fibroblasts. Nature 
345, 458–460 (1990).
First evidence linking telomere shortening to 
replicative senescence.

62.   Hemann, M. T., Strong, M.A., Hao, L. Y. &  

Greider, C. W. The shortest telomere, not average 
telomere length, is critical for cell viability and 
chromosome stability. Cell 107, 67–77 (2001).

63.   Martens, U. M., Chavez, E. A., Poon, S. S., Schmoor, 

C. & Lansdorp, P. M. Accumulation of short telomeres 
in human fibroblasts prior to replicative senescence. 
Exp. Cell Res. 256, 291–299 (2000).

64.   Gire, V., Roux, P., Wynford-Thomas, D., Brondello, J. M. 

& Dulic, V. DNA damage checkpoint kinase Chk2 
triggers replicative senescence. EMBO J. 23,  
2554–2563 (2004).

65.   Collins, K. & Mitchell, J. R. Telomerase in the human 

organism. Oncogene 21, 564–579 (2002).

senescence of immune cells. Exp. Gerontol. 38, 
1243–1249 (2003).

67.   Masutomi, K. et al. Telomerase maintains telomere 
structure in normal human cells. Cell 114, 241–253 
(2003).

68.   Bodnar, A. G. et al. Extension of life span by 

introduction of telomerase into normal human cells. 
Science 279, 349–352 (1998).

69.   Chen, Q. M., Prowse, K. R., Tu, V. C., Purdom, S. & 

Linskens, M. H. Uncoupling the senescent phenotype 
from telomere shortening in hydrogen peroxide-
treated fibroblasts. Exp. Cell Res. 265, 294–303 
(2001).

the replicative life span of murine cells. Nature Cell 
Biol. 5, 741–747 (2003).

71.   Jacobs, J. J. & de Lange, T. Significant role for 

p16(INK4a) in p53-independent telomere-directed 
senescence. Curr. Biol. 14, 2302–2308 (2004).

72.   Stein, G. H., Drullinger, L. F., Soulard, A. & Dulic, V. 

Differential roles for cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors 
p21 and p16 in the mechanisms of senescence and 
differentiation in human fibroblasts. Mol. Cell. Biol. 
19, 2109–2117 (1999).

73.   Roninson, I. B. Tumor cell senescence in cancer 

treatment. Cancer Res. 63, 2705–2715 (2003).

74.   Roberson, R. S., Kussick, S. J., Vallieres, E., Chen, S. Y. 
& Wu, D. Y. Escape from therapy-induced accelerated 
cellular senescence in p53-null lung cancer cells and in 
human lung cancers. Cancer Res. 65, 2795–2803 
(2005).

75.   Schmitt, C. A. et al. A senescence program controlled 
by p53 and p16INK4a contributes to the outcome of 
cancer therapy. Cell 109, 335–346 (2002).

76.   te Poele, R. H., Okorokov, A. L., Jardine, L., Cummings, 

J. & Joel, S. P. DNA damage is able to induce 
senescence in tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. Cancer 
Res. 62, 1876–1883 (2002).
References 73–76 describe evidence that tumour 
cells can undergo senescence in response to DNA-
damaging chemotherapy.

77.   Munro, J., Barr, N. I., Ireland, H., Morrison, V. & 

Parkinson, E. K. Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce 
a senescence-like state in human cells by a p16-
dependent mechanism that is independent of a mitotic 
clock. Exp. Cell Res. 295, 525–538 (2004).

78.   Bakkenist, C. J. & Kastan, M. B. DNA damage 

activates ATM through intermolecular 
autophosphorylation and dimer dissociation. Nature 
421, 499–506 (2003).

79.   Bandyopadhyay, D. et al. Down-regulation of p300/

CBP histone acetyltransferase activates a senescence 
checkpoint in human melanocytes. Cancer Res. 62, 
6231–6239 (2002).

80.   Minucci, S. & Pelicci, P. G. Histone deacetylase 

inhibitors and the promise of epigenetic (and more) 
treatments for cancer. Nature Rev. Cancer 6, 38–51 
(2006).

Regulation of a senescence checkpoint response by 
the E2F1 transcription factor and p14/ARF tumor 
suppressor. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 273–285 (2000).

82.   Lin, A. W. et al. Premature senescence involving p53 
and p16 is activated in response to constitutive MEK/
MAPK mitogenic signaling. Genes Dev. 12,  
3008–3019 (1998).

like cell cycle arrest of human nevi. Nature 436,  
720–724 (2005).

and cooperate with chromosomal instability for 
neoplastic transformation. Genes Dev. 18 (2004).
85.   Mathon, N. F., Malcolm, D. S., Harrisingh, M. C., 

Cheng, L. & Lloyd, A. C. Lack of replicative senescence 
in normal rodent glia. Science 291, 872–875 (2001).
86.   Tang, D. G., Tokumoto, Y. M., Apperly, J. A., Lloyd, A. C. 
& Raff, M. C. Lack of replicative senescence in cultured 
rat oligodendrocyte precursor cells. Science 291, 
868–871 (2001).

87.   Ohtani, N. et al. Opposing effects of Ets and Id 

proteins on p16/INK4a expression during cellular 
senescence. Nature 409, 1067–1070 (2001).

88.   Zhang, R. et al. Formation of macroH2A-containing 

senescence-associated heterochromatin foci and 
senescence driven by ASF1a and HIRA. Dev. Cell 8, 
19–31 (2005).

89.   Bartkova, J. et al. Oncogene-induced senescence is 
part of the tumorigenesis barrier imposed by DNA 
damage checkpoints. Nature 444, 633–637  
(2006).

R E V I E W S

fibroblasts are resistant to RAS-induced senescence. 
Mol. Cell. Biol. 24, 2842–2852 (2004).

91.   Skinner, J. et al. Opposing effects of mutant ras 

oncoprotein on human fibroblast and epithelial cell 
proliferation: implications for models of human 
tumorigenesis. Oncogene 23, 5994–5999  
(2004).

92.   Braig, M. et al. Oncogene-induced senescence as an 

initial barrier in lymphoma development. Nature 436, 
660–665 (2005).

93.   Chen, Z. et al. Critical role of p53-dependent cellular 

senescence in suppression of PTEN-deficient 
tumorigenesis. Nature 436, 725–730 (2005).

premalignant tumours. Nature 436, 642 (2005).

95.   Lazzerini Denchi, E., Attwooll, C., Pasini, D. & Helin, K. 

Deregulated E2F activity induces hyperplasia and 
senescence-like features in the mouse pituitary gland. 
Mol. Cell. Biol. 25, 2660–2672 (2005).
Together with references 83 and 89, references 
92–95 provide evidence that cellular senescence 
suppresses tumorigenesis in vivo.

96.   Moiseeva, O., Mallette, F. A., Mukhopadhyay, U. K., 
Moores, A. & Ferbeyre, G. DNA damage signaling  
and p53-dependent senescence after prolonged  
β-interferon stimulation. Mol. Biol. Cell 17,  
1583–1592 (2006).

97.   Vijayachandra, K., Lee, J. & Glick, A. B. Smad3 

regulates senescence and malignant conversion in a 
mouse multistage skin carcinogenesis model. Cancer 
Res. 63, 3447–3452 (2003).

98.   Zhang, H. & Cohen, S. N. Smurf2 up-regulation 

activates telomere-dependent senescence. Genes Dev. 
18, 3028–3040 (2004).

99.   Ramirez, R. D. et al. Putative telomere-independent 
mechanisms of replicative aging reflect inadequate 
growth conditions. Genes Dev. 15, 398–403  
(2001).

100.  Brenner, A. J., Stampfer, M. R. & Aldaz, C. M. 

Increased p16 expression with first senescence arrest 
in human mammary epithelial cells and extended 
growth capacity with p16 inactivation. Oncogene 17, 
199–205 (1998).

101.  Huschtscha, L. I. et al. Loss of p16INK4 expression by 

methylation is associated with lifespan extension of 
human mammary epithelial cells. Cancer Res. 58, 
3508–3512 (1998).

102.  Forsyth, N. R., Evans, A. P., Shay, J. W. & Wright, W. E. 

Developmental differences in the immortalization of 
lung fibroblasts by telomerase. Aging Cell 2, 235–243 
(2003).

103.  Jacobs, J. J., Kieboom, K., Marino, S., DePinho, R. A. 

& van Lohuizen, M. The oncogene and Polycomb-
group gene BMI-1 regulates cell proliferation and 
senescence through the INK4a locus. Nature 397, 
164–168 (1999).

104.  Zindy, F., Quelle, D. E., Roussel, M. F. & Sherr, C. J. 

Expression of the p16INK4a tumor suppressor versus 
other INK4 family members during mouse 
development and aging. Oncogene 15, 203–211 
(1997).
First report that p16 expression increases during 
ageing.

105.  Janzen, V. et al. Stem cell aging modified by the cyclin-

dependent kinase inhibitor, p16INK4a. Nature 443, 
421–426 (2006).

dependent decline in islet regenerative potential. 
Nature 443, 453–457 (2006).

107.  Molofsky, A. V. et al. Declines in forebrain progenitor 
function and neurogenesis during aging are partially 
caused by increasing Ink4a expression. Nature 443, 
448–452 (2006).
References 105–107 describe evidence that p16 
limits stem-cell or progenitor-cell proliferation, 
which drives ageing phenotypes.

108.  Holst, C. R. et al. Methylation of p16(INK4a) 

promoters occurs in vivo in histologically normal 
human mammary epithelia. Cancer Res. 63,  
1596–1601 (2003).

109.  Brown, J. P., Wei, W. & Sedivy, J. M. Bypass of 

senescence after disruption of p21CIP1/WAF1 gene in 
normal diploid human fibroblasts. Science 277,  
831–834 (1997).

110.  Won, J. et al. Small molecule-based reversible 

reprogramming of cellular lifespan. Nature Chem. Biol. 
2, 369–374 (2006).

111.  Shay, J. W. & Wright, W. E. Senescence and 

immortalization: role of telomeres and telomerase. 
Carcinogenesis 26, 867–874 (2005).

57.   Bartholdi, M. F. Nuclear distribution of centromeres 

81.   Dimri, G. P., Itahana, K., Acosta, M. & Campisi, J. 

60.   Griffith, J. D. et al. Mammalian telomeres end in a 

84.   Woo, R. A. & Poon, R. Y. Activated oncogenes promote 

83.   Michaloglou, C. et al. BRAFE600-associated senescence-

106.  Krishnamurthy, J. et al. p16INK4a induces an age-

nATurE rEvIEwS | molecular cell biology 

 vOluME 8 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | 739

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  R E V I E W S

112.  Bartkova, J. et al. DNA damage response as a 

candidate anti-cancer barrier in early human 
tumorigenesis. Nature 434, 864–870 (2005).

113.  Gorgoulis, V. G. et al. Activation of the DNA damage 

checkpoint and genomic instability in human 
precancerous lesions. Nature 434, 907–913 (2005).
114.  Smogorzewska, A. & de Lange, T. Different telomere 

damage signaling pathways in human and mouse cells. 
EMBO J. 21, 4338–4348 (2002).

115.  Hara, E. et al. Id related genes encoding helix loop 

helix proteins are required for G1 progression and are 
repressed in senescent human fibroblasts. J. Biol. 
Chem. 269, 2139–2145 (1994).

116.  Bracken, A. P. et al. The Polycomb group proteins bind 

throughout the INK4A–ARF locus and are 
disassociated in senescent cells. Genes Dev. 21,  
525–530 (2007).

117.  Gil, J., Bernard, D., Martinez, D. & Beach, D. 

131.  Cosme-Blanco, W. et al. Telomere dysfunction 

suppresses spontaneous tumorigenesis in vivo by 
initiating p53-dependent cellular senescence. EMBO 
Rep. 8, 497–503 (2007).

132.  Christophorou, M. A., Ringshausen, I., Finch, A. J., 

Swigart, L. B. & Evan, G. I. The pathological response 
to DNA damage does not contribute to p53-mediated 
tumour suppression. Nature 443, 214–217 (2006).
133.  Feldser, D. M. & Greider, C. W. Short telomeres limit 

tumor progression in vivo by inducing senescence. 
Cancer Cell 11, 461–469 (2007).

134.  Donehower, L. A. et al. Mice deficient for p53 are 

developmentally normal but susceptible to 
spontaneous tumors. Nature 356, 215–221 (1992).

135.  Iwakuma, T., Lozano, G. & Flores, E. R. Li-Fraumeni 

syndrome: a p53 family affair. Cell Cycle 4, 865–867 
(2005).

136.  Lee, S. B. et al. Destabilization of CHK2 by a missense 

Polycomb CBX7 has a unifying role in cellular lifespan. 
Nature Cell Biol. 6, 62–67 (2004).

mutation associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. 
Cancer Res. 61, 8062–8067 (2001).

118.  Sherr, C. J. & Roberts, J. M. CDK inhibitors: positive 

137.  Shay, J. W., Tomlinson, G., Piatyszek, M. A. & 

122.  Zhang, R., Chen, W. & Adams, P. D. Molecular 

140.  Hahn, W. C. et al. Creation of human tumor cells with 

and negative regulators of G1-phase progression. 
Genes Dev. 13, 1501–1512 (1999).

119.  Bates, S. et al. p14ARF links the tumor suppressors 

RB and p53. Nature 395, 125–125 (1998).

120.  Zhang, J., Pickering, C. R., Holst, C. R., Gauthier, M. L. 

& Tlsty, T. D. p16INK4a modulates p53 in primary 
human mammary epithelial cells. Cancer Res. 66, 
10325–10331 (2006).

121.  Funayama, R., Saito, M., Tanobe, H. & Ishikawa, F. 

Loss of linker histone H1 in cellular senescence. J. Cell 
Biol. 175, 869–880 (2006).

dissection of formation of senescence-associated 
heterochromatin foci. Mol. Cell. Biol. 27, 2343–2358 
(2007).

123.  Macaluso, M., Montanari, M. & Giordano, A.  

Rb family proteins as modulators of gene expression 
and new aspects regarding the interaction with 
chromatin remodeling enzymes. Oncogene 25,  
5263–5267 (2006).

124.  Jeyapalan, J. C., Ferreira, M., Sedivy, J. M. & Herbig, U. 

Accumulation of senescent cells in mitotic tissue of 
aging primates. Mech. Ageing Dev. 128, 36–44 
(2007).

125.  Chang, E. & Harley, C. B. Telomere length and 

replicative aging in human vascular tissues. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 92, 11190–11194 (1995).

126.  Price, J. S. et al. The role of chondrocyte senescence in 

osteoarthritis. Aging Cell 1, 57–65 (2002).

127.  Vasile, E., Tomita, Y., Brown, L. F., Kocher, O. &  

Dvorak, H. F. Differential expression of thymosin β-10 
by early passage and senescent vascular endothelium 
is modulated by VPF/VEGF: Evidence for senescent 
endothelial cells in vivo at sites of atherosclerosis. 
FASEB J. 15, 458–466 (2001).

128.  Castro, P., Giri, D., Lamb, D. & Ittmann, M. Cellular 
senescence in the pathogenesis of benign prostatic 
hyperplasia. Prostate 55, 30–38 (2003).

129.  Ventura, A. et al. Restoration of p53 function leads to 

tumour regression in vivo. Nature 445, 661–665 
(2007).

130.  Xue, W. et al. Senescence and tumour clearance is 

triggered by p53 restoration in murine liver 
carcinomas. Nature 445, 656–650 (2007).

Gollahon, L. S. Spontaneous in vitro immortalization of 
breast epithelial cells from a patient with Li-Fraumeni 
syndrome. Mol. Cell Biol. 15, 425–432 (1995).

138.  Morales, C. P. et al. Absence of cancer-associated 

changes in human fibroblasts immortalized with 
telomerase. Nature Genet. 21, 115–118 (1999).

139.  Shay, J. W., Van Der Haegen, B. A., Ying, Y. &  

Wright, W. E. The frequency of immortalization of 
human fibroblasts and mammary epithelial cells 
transfected with SV40 large T-antigen. Exp. Cell Res. 
209, 45–52 (1993).

defined genetic elements. Nature 400, 464–468 
(1999).

141.  Tyner, S. D. et al. p53 mutant mice that display early 

aging-associated phenotypes. Nature 415, 45–53 
(2002).

142.  Maier, B. et al. Modulation of mammalian life span by 

the short isoform of p53. Genes Dev. 18, 306–319 
(2004).
References 141 and 142 show that constitutive p53 
activity can suppress the development of cancer at 
the cost of accelerating ageing phenotypes.

143.  Funk, W. D. et al. Telomerase expression restores 

dermal integrity to in vitro aged fibroblasts in a 
reconstituted skin model. Exp. Cell Res. 258,  
270–278 (2000).

144.  Parrinello, S., Coppe, J. P., Krtolica, A. & Campisi, J. 
Stromal-epithelial interactions in aging and cancer: 
senescent fibroblasts alter epithelial cell 
differentiation. J. Cell Sci. 118, 485–496 (2005).

145.  Bavik, C. et al. The gene expression program of 

prostate fibroblast senescence modulates neoplastic 
epithelial cell proliferation through paracrine 
mechanisms. Cancer Res. 66, 794–802 (2006).

146.  Coppe, J. P., Kauser, K., Campisi, J. & Beausejour, C. M. 

Secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor by 
primary human fibroblasts at senescence. J. Biol. 
Chem. 281, 29568–29574 (2006).

147.  Dilley, T. K., Bowden, G. T. & Chen, Q. M. Novel 

mechanisms of sublethal oxidant toxicity: induction of 
premature senescence in human fibroblasts confers 
tumor promoter activity. Exp. Cell Res. 290, 38–48 
(2003).

148.  Krtolica, A., Parrinello, S., Lockett, S., Desprez, P. & 
Campisi, J. Senescent fibroblasts promote epithelial 
cell growth and tumorigenesis: a link between cancer 
and aging. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98,  
12072–12077 (2001).

149.  Martens, J. W. et al. Aging of stromal-derived human 
breast fibroblasts might contribute to breast cancer 
progression. Thromb. Haemost. 89, 393–404 (2003).
150.  Garcia-Cao, I. et al. ‘Super p53’ mice exhibit enhanced 

DNA damage response, are tumor resistant and age 
normally. EMBO J. 21, 6225–6235 (2002).

151.  Matheu, A. et al. Increased gene dosage of Ink4a/Arf 
results in cancer resistance and normal aging. Genes 
Dev. 18, 2736–2746 (2004).

152.  Mendrysa, S. M. et al. Tumor suppression and normal 

aging in mice with constitutively high p53 activity. 
Genes Dev. 20, 16–21 (2006).
References 150–152 show that resistance to 
cancer need not accelerate ageing.

153.  Shay, J. W., Wright, W. E. & Werbin, H. Defining the 

molecular mechanisms of human cell immortalization. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta Rev. Cancer 1071, 1–7 (1991).

154.  Romanov, S. R. et al. Normal human mammary 

epithelial cells spontaneously escape senescence and 
acquire genomic changes. Nature 409, 633–637 
(2001).

155.  Emsley, J. G., Mitchell, B. D., Kempermann, G. & 

Macklis, J. D. Adult neurogenesis and repair of the 
adult CNS with neural progenitors, precursors, and 
stem cells. Prog. Neurobiol. 75, 321–341 (2005).

156.  Shi, X. & Garry, D. J. Muscle stem cells in 

development, regeneration, and disease. Genes Dev. 
20, 1692–1708 (2006).

157.  Srivastava, D. & Ivey, K. N. Potential of stem-cell-
based therapies for heart disease. Nature 441,  
1097–1099 (2006).

Acknowledgements
The authors thank colleagues and the members of their labo-
ratories for stimulating discussions. The F.d’A.d.F. group is 
supported by the Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul 
Cancro, the Association for International Cancer Research 
and the Human Frontier Science Program. The J.C. group is 
supported by the US National Institute of Aging, the National 
Cancer Institute and the Department of Energy.

Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

DATABASES
OMIM: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.
fcgi?db=OMIM
Li-Fraumeni syndrome | type II diabetes
UniProtKB: http://ca.expasy.org/sprot
ATM | CHK2| E2F | HDM2| p16| p21| p53 | pRB | PTEN

FURTHER INFORMATION
Judith Campisi’s homepages:  
http://www.buckinstitute.org/site/index.php?option=com_c
ontent&task=view&id=113&Itemid=100
http://www.lbl.gov/lifesciences/labs/campisi_lab.html
Fabrizio d’Adda di Fagagna’s homepage:  
http://www.ifom-ieo-campus.it/research/dadda.php
all liNkS are acTive iN The oNliNe PDF.

740 | SEpTEMbEr 2007 | vOluME 8 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group  