Patient-reported outcomes of pain and
physical functioning in neurofibromatosis
clinical trials

Pamela L. Wolters, PhD
Staci Martin, PhD
Vanessa L. Merker, BS
James H. Tonsgard, MD
Sondra E. Solomon,

PhD†

Andrea Baldwin, CRNP
Amanda L. Bergner, MS
Karin Walsh, PsyD
Heather L. Thompson,

PhD, CCC-SLP

Kathy L. Gardner, MD
Cynthia M. Hingtgen,

MD, PhD

Elizabeth Schorry, MD
William N. Dudley, PhD
Barbara Franklin, BS
For the REiNS
International
Collaboration

Correspondence to
Dr. Wolters:
woltersp@mail.nih.gov

ABSTRACT
Objective: Tumors and other disease complications of neurofibromatosis (NF) can cause pain and neg-
atively affect physical functioning. To document the clinical benefit of treatment in NF trials targeting
these manifestations, patient-reported outcomes (PROs) assessing pain and physical functioning
should be included as study endpoints. Currently, there is no consensus on the selection and use of
such measures in the NF population. This article presents the recommendations of the PRO group
of the Response Evaluation in Neurofibromatosis and Schwannomatosis (REiNS) International Collab-
oration for assessing the domains of pain and physical functioning for NF clinical trials.
Methods: The REiNS PRO group reviewed and rated existing PRO measures assessing pain inten-
sity, pain interference, and physical functioning using their systematic method. Final recommen-
dations are based primarily on 4 main criteria: patient characteristics, item content, psychometric
properties, and feasibility for clinical trials.
Results: The REiNS PRO group chose the Numeric Rating Scale–11 ($8 years) to assess pain
intensity, the Pain Interference Index (6–24 years) and the Patient-Reported Outcome Measure-
ment Information System (PROMIS) Pain Interference Scale ($18 years) to evaluate pain inter-
ference, and the PROMIS Physical Functioning Scale to measure upper extremity function and
mobility ($5 years) for NF clinical trials.
Conclusions: The REiNS Collaboration currently recommends these PRO measures to assess the
domains of pain and physical functioning for NF clinical trials; however, further research is needed
to evaluate their use in individuals with NF. A final consensus recommendation for the pain inter-
ference measure will be disseminated in a future publication based on findings from additional
published research. Neurology® 2016;87 (Suppl 1):S4–S12

GLOSSARY
CAT 5 computerized adaptive test; COA 5 clinical outcome assessment; FDA 5 Food and Drug Administration; IRT 5 Item
Response Theory; NF 5 neurofibromatosis; NF1 5 neurofibromatosis 1; NF2 5 neurofibromatosis 2; NRS-11 5 Numeric
Rating Scale–11; PII 5 Pain Interference Index; PRO 5 patient-reported outcome; PROMIS 5 Patient-Reported Outcome
Measurement Information System; PROMIS-PF 5 Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement Information System Physical
Functioning scale; PROMIS-PI 5 Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement Information System Pain Interference scale;
QOL 5 quality of life; REiNS 5 Response Evaluation in Neurofibromatosis and Schwannomatosis; SF 5 short forms;
SWN 5 schwannomatosis.

Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1), neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2), and schwannomatosis (SWN) are neuro-
genetic disorders that share a predisposition to develop multiple nerve sheath tumors. These tumors
may cause significant complications such as visual impairments, hearing loss, facial nerve palsy, air-
way constriction, and spinal cord compression.1 Generalized and focal orthopedic problems,
including spinal and skeletal abnormalities
tibial

scoliosis, congenital bowing,

such as

Supplemental data
at Neurology.org

†Deceased.
From the Pediatric Oncology Branch (P.L.W., S.M., A.B.), National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; Department of
Neurology and Cancer Center (V.L.M.), Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine (J.H.T.), IL;
Department of Psychological Sciences (S.E.S.), University of Vermont, Burlington; Departments of Neurology and Genetics (A.L.B.), Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD; Children’s National Health System & The George Washington School of Medicine (K.W.), Washington,
DC; Department of Speech Pathology & Audiology (H.L.T.), California State University, Sacramento; Veteran’s Administration Pittsburgh
Healthcare System and University of Pittsburgh (K.L.G.), PA; Department of Clinical Neurosciences (C.M.H.), Spectrum Health Medical Group
and College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing; Division of Human Genetics (E.S.), Cincinnati Children’s Hospital,
OH; Department of Public Health Education (W.N.D.), School of Health and Human Sciences, University of North Carolina at Greensboro; and
Advocure NF2 Inc. (B.F.), Los Angeles, CA.
REiNS International Collaboration members are listed on the Neurology® Web site at Neurology.org.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.

S4

© 2016 American Academy of Neurology

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

pseudoarthrosis, and chest wall malformations,
also may contribute to morbidity.2 Further-
more, chronic pain is common in children3,4
and adults5,6 with neurofibromatosis (NF) and
may be related to tumors, physical impairments,
and headaches.2,3,5,6 These complications of NF
can significantly affect physical
functioning,
activities of daily living, and quality of life
(QOL).4,6

The number of clinical trials evaluating treat-
ments for tumors and other manifestations of
NF1, NF2, and SWN has increased over the
last several years. To assess clinical benefit
from the patients’ perspective in drug trials,
investigators have begun to incorporate patient-
reported outcome (PRO) measures as secondary
endpoints.7 Current behavioral
intervention
studies focusing on reducing pain and its inter-
ference with everyday functioning use PROs as
primary endpoints.8 PRO measures also can fur-
ther define baseline disease characteristics7 and
document effects of drug toxicities.9 Regulatory
agencies in the United States and Europe recom-
mend including PRO tools in clinical trials to
systematically evaluate symptoms of interest10,11
as the data can provide complementary informa-
tion about the efficacy of a new treatment.10 To
support medical product approval and labeling
claims in the United States, PRO tools must
be qualified by the Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA) as a clinical outcome assessment
(COA)12 and meet rigorous standards to be
used as trial endpoints.11 In meetings with
Response Evaluation in Neurofibromatosis
and Schwannomatosis (REiNS) members, the
FDA has indicated that COAs of pain and
physical functioning need to be incorporated
into trial design as coprimary or secondary
endpoints to document clinical benefit in addi-
tion to tumor reduction for NF trials seeking
drug approval.

Despite the increased interest in PROs,
challenges remain in using such measures of
pain and physical functioning in NF clinical
trials. First, the complications of NF are het-
erogeneous and vary widely in prevalence and
severity.1,13 Individuals often have multiple tu-
mors and complications, making it difficult to
differentiate changes in pain or functioning
related to one particular tumor type or compli-
cation being treated in a clinical trial. Pain may

be acute, episodic, or chronic, and vary in inten-
sity and location. Thus, when designing an NF
trial including pain PROs, researchers need to
consider the frequency of evaluations, length of
the response period (e.g., past 7 days), and how
to track the locations of target tumors or com-
plications in order to obtain reliable and valid
assessments of pain throughout the study. Accu-
rate recording of analgesic use also is required to
help distinguish changes in pain related to tumor
reduction due to the study drug from changes in
pain due to analgesics.14 In addition, NF com-
plications, such as plexiform neurofibromas3,5
and learning disabilities,15 are common in chil-
dren through adults. Therefore, PRO measures
used in NF trials must evaluate individuals across
a wide range of ages and ability levels. To be
feasible for multicenter and international studies,
PRO tools need to be relatively brief, easy to
administer, and available in different languages.
Finally, no measures currently are validated to
assess pain and physical functioning across the
lifespan in NF, and there is a lack of consensus
about how to assess PROs in NF clinical trials.
The US FDA and European regulatory agencies
have acknowledged the importance of developing
a common core language and methodology for
clinical trials evaluating new drugs that will per-
mit comparisons of PROs across treatments.10

To respond to these challenges and promote
consensus in the assessment of PROs in NF clin-
ical trials, the PRO group of the REiNS Inter-
national Collaboration is working to provide
guidance about appropriate PRO measures
and methodologies in 4 core domains (pain,
physical functioning, disease-specific QOL, and
general QOL) for use in NF clinical trials. The
PRO group’s first publication16 outlined their
goals and described the systematic process they
developed to review and choose PRO measures
using pain intensity as an example. This article
presents the current REiNS recommendations
for the domains of pain and physical function-
ing, specifically focusing on self-report measures
for ages 8 years and older and parent report
questionnaires for 5 years and older.

METHODS The group’s systematic method involves gathering
information from extensive literature reviews and rating existing
PRO measures on 6 criteria, as previously described.16 PRO measures
may be re-reviewed to consider new published data, and when scores
are close, the highest-rated measures are compared directly during the

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

S5

same meeting. Of the 6 initial criteria, the group refined their focus to
the 4 it deemed most important when making the final selection of
a PRO measure17 for NF clinical trials. Thus, patient characteristics,
item content, psychometric properties, and feasibility for multicenter
trials were the primary criteria used to determine the recommendations
in the domains of pain and physical functioning. All the PRO measures
reviewed for these domains are listed in table e-1 on the Neurology®
Web site at Neurology.org.

RESULTS Pain domain. Pain intensity recommendation.
The PRO group recommends the Numeric Rating
Scale–11 (NRS-11) as a self-report measure of pain
intensity (ages $8 years) for NF clinical trials, as
described and compared in detail with other tools in
our previous publication.16 On the NRS-11, respond-
ents are asked to circle the number from 0 (no pain) to
10 (e.g., worst pain imaginable) that best represents
their pain.18 The characteristics of the NRS-11 are
shown in table 1.

Pain interference. In the domain of pain interfer-
ence, our group initially identified 7 pain interference
scales to consider. Of these, 4 met basic criteria to be
suitable for use in NF clinical trials and were rated using
our systematic process. The top-rated measures were the
Pain Interference Index (PII),19 Patient-Reported
Outcome Measurement Information System Pain
Interference scale (PROMIS-PI),20 and Brief Pain
Inventory Pain Interference subscale.21 Our final
side-by-side comparison resulted in the highest overall
ratings, which were tied, for the PII and PROMIS-PI.
Table 2 presents the characteristics of the PII and
PROMIS-PI for each of the 4 main review criteria.

Pain Interference Index. The PII19,22 is a 6-item scale
that assesses the extent to which pain has interfered with
an individual’s daily activities in the past 7 days. Items
are rated on a 7-point Likert scale, and the total score is

the mean of the completed items. The PII is suitable for
NF clinical trials because it covers a wide age range,
assesses areas relevant for NF, and has parallel child
and adult self-report and parent proxy forms. Impor-
tantly for use in pediatric NF trials, the child and parent
forms demonstrate good reliability and validity in
NF1,19 yield high correlations between parent and child
scores,19 and show sensitivity to change after behavioral
interventions for chronic pain in children.8 While good
preliminary data exist in adults with NF1 (unpublished
data) and other conditions involving pain,23 more
research is needed before recommending the adult ver-
sion for NF trials.

Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement Information System
(PROMIS). PROMIS was created from an NIH-
sponsored initiative to develop standardized PRO
measures that can be compared across patient popula-
tions and studies in a variety of health domains
(http://www.nihpromis.org/). It utilizes Item Response
Theory (IRT), in which each item in a large item bank is
a measure of a latent trait that falls along a continuum. A
small subset of these items are administered as short
forms (SF) of various lengths (e.g., 8, 10, or 20 items)
or as a computerized adaptive test (CAT), which selects
the most relevant questions from an item bank based on
a person’s answers to previous questions, to produce
brief and precise outcome assessments.24,25 Items are
rated on a 5-point Likert scale, and the measures yield
standardized T scores. PROMIS scales are appropriate
for NF clinical trials because they assess relevant do-
mains in a wide age range, have good psychometric
properties, and are translated into multiple languages.

PROMIS-PI. The PROMIS-PI20 assesses the degree
to which pain has interfered with a patient’s ability to
complete daily activities over the past 7 days. This

Table 1

Characteristics of the Numeric Rating Scale–11 (NRS-11) for the 4 main review criteria

Criteria

Patient characteristics

Domains/item content

Psychometric data

Feasibility

NRS-11 characteristics
 Self-report form for $8 years18,40
 Preliminary validity data for children 6–7 years41
 No published data using the NRS-11 in neurofibromatosis to date16
 Assesses pain intensity
 Pain intensity rated from 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst pain you can imagine) over the past week
 Different instructions and pain descriptors used40
 Good test-retest reliability for children (mean difference 0.2; 95% CI 0.0–0.4)42 and adults (intraclass correlations 0.72–0.78)43
 Good construct validity supported by correlations with other pain intensity measures (e.g., NRS-11 and FPS-R, r 5 0.78)18
 Sensitive to change over time in children42 and adults43
 Free, brief, simple to administer
 Can be administered by paper/pencil, verbally, or electronically
 Can modify descriptors and instructions
 Available in multiple languages and can be translated

Abbreviations: CI 5 confidence interval; FPS-R 5 Faces Pain Scale–Revised.

S6

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Table 2

Characteristics of the Pain Interference Index (PII) and the Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement Information System Pain
Interference scale (PROMIS-PI) for the 4 main review criteria

Criteria

Patient characteristics

Domains/item content

Psychometric data

PII characteristics
 Self-report adult form $18 years
 Self-report pediatric form 6–24 years
 Parent proxy form 6–18 years
 Validation with children with chronic pain and with NF1

 Items assess appropriate content for NF
 Child/parent/adult items: school/work, leisure time, mood,
time with friends/family, physical activities, sleep
 Parallel content and response format

 Developed using Classical Test Theory

 Internal consistency in child self-report (Cronbach a 5 0.84)
and parent proxy (0.96)19 very good in NF1/cancer
 No test-retest reliability data to date

 Good correlation between child self-report and parent proxy
scores (r 5 0.62, p , 0.0001)19 in NF1/cancer
 Demonstrated construct validity based on correlation with
established pain measures (r 5 0.81) and differentiates
patients with varying levels of NF1 disease severity19
 Responsive to change in children and adolescents
after intervention8
 Good preliminary psychometric data in adult patients23

Feasibility

 Brief, easy to administer, free
 English and Swedish languages
 Can modify items and format for NF
 Can administer forms electronically

PROMIS-PI characteristics
 Self-report adult form $18 years
 Self-report pediatric form 8–18 years
 Parent proxy form 5–18 years
 Validation with general population and several pediatric/adult disease
groups
 Items assess appropriate content for NF
 Child/parent items: schoolwork, sleeping, standing, walking, running,
having fun, paying attention, feeling angry
 Adult items include day-to-day and social activities, work around home,
family life, chores, fun things, and enjoyment of social activities and life
 Not parallel content and response format between child/parent and adult
forms
 Developed using Item Response Theory
 Internal consistency of the PI bank very good in adults
(Cronbach a 5 0.99)20 and children (0.87)35
 Good test-retest reliability in adults (intraclass correlations 5 0.83–
0.87)26; lower in children (0.62)35
 Moderate agreement between child and parent PI scores
(r 5 0.49)30
 Demonstrated construct validity with other PI scale (Spearman
r 5 0.90) and known groups validity in adults20

 Known groups validity by disease severity for child self-report
PI scale27; no validity data for parent proxy to date
 Responsive to change in adults28; no changed detected in one pediatric
longitudinal study to date29
 SF and CAT highly correlated; CAT often more precise than SF
in adults36; SF generally more precise than CAT in one pediatric study35
 Brief, easy to administer, free
 Multiple languages
 Can add items to customize for NF
 Can administer SF electronically; CAT administered electronically

Abbreviations: CAT 5 computerized adaptive testing; NF 5 neurofibromatosis; NF1 5 neurofibromatosis 1; SF 5 short form.

scale has demonstrated feasibility and validity in
adults and youth with various medical conditions
and chronic pain.20,26,27 The PROMIS-PI also has been
shown to be responsive to changes in pain in a limited
number of clinical trials with adults28 but not yet with
children.29 Published studies using both the pediatric self-
report and parent-proxy pain interference scales currently
are scarce. The pediatric and parent forms are parallel and
general parent-child agreement is moderate.30 The item
content and response options of the adult form are not
consistent with the child/parent forms; thus, research is
needed to evaluate whether these scales can provide a reli-
able assessment across age ranges for longitudinal studies
involving children through adults. Studies investigating
the self-report and parent-proxy versions in NF, includ-
ing comparisons of CAT and SF administration in chil-
dren, also are required before our group can recommend
the PROMIS-PI for pediatric NF trials.

Pain interference recommendation. Since both of these
pain interference tools have strengths and weaknesses
for use in NF, the current REiNS recommendation is
to utilize the PII in clinical trials involving children to
young adults (6–24 years), the PROMIS-PI scale for
adult trials ($18 years), and when possible, both meas-
ures for trials enrolling children through adults. Since
there are limited publications using the PROMIS-PI in
longitudinal studies and none with the NF population to
date, the PRO group recommends administering the
longest PI SF available (8 items) or both the 8-item
SF and CAT in NF clinical trials to compare findings.
Our group will review newly published data in the
future to determine the one pain interference tool most
suitable for NF clinical trials.

Physical functioning domain. In the domain of physical
functioning, our group identified 6 PRO measures

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

S7

Table 3

Characteristics of the Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement Information System Physical Functioning scale (PROMIS-PF) for the
4 main review criteria

Criteria

Patient
characteristics

PROMIS-PF characteristics
 Self-report adult form $18 years

 Self-report pediatric form 8–17 years
 Parent proxy form 5–18 years
 Large validation samples including various disease groups
 Items assess appropriate content (upper extremity and mobility) for NF

Domains/item
content

 Measures both motor function and daily living activities
 Child and parent mobility items include doing sports, playing with other children, getting up from the floor, standing up, standing on tiptoes,
and walking upstairs; upper extremity items include buttoning shirt, opening a jar, opening school binder rings, pouring a drink, putting on
shoes, and using a key to unlock doors
 Adult items include how difficult it is to do chores, dress self including buttons/shoelaces, shampoo hair, wash/dry body, get on/off toilet, and
run a short distance; how their health limits physical tasks like bending or kneeling, walking, climbing stairs, carrying groceries, and doing
vigorous activities, like sports or lifting heavy objects
 Adult forms not parallel with child/parent forms; adult scale is unidimensional (physical functioning) and child/parent scales have 2 dimensions
(upper extremity and mobility)33
 Internal consistency excellent in adults with cancer (PF scale Cronbach a 5 0.92–0.96)34 and moderate in children (SF upper extremity 5
0.62; mobility 5 0.73)35
 Good test-retest reliability of PF scale in adults with osteoarthritis (intraclass correlations 5 0.92 CAT; 0.95 SF)26 and moderate in children
(SF upper extremity 5 0.66; mobility 5 0.77)35
 Demonstrated construct validity with established measures (all rs . 0.68) and known groups validity in adults with cancer34
 Known groups validity by disease severity for child upper extremity and mobility PF scales27; no validity data for parent proxy to date
 Good agreement between child self-report and parent proxy (upper extremity r 5 0.69; mobility r 5 0.63)44
 Sensitive to change after spine augmentation in adults28; no change after surgery in children with cerebral palsy29
 CAT version less accurate then the SF in children with cerebral palsy38; CAT was more precise than SF but CAT administered more items35
 Brief, free, easy to administer
 Multiple languages for adult form; English and Spanish pediatric forms
 Can add items to customize the PF scale to NF
 Electronic administration of SF or CAT
 Easy to integrate testing with other PROMIS domains

Psychometric data

Feasibility

Abbreviations: CAT 5 computerized adaptive testing; NF 5 neurofibromatosis; SF 5 short form.

appropriate for consideration; 5 met basic criteria to be
rated. Of these, the PROMIS Physical Functioning scale
(PROMIS-PF),25 Health Assessment Questionnaire,31
and Functional Disability Inventory32 were the top-
rated measures. From our final side-by-side comparison
of these 3 scales, the overall rating of the PROMIS-PF
for use in NF clinical trials was the highest. Table 3
presents the characteristics of the PROMIS-PF for each
of the 4 main review criteria.

PROMIS-PF. The PROMIS-PF scale measures the
perception of one’s capability of performing specific
physical activities. It includes items assessing upper
extremity function, mobility (lower extremity), and,
for adults, axial or head and neck function.25 The
PROMIS-PF demonstrates good reliability and con-
struct validity in adults and youth from the general
population and various disease groups.25–27,33–35 Adult
studies show that the IRT-based PROMIS-PF scales
reduce floor and ceiling effects,36 are more accurate

and efficient, decrease administration time, result in
greater responsiveness, and require smaller study sample
sizes than legacy PRO measures.36,37 Administration of
the 10-item PROMIS-PF CAT to adults resulted in an
efficient and precise measurement of physical function-
ing, which differentiated between age and disease
groups.36 However,
in children with cerebral palsy,
the PROMIS Mobility CAT did not correlate with
performance measures or differentiate known mobility
groups.38 In clinical trials, the PROMIS-PF showed
sensitivity to change after spine augmentation in adults28
but not after surgery in children with cerebral palsy.29

Physical functioning recommendation. Although pub-
lished studies have not used the PROMIS-PF in
NF to date, the evaluation of both upper and lower
extremity function as well as the range, content, and
wording of the items are well-suited to assess the spec-
trum of complications affecting physical function in
NF. Therefore, the current REiNS recommendation is

S8

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Table 4

Response Evaluation in Neurofibromatosis and Schwannomatosis (REiNS) patient-reported outcome
recommendations for the pain and physical functioning domains in neurofibromatosis clinical trials

Trial age range

Pain intensity

Pain interference

Physical functioning

Pediatric

Adult

NRS-11 (SR $ 8)

PII (SR 6–24; PP 6–18)

PROMIS-PF (SR 8–17; PP 5–17)

NRS-11 (SR $ 8)

PROMIS-PI (SR $ 18)

PROMIS-PF (SR $ 18)

Pediatric-adult

NRS-11 (SR $ 8)

PII (SR $ 6; PP 6–18) and
PROMIS-PI (SR $ 8; PP 5–17)a

PROMIS-PF (SR $ 8; PP 5–17)

Abbreviations: NRS-11 5 Numeric Rating Scale–11; PII 5 Pain Interference Index; PP 5 parent proxy; PROMIS-PF 5
Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement Information System Physical Functioning scale; PROMIS-PI 5 Patient-Reported
Outcome Measurement Information System Pain Interference scale; SR 5 self-report.
a Currently, REiNS is recommending the PII for pediatric-only trials and the PROMIS-PI scale for adult-only trials. In clinical
trials enrolling both children and adults, it is recommended to give both the PII and PROMIS-PI until more data are
published and REiNS can make a final recommendation.

syndrome being studied (e.g.,

to use the longest PF SF that is feasible for a particular
study (e.g., 20-item SF was the most responsive in pop-
ulations with physical impairments)37 or the CAT in
adult studies. The CAT alone is not recommended
for pediatric studies at this time since it was less accurate
than the SF in children with functional limitations.38
When possible, giving both SF and CAT versions in
pediatric NF studies will allow comparisons between
the 2 versions to help refine these recommendations.
Recommendations for use of these measures for NF1, NF2,
and SWN. The above recommendations on pain inten-
sity, pain interference, and physical functioning PRO
measures (listed in table 4) apply to clinical trials
enrolling patients with NF1, NF2, or SWN. Each
measure was evaluated for its ability to capture rele-
vant changes in disease status regardless of the partic-
ular
adequately
measuring pain interference from plexiform neurofi-
bromas in NF1 or from generalized chronic pain in
SWN). Since the NRS-11, PII, PROMIS-PI, and
PROMIS-PF assess generalized constructs rather than
disease-specific manifestations of pain and disability, they
are suited for a range of clinical trials in NF1, NF2, and
SWN. However, the patient population and objectives
of a particular clinical trial will dictate which of these
PRO measures are most appropriate and whether addi-
tional measures may be needed to capture the full range
of relevant PROs adequately. For example, a targeted
measure on swallowing or breathing may be warranted
for studies on plexiform tumors causing airway compres-
sion in NF1. Similarly, in trials for symptomatic vestib-
ular schwannomas in NF2, targeted questionnaires on
the effect of balance problems on physical activities or
the effect of hearing decline on communicative ability
may be warranted.

DISCUSSION PROs assessing pain and physical
functioning are critical for documenting the clinical
efficacy of
treatments targeting manifestations of
NF1, NF2, and SWN. The REiNS International
Collaboration provides consensus recommendations

regarding PROs to the NF research community based
on extensive review of existing tools in these domains.
To assess pain intensity, the REiNS International
Collaboration recommends the NRS-11 as a brief, reli-
able, and valid self-report scale to assess pain intensity for
ages 8 years and older, as previously described.16 How-
ever, for NF clinical trials targeting tumor reduction,
research needs to explore modifications for assessing
tumor-specific pain and indicating the location of the
tumor pain being rated throughout a trial.

To assess pain interference, the current REiNS rec-
ommendation includes 2 measures until additional data
are published to determine the most appropriate one for
use in NF clinical trials across all age groups. At this time,
the REiNS group recommends the PII for pediatric
studies and the PROMIS-PI for adult trials. Both meas-
ures are recommended for NF studies including children
and adults so the data can be compared. The PII is valid
in children with NF1 and their parents19; however, there
currently are no published data in adults with NF1. The
PROMIS-PI20 is an IRT-based measure that has been
used in several published studies with adults, has excel-
lent feasibility, and has robust psychometric properties.
However, additional research is needed to examine the
use of the PROMIS-PI in children and parents, individ-
uals with NF, and CAT in longitudinal studies.

In the domain of physical functioning, the REiNS
Collaboration recommends the PROMIS-PF scale.25
Although relatively new, the PROMIS-PF was deemed
the most appropriate for NF clinical trials because it
evaluates both upper and lower extremity functioning,
consisting of a range of motor functions and daily living
activities that are important to assess in NF. This scale
should provide an efficient and precise PRO assessment
of physical functioning and require smaller sample
sizes,37 which is important for clinical trials of rare dis-
eases. However, CAT administration was not as accu-
rate as the SF in children with functional limitations so
both administration options need to be examined in the
NF population. Additional information also is needed
on the use of the pediatric scales over time.27

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

S9

Limitations. The continued work of the REiNS Col-
laboration and the broader scientific community will
be important in addressing the current limitations
associated with these recommendations. First is the
challenge of whether these PRO tools accurately
assess the specific types of pain and physical functions
being evaluated in clinical trials for individuals with
NF when multiple factors may contribute to their
pain experience or impact their daily functioning.
Another issue is the lack of data in NF1, NF2, and
SWN and whether the psychometric properties of the
scale in these conditions will be consistent with those
documented in the general population. Additionally,
no PRO tools to date have shown the ability to measure
pain and physical functioning adequately for all ages. In

Comment:
Clinical outcome assessments in transition

The Response Evaluation in Neurofibromatosis and Schwannomatosis
(REiNS) International Collaboration systematically evaluated existing patient-
reported outcome (PRO) measures of pain intensity, pain interference, and phys-
ical functioning as potential primary and secondary outcomes for neurofibroma-
tosis trials. On the basis of 4 criteria—patient characteristics,
item content,
psychometric properties, and feasibility—specific measures were recommended.1
These recommendations are valuable for investigators designing clinical trials and
can serve as a basis for developing improved outcome assessments for patients
with these disorders.

In 2006, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) released a draft guidance
on PRO measures that initiated a broader consideration of clinical outcome
assessments (COAs) of “a patient’s symptoms, overall mental state, or the effects of
a disease or condition on how the patient functions.”2 COAs are used in evaluating
efficacy and safety, and include patient-reported, clinician-reported, observer-
reported, and performance outcome measures. Such measures should be used within
a carefully defined context of use for which available data provide support.2 The FDA
recently released a compendium of COAs that have either been used as a basis for
regulatory decisions or are being developed in accord with its qualification program.3
In evaluating COAs, the FDA examines their content validity (e.g., as assessed
by patient focus groups and cognitive interviewing), reliability, construct validity,
and longitudinal measurement properties (e.g., ability to detect change, responder
criteria).2 The REiNS recommendations were based on some of these characteristics,
but most existing outcome measures fall short of the rigorous standards now being
applied by the FDA. Indeed, as the REiNS investigators acknowledge, specification
of the appropriate context of use (e.g., patient age, specific disorders) for pain and
physical functioning measures in neurofibromatosis trials requires additional data.
Systematic efforts to improve the validity, reliability, and responsiveness to change of
COAs will ensure that clinical trial outcomes provide meaningful information about
the treatment benefits and risks that patients consider most important.

1. Wolters PL, Martin S, Merker VL, et al. Patient-reported outcomes of pain and physical

functioning in neurofibromatosis clinical trials. Neurology 2016;87(suppl 1):S4–S12.

2. US Food and Drug Administration. Clinical outcome assessment qualification
program. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
DrugDevelopmentToolsQualificationProgram/ucm284077.htm. Accessed June
16, 2016.

3. US Food and Drug Administration. Clinical outcome assessment compendium
(COA compendium): version 1. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/DevelopmentResources/UCM481225.pdf. Accessed June
16, 2016.

Robert H. Dworkin, PhD

From the Department of Anesthesiology, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, NY.
Study funding: No targeted funding reported.
Disclosure: Dr. Dworkin has received, in the past 12 months, research grants and contracts from the US
Food and Drug Administration and US NIH, and compensation for activities involving clinical trial research
methods from Abide, Adynxx, Aptinyx, Astellas, Biogen, Dong-A, Glenmark, Hope, Hydra, Immune,
Medavante, Novartis, NsGene, Olatec, Periphagen, Phosphagenics, Reckitt Benckiser, Relmada, Semnur,
Spinifex, Syntrix, Teva, Trevena, and Vertex. Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.

particular, researchers need to address the evaluation
of these domains in children under 8 years old since
NF trials are enrolling these younger participants. This
challenge is reflected in our recommendation of 2 pain
interference scales, as currently there are insufficient pub-
lished data for establishing the validity of either measure
in children and adults with NF. Identifying the most
appropriate methods to assess children with significant
cognitive impairments also needs to be addressed. Our
group will update our recommendations in these specific
areas in future publications.

To address the limitations noted above, PRO
group members are using these recommended pain
and physical
functioning measures in descriptive
studies and clinical trials with a wide age range of in-
dividuals who have all types of NF. Several of these
PROs have been accepted into the FDA’s Drug
Development Tool COA Qualification Program12
and are being further studied with both qualitative
and quantitative research methods11 to examine pos-
sible modifications and their use as NF clinical trial
endpoints. The PRO working group also plans to
form a subgroup that will focus on identifying meas-
ures to assess young children and individuals with
significant cognitive impairments. Finally, researchers
need to investigate the use of new methodologies in
NF clinical trials to improve PRO data, such as using
electronic administration to increase the accuracy and
speed of data collection.39

The REiNS PRO group is working to identify PRO
measures that can be used consistently as endpoints
across trials to assess clinical benefit of treatments to
reduce tumors or other disease manifestations in indi-
viduals with NF1, NF2, and SWN. The REiNS rec-
ommendations for PROs in the domains of pain and
physical functioning are presented with the understand-
ing that further evaluation of the measures is needed in
the NF population. Our group encourages researchers
to use these PRO measures in upcoming NF studies.
Final consensus recommendations regarding the one
specific pain interference measure and format of the
PROMIS-PF scales to use in NF clinical trials will be
disseminated in a future publication based on results
of additional published research.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Pamela Wolters: design and conceptualization of the study, collection and
interpretation of the data, drafting and revising the manuscript. Staci
Martin: design and conceptualization of the study, collection and inter-
pretation of the data, drafting and revising the manuscript. Vanessa
Merker: study concept, collection and interpretation of the data, drafting
and revising the manuscript. Jim Tonsgard: study concept, collection and
interpretation of the data, drafting and revising the manuscript. Sondra
Solomon: study concept, collection and interpretation of the data, draft-
ing and revising the manuscript. Andrea Baldwin: study concept, collec-
tion and interpretation of the data, drafting and revising the manuscript.
Amanda Bergner: study concept, collection and interpretation of the data,
drafting and revising the manuscript. Karin Walsh: study concept, collec-
tion and interpretation of the data, drafting and revising the manuscript.

S10

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Heather Thompson: study concept, collection and interpretation of the
data, drafting and revising the manuscript. Kathy Gardner: study con-
cept, collection and interpretation of the data, revising the manuscript.
Cynthia Hingtgen: study concept, collection and interpretation of the
data, revising the manuscript. Elizabeth Schorry: study concept, collec-
tion and interpretation of the data, revising the manuscript. William
Dudley: study concept, collection and interpretation of the data, revising
the manuscript. Barbara Franklin: study concept, collection and interpre-
tation of the data, revising the manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Ana-Maria Vranceanu, PhD, Department of Psy-
chiatry, Harvard Medical School, a new member of the REiNS PRO
working group, for participation in selected conference calls to discuss
reviewed PRO measures.

STUDY FUNDING
This research is supported by the Intramural Research Program of the
National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute.

DISCLOSURE
P. Wolters received funding from the Neurofibromatosis Therapeutics
Acceleration Program and holds stock in Bristol-Meyers-Squibb. S. Martin
received funding from the Neurofibromatosis Therapeutics Acceleration
Program. She also received funded travel for speaking engagements from
the University of Chicago and the Children’s Tumor Foundation.
V. Merker reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. J. Tonsgard
receives funding from the Department of Defense Army Research Command as
part of the NF Consortium and from Midwest NF, Inc. S. Solomon is
deceased; she reported no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. A. Baldwin
and A. Bergner report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. K. Walsh
received funding from the Children’s Tumor Foundation, the Department of
Defense, and the Gilbert Neurofibromatosis Institute. H. Thompson and
K. Gardner report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. C. Hingtgen holds
stock in Merck. B. Schorry receives funding from the Department of Defense as
a site PI for the NF Consortium and also as a coinvestigator for a clinical trial of
vitamin D for adults with NF1. W. Dudley and B. Franklin report no dis-
closures relevant to the manuscript. Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.

Received August 19, 2015. Accepted in final form April 12, 2016.

REFERENCES
1. Korf BR. Neurofibromatosis. Handb Clin Neurol 2013;

111:333–340.

2. Elefteriou F, Kolanczyk M, Schindeler A, et al. Skeletal abnor-
malities in neurofibromatosis type 1: approaches to therapeu-
tic options. Am J Med Genet A 2009;149A:2327–2338.

3. Nguyen R, Kluwe L, Fuensterer C, Kentsch M, Friedrich RE,
Mautner VF. Plexiform neurofibromas in children with
neurofibromatosis type 1: frequency and associated clin-
ical deficits. J Pediatr 2011;159:652–655.

4. Wolters PL, Burns KM, Martin S, et al. Pain interference
in youth with neurofibromatosis type 1 and plexiform
neurofibromas and relation to disease severity, social-
emotional functioning, and quality of life. Am J Med
Genet A 2015;167A:2103–2113.

5. Creange A, Zeller J, Rostaing-Rigattieri S, et al. Neurolog-
ical complications of neurofibromatosis type 1 in adult-
hood. Brain 1999;122:473–481.

6. Merker VL, Bredella MA, Cai W, et al. Relationship
between whole-body tumor burden, clinical phenotype,
and quality of life in patients with neurofibromatosis.
Am J Med Genet A 2014;164A:1431–1437.

7. Widemann BC, Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Dombi E, et al.
Phase II trial of pirfenidone in children and young adults with
neurofibromatosis type 1 and progressive plexiform neurofi-
bromas. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2014;61:1598–1602.

8. Martin S, Wolters P, Toledo-Tamula MA, et al. Accep-
tance and commitment therapy in youth with neurofibro-
matosis type 1 (NF1) and chronic pain and their parents:
a pilot study of feasibility and preliminary efficacy. Am J
Med Genet 2016;170:1462–1470.

9. Kim A, Dombi E, Tepas K, et al. Phase I trial and phar-
macokinetic study of sorafenib in children with neurofi-
bromatosis type I and plexiform neurofibromas. Pediatr
Blood Cancer 2013;60:396–401.

10. Acquadro C, Berzon R, Dubois D, et al. Incorporating the
patient’s perspective into drug development and communi-
cation: an ad hoc task force report of the Patient-Reported
Outcomes (PRO) Harmonization Group meeting at the
Food and Drug Administration, February 16, 2001. Value
Health 2003;6:522–531.

11. US Department of Health and Human Services FDA Cen-
ter for Drug Evaluation and Research; US Department of
Health and Human Services FDA Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research; US Department of Health and
Human Services FDA Center for Devices and Radiological
Health. Guidance for Industry: patient-reported outcome
measures: use in medical product development to support
labeling claims. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2006;4:79.

12. US Food and Drug Administration. Clinical Outcome
Assessment Compendium. Mary Land: US Food and
Drug Administration; 2016.

13. Hoa M, Slattery WH III. Neurofibromatosis 2. Otolar-

yngol Clin North Am 2012;45:315–332.

14. Cleeland CS, O’Mara A, Zagari M, Baas C. Integrating
pain metrics into oncology clinical trials. Clin Cancer Res
2011;17:6646–6650.

15. Hyman SL, Shores A, North KN. The nature and fre-
quency of cognitive deficits in children with neurofibro-
matosis type 1. Neurology 2005;65:1037–1044.

16. Wolters PL, Martin S, Merker VL, et al. Patient-reported
outcomes in neurofibromatosis and schwannomatosis clin-
ical trials. Neurology 2013;81:S6–S14.

17. McClimans LM, Browne J. Choosing a patient-reported

outcome measure. Theor Med Bioeth 2011;32:47–60.

18. Miro J, Castarlenas E, Huguet A. Evidence for the use of
a numerical rating scale to assess the intensity of pediatric
pain. Eur J Pain 2009;13:1089–1095.

19. Martin S, Nelson Schmitt S, Wolters PL, et al. Develop-
ment and validation of the English pain interference index
and pain interference index-parent report. Pain Med 2015;
16:367–373.

20. Amtmann D, Cook KF, Jensen MP, et al. Development of
a PROMIS item bank to measure pain interference. Pain
2010;150:173–182.

21. Cleeland CS, Ryan KM. Pain assessment: global use of the
brief pain inventory. Ann Acad Med Singapore 1994;23:
129–138.

22. Holmstrom L, Kemani MK, Kanstrup M, Wicksell RK.
Evaluating the statistical properties of the pain interference
index in children and adolescents with chronic pain. J Dev
Behav Pediatr 2015;36:450–454.

23. Kemani M, Zetterqvist V, Kanstrup M, Wicksell R,
Holmström L. A validation of the pain interference index
in adults with longstanding pain. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
2016;60:250–258.

24. Bevans M, Ross A, Cella D. Patient-Reported Outcomes
Measurement Information System (PROMIS): efficient,
standardized tools to measure self-reported health and
quality of life. Nurs Outlook 2014;62:339–345.

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

S11

25. Rose M, Bjorner JB, Becker J, Fries JF, Ware JE. Evalu-
ation of a preliminary physical function item bank sup-
ported the expected advantages of the Patient-Reported
Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS).
J Clin Epidemiol 2008;61:17–33.

26. Broderick JE, Schneider S, Junghaenel DU, Schwartz JE,
Stone AA. Validity and reliability of patient-reported out-
comes measurement information system instruments in
osteoarthritis. Arthritis Care Res 2013;65:1625–1633.

27. DeWalt DA, Gross HE, Gipson DS, et al. PROMIS pedi-
atric self-report scales distinguish subgroups of children
within and across six common pediatric chronic health
conditions. Qual Life Res 2015;24:2195–2208.
Shahgholi L, Yost KJ, Kallmes DF. Correlation of the
National Institutes of Health patient reported outcomes
measurement information system scales and standard pain
and functional outcomes in spine augmentation. AJNR
Am J Neuroradiol 2012;33:2186–2190.

28.

29. Mulcahey MJ, Haley SM, Slavin MD, et al. Ability of
PROMIS pediatric measures to detect change in children
with cerebral palsy undergoing musculoskeletal surgery.
J Pediatr Orthop Epub 2015 Jun 5.

30. Varni JW, Thissen D, Stucky BD, et al. PROMIS(R)
Parent Proxy Report Scales: an item response theory anal-
ysis of the parent proxy report item banks. Qual Life Res
2012;21:1223–1240.

31. Bruce B, Fries JF. The Health Assessment Questionnaire

(HAQ). Clin Exp Rheumatol 2005;23:S14–S18.

32. Walker LS, Greene JW. The Functional Disability Inven-
tory: measuring a neglected dimension of child health sta-
tus. J Pediatr Psychol 1991;16:39–58.

33. DeWitt EM, Stucky BD, Thissen D, et al. Construction of
the eight-item patient-reported outcomes measurement infor-
mation system pediatric physical function scales: built using
item response theory. J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64:794–804.
Jensen RE, Potosky AL, Reeve BB, et al. Validation of the
PROMIS physical
function measures in a diverse US
population-based cohort of cancer patients. Qual Life
Res 2015;24:2333–2344.

34.

35. Varni JW, Magnus B, Stucky BD, et al. Psychometric
properties of the PROMIS (R) pediatric scales: precision,
stability, and comparison of different scoring and admin-
istration options. Qual Life Res 2014;23:1233–1243.

36. Rose M, Bjorner JB, Gandek B, Bruce B, Fries JF,
Ware JE Jr. The PROMIS Physical Function item bank
was calibrated to a standardized metric and shown to
improve measurement efficiency. J Clin Epidemiol 2014;
67:516–526.
Fries JF, Krishnan E, Rose M, Lingala B, Bruce B.
Improved responsiveness and reduced sample size require-
ments of PROMIS physical function scales with item
response theory. Arthritis Res Ther 2011;13:R147.

37.

38. Kratz AL, Slavin MD, Mulcahey MJ,

Jette AM,
Tulsky DS, Haley SM. An examination of
the
PROMIS(R) pediatric instruments to assess mobility
in children with cerebral palsy. Qual Life Res 2013;22:
2865–2876.
Palermo TM, Valenzuela D, Stork PP. A randomized trial
of electronic versus paper pain diaries in children: impact
on compliance, accuracy, and acceptability. Pain 2004;
107:213–219.
von Baeyer CL. Numerical rating scale for self-report of
pain intensity in children and adolescents: recent progress
and further questions. Eur J Pain 2009;13:1005–1007.

39.

40.

41. Castarlenas E, Miro J, Sanchez-Rodriguez E. Is the verbal
numerical rating scale a valid tool for assessing pain intensity
in children below 8 years of age? J Pain 2013;14:297–304.
42. Bailey B, Daoust R, Doyon-Trottier E, Dauphin-Pierre S,
Gravel J. Validation and properties of the verbal numeric
scale in children with acute pain. Pain 2010;149:216–221.
43. Good M, Stiller C, Zauszniewski JA, Anderson GC,
Stanton-Hicks M, Grass JA. Sensation and distress of pain
scales: reliability, validity, and sensitivity. J Nurs Meas
2001;9:219–238.

44. Varni JW, Thissen D, Stucky BD, et al. Item-level infor-
mant discrepancies between children and their parents on
the PROMIS pediatric scales. Qual Life Res 2015;24:
1921–1937.

S12

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Patient-reported outcomes of pain and physical functioning in neurofibromatosis

Pamela L. Wolters, Staci Martin, Vanessa L. Merker, et al. 

clinical trials

Neurology 

2016;87;S4-S12 

DOI 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002927

This information is current as of August 15, 2016

® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Neurology. All 
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.

Updated Information &
Services

including high resolution figures, can be found at:
http://n.neurology.org/content/87/7_Supplement_1/S4.full.html
 

Supplementary Material

References

Subspecialty Collections

Permissions & Licensing
  

Supplementary material can be found at: 
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2016/08/15/WNL.0000000000002
927.DC1
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2016/08/15/WNL.0000000000002
927.DC2

 

 

This article cites 42 articles, 2 of which you can access for free at: 
http://n.neurology.org/content/87/7_Supplement_1/S4.full.html##ref-lis
t-1
 

This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
following collection(s): 
All Pain
http://n.neurology.org//cgi/collection/all_pain
 
Clinical trials Methodology/study design
http://n.neurology.org//cgi/collection/clinical_trials_methodology_stud
y_design_
Neurofibromatosis
http://n.neurology.org//cgi/collection/neurofibromatosis
 
Outcome research
http://n.neurology.org//cgi/collection/outcome_research
 
Quality of life
http://n.neurology.org//cgi/collection/quality_of_life
 

 

Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures,tables) or in
its entirety can be found online at:
http://n.neurology.org/misc/about.xhtml#permissions

 

Reprints
  

Information about ordering reprints can be found online:
http://n.neurology.org/misc/addir.xhtml#reprintsus
 

® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Neurology. All 
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.

