Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

Review and recommendations

www.elsevier.com/locate/pain

Pharmacologic management of neuropathic pain:

Evidence-based recommendations

Robert H. Dworkin a,*, Alec B. O’Connor a, Miroslav Backonja b,

John T. Farrar c, Nanna B. Finnerup d, Troels S. Jensen d, Eija A. Kalso e,

John D. Loeser f, Christine Miaskowski g, Turo J. Nurmikko h,

Russell K. Portenoy i, Andrew S.C. Rice j,

Brett R. Stacey k, Rolf-Detlef Treede l, Dennis C. Turk f, Mark S. Wallace m

a University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA

b University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA

c University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

d Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark

e Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland

f University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

g University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA
h University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom
i Beth Israel Medical Center, New York, NY, USA
j Imperial College School, London, United Kingdom

k Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA

l Johannes Gutenberg Universita¨ t, Mainz, Germany
m University of California, San Diego, CA, USA

Received 4 February 2007; received in revised form 21 August 2007; accepted 23 August 2007

Abstract

Patients with neuropathic pain (NP) are challenging to manage and evidence-based clinical recommendations for phar-
macologic management are needed. Systematic literature reviews, randomized clinical trials, and existing guidelines were
evaluated at a consensus meeting. Medications were considered for recommendation if their eﬃcacy was supported by
at least one methodologically-sound, randomized clinical trial (RCT) demonstrating superiority to placebo or a relevant
comparison treatment. Recommendations were based on the amount and consistency of evidence, degree of eﬃcacy, safety,
and clinical experience of the authors. Available RCTs typically evaluated chronic NP of moderate to severe intensity.
Recommended ﬁrst-line treatments include certain antidepressants (i.e., tricyclic antidepressants and dual reuptake inhib-
itors of both serotonin and norepinephrine), calcium channel a2-d ligands (i.e., gabapentin and pregabalin), and topical
lidocaine. Opioid analgesics and tramadol are recommended as generally second-line treatments that can be considered
for ﬁrst-line use in select clinical circumstances. Other medications that would generally be used as third-line treatments
but that could also be used as second-line treatments in some circumstances include certain antiepileptic and antidepres-
sant medications, mexiletine, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists, and topical capsaicin. Medication selection should
be individualized, considering side eﬀects, potential beneﬁcial or deleterious eﬀects on comorbidities, and whether prompt
onset of pain relief is necessary. To date, no medications have demonstrated eﬃcacy in lumbosacral radiculopathy, which
is probably the most common type of NP. Long-term studies, head-to-head comparisons between medications, studies

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 585 275 3524; fax: +1 585 473 5007.
E-mail address: robert_dworkin@urmc.rochester.edu (R.H. Dworkin).

0304-3959/$32.00 Ó 2007 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pain.2007.08.033

238

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

involving combinations of medications, and RCTs examining treatment of central NP are lacking and should be a priority
for future research.
Ó 2007 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Neuropathic pain; Evidence-based recommendations; Pharmacologic management; Randomized clinical trials

1. Introduction

The International Association for the Study of Pain
(IASP) deﬁnes neuropathic pain (NP) as pain ‘‘initiated
or caused by a primary lesion or dysfunction in the ner-
vous system’’ [74]. It is estimated to aﬄict millions of
people worldwide, although precise ﬁgures are not avail-
able [7,9,12,44,102]. Many common diseases, injuries,
and interventions cause NP by producing lesions in
somatosensory pathways in the peripheral or central
nervous system.

The management of patients with chronic NP is com-
plex and response to existing treatments is often inade-
quate. Even with well-established NP medications,
eﬀectiveness is unpredictable, dosing can be compli-
cated, analgesic onset is delayed, and side eﬀects are
common. Evidence-based consensus treatment recom-
mendations exist [25], but additional medications have
become available since their publication [31]. Because
of gaps and controversies in the literature, considerable
interpretation of available evidence,
judgment, and
experience are required to develop treatment approaches
that can be used in clinical practice.

The objectives of this article are to: (1) brieﬂy review
the results of RCTs examining medications for the treat-
ment of NP; (2) present up-to-date, evidence-based
guidelines for the pharmacologic management of NP
that take into account clinical eﬃcacy, adverse eﬀects,
impact on health-related quality of life, convenience,
and costs; and (3) provide speciﬁc recommendations
for the use of these medications.

2. Methods

The consensus meeting on which these treatment recom-
mendations are based and the preparation of this article were
conducted under the auspices of the IASP Neuropathic Pain
Special Interest Group with additional support provided by
the Neuropathic Pain Institute, both of which have received
unrestricted support for their activities from multiple pharma-
ceutical companies. No individuals employed by pharmaceuti-
cal companies were involved in the consensus meeting on
which these recommendations are based or in the preparation
of this article. Prior to the consensus meeting, all participants
were provided with copies of existing treatment guidelines
[25,58], systematic reviews and meta-analyses, and recently
published RCTs. This literature and the authors’ clinical and
research experience were reviewed during the consensus meet-
ing. Systematic reviews and RCTs published after the meeting

were reviewed subsequently. The treatment recommendations
included in this article have been endorsed by the American
Pain Society, Canadian Pain Society, Finnish Pain Society,
Latinamerican Federation of IASP Chapters, and Mexican
Pain Society.

2.1. Search strategy and selection criteria

Relevant publications were identiﬁed through Medline
searches (1966–2007), examination of reference lists of relevant
published articles and book chapters, and personal knowledge
of the authors. Only studies of oral or topical pharmacother-
apy in adults were considered, and our recommendations do
not apply to the treatment of pediatric neuropathic pain.
The treatment of trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux), for
which there are distinct treatment recommendations [3,65],
was not considered. On the basis of recent recommendations
for the diagnosis of NP [115], conditions for which there is
no evidence of lesions aﬀecting nervous system somatosensory
pathways (e.g., ﬁbromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome) were
also not considered.

In evaluating the literature and developing recommenda-
tions, the Cochrane Database and other recent systematic
reviews were emphasized [27,31,33,50,53,68,100,109,119,129].
Eﬃcacy was considered to have been demonstrated if the
results of an RCT found statistically signiﬁcantly greater pain
reduction vs. placebo for the primary outcome measure [31]
and was evaluated according to the Oxford Centre for Evi-
dence-based Medicine levels of evidence [78]. All medications
with eﬃcacy supported by at least one systematic review or
positive placebo-controlled or dose-response RCT (levels of
evidence criterion 1b or better), [78] in which reduction of
chronic NP was a primary or co-primary endpoint were con-
sidered for inclusion. Published data, unpublished data (when
available), and the clinical experience of the authors were used
to evaluate each of these medications in terms of degree of eﬃ-
cacy, safety, tolerability, drug interactions, ease of use, and
impact on health-related quality of life.

Recommendations for ﬁrst-line treatments are consistent
with the results of multiple RCTs (Oxford Centre for Evi-
dence-based Medicine grade A recommendation),
[78] and
the clinical experience of the authors. Recommendations for
opioid analgesics and tramadol as generally second-line treat-
ments are consistent with the results of multiple RCTs (grade
A recommendation), the clinical experience of the authors, and
published guidelines and recommendations for their use. Rec-
ommendations for other medications that would generally be
used as third-line treatments but that could also be used as sec-
ond-line treatments in some circumstances are based on a sin-
gle positive RCT or inconsistent results from multiple trials
(grade B recommendation)
clinical
experience.

and the

authors’

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

239

3. General management considerations and
recommendations

Appropriate diagnosis and assessment are critical to
the successful treatment of NP. The diagnosis of NP
can often be challenging, diagnostic criteria are evolv-
ing, and NP commonly coexists with other types of pain
(e.g., low back pain associated with both radiculopathy
and musculoskeletal abnormalities). Assessment of NP
should focus on identifying and treating the underlying
disease processes and peripheral or central nervous sys-
tem lesions, response to prior therapies, and comorbid
conditions that can be aﬀected by therapy. Particular
attention should be paid to identifying coexisting
depression, anxiety,
sleep disturbances, and other
adverse impacts of NP on health-related quality of life
[56,75], and both pain and its adverse eﬀects should be
reassessed frequently. Patient education and support
are critical components of the successful management
of NP. Careful explanation of the cause of NP and the
treatment plan are essential. Patient and provider expec-
tations regarding treatment eﬀectiveness and tolerability
must be discussed, and realistic treatment goals should
be established with patients. Non-pharmacologic meth-
ods of coping with pain should be discussed, including
the importance of stress reduction, good sleep hygiene,
physical therapy, and other potentially useful interven-
tions. Additional information about the diagnosis of
NP and recommendations for its assessment can be
found elsewhere [20,25,47,85].

The majority of the RCTs of patients with NP have
examined either PHN or painful diabetic peripheral neu-
ropathy (DPN). Although the extent to which the results
of RCTs of one type of NP apply to other types is
unknown, the extrapolation of eﬃcacy from ﬁrst-line
medications that have demonstrated eﬃcacy in one or
more types of NP to other types of NP is reasonable
and often clinically necessary. Medications that have
demonstrated eﬃcacy in several diﬀerent NP conditions
may have the greatest probability of being eﬃcacious in
additional, as yet unstudied, conditions [46]. However, it
is possible that some types of NP respond diﬀerently to
treatment [3]. Although few clinical trials have been con-
ducted, no medications have demonstrated eﬃcacy in
patients with lumbosacral radiculopathy, which is prob-
ably the most common type of NP.

The methodology used in RCTs of NP varies, and
there are few head-to-head comparisons of diﬀerent
medications, making it diﬃcult to compare the relative
eﬃcacy and safety of many medications. Little is known
regarding the treatment response of patients with mild-
to-moderate NP because RCTs have typically evaluated
chronic NP of moderate to severe intensity. Moreover,
treatment duration has generally not exceeded three
months in the RCTs of any treatments for NP, and
knowledge of the long-term beneﬁts and risks of treat-

ment is therefore inadequate. Unfortunately, there is
insuﬃcient evidence to rank ﬁrst-line medications for
NP by their degree of eﬃcacy or safety. Given these lim-
itations, clinicians must consider several other factors
when selecting a speciﬁc medication for a patient with
NP, including: (1) the potential for adverse outcomes
associated with medication-related side eﬀects;
(2)
potential drug interactions; (3) comorbidities that may
also be relieved by the non-analgesic eﬀects of the med-
ication (e.g., sleep disturbance, depression, anxiety); (4)
costs associated with therapy; (5) the potential risks of
medication abuse; and (6) the risks of intentional and
unintentional overdose. These potentially competing
factors must be prioritized according to the speciﬁc
needs of each patient with NP.

Individual variation in the response to the medica-
tions used to treat NP is substantial and unpredictable.
Although evidence-based recommendations encourage
the use of speciﬁc medications, the overall approach
should be recognized as a stepwise process intended
to identify the medication, or medication combination,
that provides the greatest pain relief and fewest side
eﬀects for a given patient (Table 1). If an adequate trial
of one medication fails to adequately relieve pain or
causes intolerable side eﬀects, treatment should be dis-
continued and a diﬀerent medication should be selected
for a trial. If a medication is well tolerated and pro-
vides partial pain relief, it should be continued and a
second medication with a distinct mechanism of action
added.

In addition to potential additive analgesic beneﬁts,
combination therapy may provide analgesia more
quickly by combining a medication with a rapid onset
of eﬀect with one that requires several weeks of treat-
ment before maximum beneﬁt is achieved. These poten-
tial advantages of combination therapy must be weighed
against the possibility of additive adverse eﬀects, drug
interactions, increased cost, and reduced adherence to
a more complex treatment regimen. In one of the ﬁrst
RCTs of combination therapy in NP, gabapentin and
morphine in combination provided superior pain relief
to either medication alone and to placebo [36]. However,
a recent RCT evaluating nortriptyline, morphine, and
their combination in patients with chronic lumbar root
pain found no greater eﬃcacy with the combination
than with either medication alone or placebo [60].

4. First-line medications

Three medications or medication classes are recom-
mended as ﬁrst-line treatment for patients with NP
(grade A recommendation). Table 2 summarizes treat-
ment selection considerations. Prescribing information
for each of these medications – including starting dos-
age, titration requirements, target dosage, and duration
of an adequate trial – is provided in Table 3.

Table 1
Stepwise pharmacologic management of neuropathic pain (NP)

Step 1
Assess pain and establish the diagnosis of NP [25,20]; if uncertain about the diagnosis, refer to a pain specialist or neurologist
Establish and treat the cause of NP; if uncertain about availability of treatments addressing NP etiology, refer to appropriate specialist
Identify relevant comorbidities (e.g., cardiac, renal, or hepatic disease, depression, gait instability) that might be relieved or exacerbated by NP treatment, or that might

require dosage adjustment or additional monitoring of therapy

Explain the diagnosis and treatment plan to the patient, and establish realistic expectations

Step 2
Initiate therapy of the disease causing NP, if applicable
Initiate symptom treatment with one or more of the following:
• A secondary amine TCA (nortriptyline, desipramine) or an SSNRI (duloxetine, venlafaxine)
• A calcium channel a2-d ligand, either gabapentin or pregabalin
• For patients with localized peripheral NP: topical lidocaine used alone or in combination with one of the other ﬁrst-line therapies
• For patients with acute neuropathic pain, neuropathic cancer pain, or episodic exacerbations of severe pain, and when prompt pain relief during titration of a ﬁrst-line

medication to an eﬃcacious dosage is required, opioid analgesics or tramadol may be used alone or in combination with one of the ﬁrst-line therapies

Evaluate patient for non-pharmacologic treatments, and initiate if appropriate

Step 3
Reassess pain and health-related quality of life frequently
If substantial pain relief (e.g., average pain reduced to 63/10) and tolerable side eﬀects, continue treatment
If partial pain relief (e.g., average pain remains P4/10) after an adequate trial (see Table 3), add one of the other ﬁrst-line medications
If no or inadequate pain relief (e.g., < 30% reduction) at target dosage after an adequate trial (see Table 3), switch to an alternative ﬁrst-line medication

Step 4
If trials of ﬁrst-line medications alone and in combination fail, consider second- and third-line medications or referral to a pain specialist or multidisciplinary pain center

TCA, tricyclic antidepressant; SSNRI, selective serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor.

2
4
0

.

R
H

.

D
w
o
r
k
i
n

e
t

a
l
.

/

P
a
i
n

1
3
2

(
2
0
0
7
)

2
3
7
–
2
5
1

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

241

Table 2
Treatment selection considerations for ﬁrst-line medications and for opioid agonists

Medication class

Therapeutic
indexa

Major side
eﬀects

Precautions

Other beneﬁts

Costb

Secondary amine TCAs
Nortriptyline, desipramine
(use a tertiary amine
TCA only if a secondary amine
TCA is not available)

+

Sedation, dry
mouth,
blurred vision,
weight gain,
urinary retention

Cardiac disease,
glaucoma, suicide risk,
seizure disorder,
concomitant use
of tramadol

SSNRIs
Duloxetinec

++

Nausea

Venlafaxine

+

Nausea

Hepatic dysfunction,
renal insuﬃciency,
alcohol abuse,
concomitant use
of tramadol
Concomitant use
of tramadol, cardiac
disease, withdrawal
syndrome with abrupt
discontinuation

Calcium channel a2-d ligands
Gabapentin

Pregabalinc

++

++

Sedation, dizziness,
peripheral edema

Renal insuﬃciency

Sedation, dizziness,
peripheral edema

Renal insuﬃciency

Topical lidocaine

++

Local erythema, rash

None

Opioid agonistsd
Morphine, oxycodone, methadone,
levorphanol

Tramadol

+

+

Nausea/vomiting,
constipation,
drowsiness, dizziness

Nausea/vomiting,
constipation,
drowsiness, dizziness
seizures

History of substance
abuse, suicide risk,
driving impairment
during treatment initiation
History of substance abuse,
suicide risk, driving
impairment during
treatment initiation, seizure
disorder, concomitant use
of SSRI, SSNRI, TCA

Improvement
of depression,
improvement
of insomnia

Improvement
of depression

$

$$

Improvement
of depression

$/$$

$/$$

$$

Improvement
of sleep disturbance,
no clinically
signiﬁcant drug
interactions
Improvement
of sleep disturbance,
improvement
of anxiety,
no clinically
signiﬁcant drug
interactions

No systemic
side eﬀects

Rapid onset
of analgesic
beneﬁt

Rapid onset
of analgesic
beneﬁt

$$ (patch)
$ (gel)

$/$$

$/$$

TCA, tricyclic antidepressants; SSNRI, selective serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor.

a Refers to the likelihood of pain relief relative to the likelihood of side eﬀects, with ‘‘++’’ being more favorable.
b Cost varies by region but is estimated on the basis of availability and cost of generic formulations, with ‘‘$$’’ being relatively more expensive.
c Lack long-term clinical experience and safety data because new to market.
d First-line only in certain circumstances; see text.

4.1. Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and selective
serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
(SSNRIs)

Systematic reviews have consistently concluded that
placebo-controlled trials have provided support for the
eﬃcacy of TCAs in the treatment of patients with NP,
especially PHN and painful DPN [31,50,100,109]. A
substantial percentage of patients do not respond

favorably to treatment with TCAs, as is also true of
the other medications recommended for the treatment
of NP, with no more than 40–60% of patients obtain-
ing partial relief of their pain. TCAs have not diﬀered
signiﬁcantly from placebo in RCTs of patients with
HIV neuropathy [62,105],
spinal cord injury [15],
cisplatin neuropathy [45], neuropathic cancer pain
[73], phantom limb pain [91], and chronic lumbar root
pain [60].

242

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

Table 3
Prescribing recommendations for ﬁrst-line medications and for opioid agonists

Medication class

Starting dosage

Titration

Secondary amine TCAs
Nortriptyline, desipraminea
(use a tertiary amine TCA only
if a secondary amine TCA is not
available)

25 mg at bedtime

Increase by 25 mg
daily every 3–7 days
as tolerated

Maximum
dosage

150 mg daily;
if blood level
of active medication
and its metabolite
is below 100 ng/ml
(mg/ml), continue titration
with caution

Duration
of adequate
trial

6–8 weeks
with at least
2 weeks at
maximum
tolerated
dosage

SSNRIs
Duloxetine

Venlafaxine

Calcium channel a2-d ligands
Gabapentina

30 mg once daily

37.5 mg once
or twice daily

Increase to 60 mg once
daily after one week
Increase by 75 mg
each week

60 mg twice daily

4 weeks

225 mg daily

4–6 weeks

100–300 mg at bedtime
or 100–300 mg three
times daily

Increase by 100–300 mg
three times daily every
1–7 days as tolerated

3600 mg daily (1200 mg
three times daily); reduce
if impaired renal function

3–8 weeks
for titration
plus 2 weeks
at maximum
dosage
4 weeks

Pregabalina

50 mg tid or 75 mg bid

Increase to 300 mg daily
after 3–7 days, then
by 150 mg/d every
3–7 days
as tolerated

600 mg daily (200 mg
three times or 300 mg
twice daily); reduce
if impaired renal function

Topical lidocaine
5% lidocaine patch

Maximum of 3 patches
daily for a maximum of 12 h

None needed

Opioid agonistsb
Morphine, oxycodone, methadone,
levorphanola

10–15 mg morphine every
4 h or as needed
(equianalgesic
dosages should be used for
other opioid analgesics)

After 1–2 weeks, convert
total daily dosage
to long-acting opioid
analgesic and continue
short-acting medication as
needed

Tramadolc

50 mg once or twice daily

Increase by 50–100 mg
daily in divided doses every
3–7 days as tolerated

Maximum of 3 patches
daily for a maximum
of 12–18 h

3 weeks

No maximum dosage
with careful titration;
consider evaluation
by pain specialist
at relatively high
dosages (e.g., 120–180 mg
morphine daily;
equianalgesic dosages
should be used
for other opioid analgesics)
400 mg daily (100 mg four
times daily); in patients
older than 75, 300 mg daily

4–6 weeks

4 weeks

TCA, tricyclic antidepressants; SSNRI, selective serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor.

a Consider lower starting dosages and slower titration in geriatric patients.
b First-line only in certain circumstances; see text.
c Consider lower starting dosages and slower titration in geriatric patients; dosages given are for short-acting formulation.

TCAs are typically inexpensive and usually adminis-
tered once daily. The presence of depression is not
required for the analgesic eﬀects of these medications
[69], although they may be particularly useful in patients
with inadequately treated depression. The most com-
mon side eﬀects of TCAs include sedation, anticholiner-
gic eﬀects (e.g., dry mouth, constipation, and urinary
retention), and orthostatic hypotension. Secondary
amine TCAs
(nortriptyline and desipramine) are

preferred because they are better tolerated than tertiary
amine TCAs (amitriptyline and imipramine) but have
comparable analgesic eﬃcacy [70,98,126]. Amitriptyline
in particular should be avoided in elderly patients.

The decision to start a TCA should also consider the
possibility of cardiac toxicity. Nortriptyline was associ-
ated with sinus tachycardia and increased ventricular
ectopy in an RCT that examined patients with a history
of depression and ischemic heart disease
[92].

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

243

An increased risk of myocardial infarction with TCAs
compared to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) has been reported [19], but subsequent, larger
studies did not conﬁrm this ﬁnding [51,113]. Finally, a
large, retrospective cohort analysis found an increased
risk of sudden cardiac death at dosages of 100 mg/day
or higher [86].

Taken together, these data suggest that the lowest
eﬀective dosage of a TCA should be used in all patients
with NP, and that TCAs should be avoided in patients
who have ischemic heart disease or an increased risk
of sudden cardiac death. A screening electrocardiogram
(ECG) is recommended before beginning treatment with
TCAs in patients over 40 years of age [25]. TCAs should
be used cautiously in patients at risk for suicide or acci-
dental death from overdose. They can cause or exacer-
bate cognitive impairment and gait disturbances in
elderly patients, and may predispose to falls. Toxic
if TCAs are administered
TCA levels may result
together with medications
inhibit cytochrome
P450 2D6, such as SSRIs.

that

Starting doses of TCAs should be low, and the dos-
age should be titrated slowly until pain is adequately
controlled or side eﬀects limit continued titration (Table
3). Although monitoring medication levels is not usually
necessary, it may reduce the risk of cardiac toxicity at
dosages greater than 150 mg/day.

Duloxetine is an SSNRI that inhibits the reuptake of
both serotonin and norepinephrine. It has demonstrated
signiﬁcantly greater pain relief compared with placebo
in three RCTs
in patients with painful DPN
[38,82,128], but it has not been studied in other types
of NP. Although duloxetine is also an eﬃcacious antide-
pressant and anxiolytic, these eﬀects do not account for
its analgesic beneﬁts in painful DPN [38]. Safety and
eﬀectiveness have also been demonstrated in open-label
treatment of patients with painful DPN extending over
52 weeks
showed modest
increases in fasting plasma glucose in the patients with
DPN [49] but no clinically meaningful ECG changes rel-
ative to placebo in depressed patients [116].

[83], and meta-analyses

Duloxetine has a generally favorable side eﬀect pro-
ﬁle and dosing is simple. Nausea is the most common
side eﬀect, but it occurs less frequently if treatment is ini-
tiated at 30 mg/day and titrated after one week to
60 mg/day [23], an eﬃcacious dosage at which pain relief
can occur within one week (Table 3). In RCTs in painful
DPN, 60 mg once daily appears to be as eﬃcacious as
60 mg twice daily and is associated with fewer side
eﬀects. As a new medication, there is limited long-term
safety information and eﬃcacy data are limited to stud-
ies of painful DPN.

Venlafaxine is an SSNRI that inhibits serotonin reup-
take at lower dosages and both serotonin and norepi-
nephrine reuptake at higher dosages. RCTs in patients
with painful DPN [96] and painful polyneuropathies of

various types including DPN [108] demonstrated eﬃ-
cacy at dosages of 150–225 mg/day. RCTs in other pop-
ulations,
including those with post-mastectomy pain
[112], various peripheral and central NP conditions
[133], and PHN [42], demonstrated inconsistent or neg-
ative results. Two of these trials used lower dosages of
venlafaxine [112,133], which may account for some of
the diﬀerences in eﬃcacy.

In one RCT, 5% of venlafaxine-treated patients
developed ECG changes [96], and monitoring is there-
fore recommended in patients with cardiovascular risk
factors. Venlafaxine is available in both short- and
long-acting formulations. Two-to-four weeks is often
required to titrate to an eﬀective dosage, and patients
should be tapered gradually from venlafaxine because
of the risk of discontinuation syndrome (Table 3) [29].

4.2. Calcium channel a2-d ligands

Gabapentin and pregabalin both bind to the a2-d
subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels, decreasing
the release of glutamate, norepinephrine, and substance
P [114]. Pain reduction has been greater with gabapentin
than with placebo in RCTs of PHN, painful DPN,
phantom limb pain, diverse peripheral NP conditions,
Guillain-Barre´
syndrome, neuropathic cancer pain,
and acute and chronic
cord injury pain
[4,10,14,39,64,79,87,97,104,111]. In some RCTs, treat-
ment with gabapentin was also associated with improve-
ment in sleep and various components of mood and
health-related quality of life. Negative trials of gabapen-
tin include an unpublished study in painful DPN [5] and
recent studies of complex regional pain syndrome, type I
[121], painful HIV neuropathy [43], chronic phantom
and residual limb pain [110], and chemotherapy-induced
neuropathy [132].

spinal

Gabapentin is generally safe, has no clinically impor-
tant drug interactions, and is available in generic formu-
lations. The main dose-limiting side
eﬀects are
somnolence and dizziness, which are reduced by gradual
dosage titration, and peripheral edema.
In some
patients, particularly the elderly, gabapentin can cause
or exacerbate cognitive or gait impairment.

Several weeks can be required to reach an eﬀective
dosage, which is usually between 1800 and 3600 mg/
day (administered in three divided doses,
increasing
the night-time dose preferentially). Dosage reduction is
necessary in patients with renal insuﬃciency. The onset
of activity can be seen as early as the second week of
therapy when titration is rapid, but peak eﬀect usually
occurs approximately two weeks after a therapeutic dos-
age is achieved. Therefore, an adequate trial may require
two months or more (Table 3).

Pregabalin has demonstrated eﬃcacy in three RCTs
in PHN [26,101,122], in three RCTs in painful DPN
[63,93,89], and in one RCT that enrolled patients with

244

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

either of these types of NP [32]. An RCT in patients with
spinal cord injury neuropathic pain also demonstrated
greater pain relief with pregabalin than with placebo
[106]. An unpublished trial in patients with DPN also
showed evidence of eﬃcacy, but in two unpublished tri-
als, pregabalin did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly from placebo
in patients with PHN and with DPN [24].

Pregabalin produces dose-dependent side eﬀects sim-
ilar to those of gabapentin. It has also demonstrated
anxiolytic eﬀects in RCTs of generalized anxiety disor-
der [76,90], which may provide additional beneﬁt in
patients with chronic pain. Like gabapentin, it has no
clinically important drug interactions but requires dos-
age reduction in patients with renal impairment. Studies
indicate that treatment can be initiated at 150 mg/day
(in either two or three divided doses), although a start-
ing dose of 75 mg at bedtime is used by some clinicians
to reduce the likelihood of early side eﬀects in elderly
patients and in others especially prone to side eﬀects
(Table 3). The potential for twice daily dosing and the
linear pharmacokinetics of pregabalin may contribute
to relatively greater ease of use compared with gabapen-
tin, but the overall eﬃcacy and tolerability of these two
medications appear similar. However, onset of pain
relief with pregabalin can be more rapid than with gaba-
pentin because its starting dosage of 150 mg/day is eﬃ-
cacious [26]. Upward dosage titration can reach 300 mg/
day within one to two weeks, and the maximum beneﬁts
typically occur after two weeks of treatment at target
dosages of 300–600 mg/day. Because it is a new medica-
tion, long-term safety of pregabalin is not as well estab-
lished as it is for gabapentin.

4.3. Topical lidocaine

RCTs have demonstrated signiﬁcantly greater pain
relief with lidocaine patch 5% than with vehicle-con-
trolled patches in patients with PHN and allodynia
[34,95] and in patients with diverse peripheral NP condi-
tions and allodynia [72], including a subgroup without
PHN [71]. As a topical preparation, it is recommended
for patients with localized peripheral NP but not for
patients with central NP.

When used as recommended, the only side eﬀects that
occur with the lidocaine patch 5% are mild skin reac-
tions (e.g., erythema and localized rash). Blood levels
are minimal with the approved maximum dosing of
three patches/day applied for 12 h and also when four
patches/day are applied for 18 h [35]. Nonetheless, use
of the lidocaine patch 5% should be avoided in patients
receiving oral Class I antiarrhythmic medications (e.g.,
mexiletine) and in patients with severe hepatic dysfunc-
tion, in whom excessive blood concentrations are theo-
retically possible.

The eﬃcacy of lidocaine gel was demonstrated in
in

patients with PHN and allodynia [94], but not

patients with HIV neuropathy [28]. Because of its safety
and ease of use, lidocaine gel can be considered when the
lidocaine patch 5% is not available, application of a
patch is problematic, or the cost of the lidocaine patch
5% precludes its use.

5. Second-line medications that can be used for ﬁrst-line
treatment in select clinical circumstances

Opioid analgesics and tramadol have demonstrated
eﬃcacy in multiple RCTs in patients with NP, and when
patients do not have a satisfactory response to the ﬁrst-
line medications alone or in combination, opioid ago-
nists can be used as second-line treatment alone or in
combination with the ﬁrst-line medications (grade A
recommendation).

In select clinical circumstances, opioid analgesics and
tramadol can also be considered for ﬁrst-line use (Table 4).
These circumstances include when prompt pain relief
during titration of a ﬁrst-line medication to an eﬃca-
cious dosage is required, and for episodic exacerbations
of severe pain, acute neuropathic pain, and neuropathic
cancer pain.

5.1. Opioid analgesics

Oral opioid analgesics have demonstrated eﬃcacy in
RCTs ranging from eight days to eight weeks in dura-
tion in patients with a variety of peripheral and central
NP conditions, including painful DPN, PHN, and phan-
tom limb pain [37,54,77,80,99,124,125]; however, mor-
phine did not diﬀer from placebo in a recent RCT for
chronic nerve root pain [60]. These trials have examined
diﬀerent opioids, including oxycodone, morphine, meth-
adone, and levorphanol. The magnitude of pain reduc-
tion associated with opioid analgesics is at least as
great as that obtained with other treatments for NP
[27,31,36,80].

Although opioid analgesics have demonstrated eﬃ-
cacy in multiple RCTs in patients with NP, they are gen-
erally considered a second-line treatment for several
reasons. First,
in head-to-head comparisons, opioids
have produced side eﬀects more frequently than TCAs
[60,80] and gabapentin [36], and some of these side
eﬀects can persist
long-term treatment
[127]. Second, the long-term safety of opioid treatment
has not been systematically studied [27,33], and evidence

throughout

Table 4
Circumstances in which opioid analgesics and tramadol can be
considered for ﬁrst-line treatment of neuropathic pain

During titration of a ﬁrst-line medication to an eﬃcacious dosage for

prompt pain relief

Episodic exacerbations of severe pain
Acute neuropathic pain
Neuropathic cancer pain

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

245

that long-term opioid use is associated with the develop-
ment of
immunologic changes and hypogonadism
[21,81,120] suggests that clinicians should not be guided
by the assumption that safety is intrinsically better for
opioids than other medications. Third, experimental
data suggest that opioid treatment can be associated
with hyperalgesia [2,16,17,131]; like tolerance, opioid-
induced hyperalgesia could potentially alter the risk-
beneﬁt ratio of long-term therapy in patients with vari-
ous types of acute and chronic pain. There are no studies
of opioid-induced hyperalgesia in patients with chronic
NP, however, and future studies must evaluate the clin-
ical signiﬁcance of this phenomenon and also systemat-
ically distinguish opioid-induced hyperalgesia from
tolerance [2,17] and from exacerbation of the underlying
pain condition.

Finally, the results of recent studies using a variety of
methods and patient samples have provided estimates of
the frequency of opioid analgesic misuse or addiction
that range widely from less than 5% to as much as
50% [1,6,52,55,66,67]. Although the risk that opioid
analgesics will be misused or abused has not been deter-
mined for patients with chronic NP, these recent esti-
mates
ignored when initiating opioid
treatment. Recent recommendations have emphasized
the need for clinical skills in risk assessment and man-
agement as a prerequisite to safe and eﬀective opioid
prescribing [6,52,59].

cannot be

Because of these problematic aspects of opioid treat-
ment, and given the eﬃcacy of the ﬁrst-line medications
discussed above, treatment of chronic NP with opioid
agonists should generally be reserved for patients who
have failed to respond to or cannot tolerate the ﬁrst-line
medications. This recommendation is consistent with
published guidelines for the use of opioids in chronic
non-cancer pain that have been prepared by various
groups [52]. Of existing medications with eﬃcacy in
NP, however, opioid analgesics may be most likely to
provide prompt pain relief. For this reason, and because
of their established eﬃcacy in NP, opioids can be con-
sidered for ﬁrst-line use in select clinical circumstances
(see Table 4). Typically, such ﬁrst-line use of opioids
should be reserved for circumstances in which suitable
alternatives cannot be identiﬁed and should be on a
short-term basis to the extent possible.

Before initiating treatment with opioid analgesics,
clinicians should identify and address risk factors for
abuse, which include active substance abuse, prior his-
tory of opioid or other drug abuse, other major psychi-
atric pathology, and family history of substance abuse
[6,52,135]. Response to treatment, side eﬀects, and
signs of opioid misuse or abuse should be monitored
on a regular basis, as has been described in guidelines
for
pain
[6,52,57,58,117]. It is recommended that clinicians with-
out opioid expertise obtain consultation from appropri-

non-cancer

chronic

opioid

use

in

ate specialists in developing a treatment plan for
challenging patients.

The most common opioid-related side eﬀects are nau-
sea, constipation, and sedation [27,33]. Although nausea
and sedation typically decrease after several weeks of
treatment, constipation may not; it usually requires con-
current management, especially in the elderly or other
groups with risk factors for this problem. Opioids
should be used cautiously in patients at risk for suicide
or accidental death from overdose. In elderly patients,
opioids can also cause or exacerbate cognitive impair-
ment and gait disturbances, increasing the risk of falls.
In contrast to abuse or addiction, physical dependence
develops in all patients chronically treated with opioid
analgesics, and patients must be advised that
they
should not discontinue these medications on their own.
The eﬀective opioid dosage varies widely among
patients, and either of two strategies for the initiation
of treatment can be used depending on the speciﬁc clin-
ical circumstances. For opioid-naı¨ve patients, treatment
can be initiated with an oral immediate-release opioid at
a dose equivalent to 10–15 mg of morphine every 4 h or
on an as needed basis, with conversion to a long-acting
opioid after a few days, when the approximate daily dos-
age has been identiﬁed (Table 3). Treatment can also be
initiated with a long-acting opioid (e.g., extended-release
oral morphine or oxycodone, or transdermal fentanyl).
Fixed-schedule dosing with a long-acting opioid is gen-
erally preferred, although RCTs in patients with NP
are needed to compare the eﬃcacy and safety of short-
vs. long-acting opioids. Titration should continue until
satisfactory pain relief is achieved or unacceptable side
eﬀects persist despite attempts to improve tolerability
(e.g.,
laxatives for constipation). Treatment with a
short-acting opioid on an as needed basis may be appro-
priate to continue in selected patients with NP who have
episodes of markedly increased pain; until the role of
such ‘‘rescue’’ treatment has been more adequately char-
acterized for patients with NP, treatment approaches
used for patients with other types of chronic pain,
including cancer pain, can be followed [57,58,117]. As
with all of the medications recommended for NP, the
lowest eﬀective dosages of opioid analgesics should be
used. If an adequate trial of therapy has not produced
clinically meaningful pain relief, patients should be
tapered oﬀ their opioid analgesic and an alternative
treatment administered.

5.2. Tramadol

Tramadol is a weak l-opioid agonist that also inhibits
the reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin. The results
of RCTs in patients with PHN, painful DPN, painful
polyneuropathies of diﬀerent etiologies, and post-
amputation pain demonstrated that tramadol reduced
pain and improved some aspects of health-related quality

246

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

of life [11,48,53,107,130]. As with opioids, tramadol is
associated with abuse potential; although rates of
tramadol abuse have remained very low despite new
branded and generic formulations [18], some recent
reports suggest that the rate of recreational tramadol
use may be rising [134].

The most common side eﬀects of tramadol are som-
nolence, constipation, dizziness, nausea, and orthostatic
hypotension, which occur more frequently with rapid
dosage escalation. Tramadol can cause or exacerbate
cognitive impairment and gait disturbances in elderly
patients. It can also precipitate seizures in patients with
a history of seizures or in those receiving medications
that reduce seizure threshold. Concurrent use of other
serotonergic medications (including SSRIs and SSNRIs)
may increase the risk of serotonin syndrome, and com-
bination therapy with these medications must be under-
taken cautiously.

Tramadol may be somewhat less eﬃcacious than
stronger opioid analgesics in patients with NP [31]. As
for opioid analgesics, tramadol is recommended primar-
ily for patients who have not responded to the ﬁrst-line
medications but it can also be considered for ﬁrst-line
use in select clinical circumstances (Table 4). Tramadol
is available in both short- and long-acting formulations;
for the short-acting formulation, the starting dosage is
50 mg once or twice daily, with gradual titration to a
maximum of 400 mg/day. Dosage reduction is necessary
in patients with renal or hepatic disease and in the
elderly (Table 3).

6. Generally third-line medications

There are a number of other medications that would
generally be used as third-line treatments but that could
also be used as second-line treatments in some circum-
stances (e.g., when treatment with an opioid agonist is
not indicated or when the patient’s treatment history
suggests greater potential for their eﬀectiveness). These
medications – for which there is substantially less evi-
dence of eﬃcacy than exists for TCAs, SSNRIs, calcium
channel a2-d ligands, topical lidocaine, opioid analge-
sics, and tramadol – include certain other antiepileptic
(carbamazepine,
topira-
mate, valproic acid) and antidepressant (bupropion,
citalopram, paroxetine) medications, mexiletine, N-
methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists, and
topical capsaicin. Recommendations for their use are
based on eﬃcacy in a single RCT or inconsistent results
from multiple RCTs and the clinical experience of the
authors (grade B recommendation).

lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine,

6.1. Antiepileptic medications

results in RCTs of other types of neuropathic pain
[31]. These studies generally had limited methodological
quality. Three positive trials of valproic acid in painful
DPN or PHN were reported from a single center but
an RCT conducted in patients with painful polyneurop-
athies by a diﬀerent research group was negative [31].

In several relatively small RCTs, lamotrigine showed
evidence of eﬃcacy in several types of NP or in sub-
groups of patients with these conditions [31]. However,
intention-to-treat analyses were negative in three large
recent RCTs,
two of which were in painful DPN
[40,123]. Slow titration from a low initial dosage is
required with lamotrigine to reduce the risk of poten-
tially serious cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions.

Three placebo-controlled RCTs have been published
of oxcarbazepine in patients with painful DPN, one of
which was positive [22], but two of which were negative
[8,41]. In patients with painful DPN, topiramate showed
eﬃcacy in one RCT [84] but not in three others [118],
and its eﬃcacy was equivocal in a trial of chronic lum-
bar radicular pain [61]. Based on the results of these
studies of ﬁrst- and second-generation antiepileptic med-
ications, carbamazepine,
lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine,
topiramate, and valproic acid can be considered options
for patients who have not responded to the ﬁrst- and
second-line medications.

6.2. Antidepressant medications

The SSRIs citalopram and paroxetine showed limited
evidence of eﬃcacy in RCTs in painful DPN but ﬂuox-
etine did not [31]. Bupropion, which inhibits the reup-
take of norepinephrine and dopamine, was eﬃcacious
in various peripheral and central NP conditions [31].
Based on the results of these trials, bupropion, citalo-
pram, and paroxetine are options for patients who have
not responded to an adequate trial of a TCA or SSNRI
when additional treatment with a medication with anal-
gesic and antidepressant eﬀects is being considered.

6.3. Mexiletine, NMDA receptor antagonists, and topical
capsaicin

Mexiletine is an orally administered lidocaine ana-
logue, and RCTs in patients with painful DPN and
other types of NP have shown either modest beneﬁts
or no diﬀerences compared to placebo [31,119]. When
evidence of eﬃcacy was found in these trials, it was at
higher dosages, which are often poorly tolerated because
of side eﬀects.

and memantine

block

Dextromethorphan

the
NMDA receptor. A few early RCTs showed evidence
of eﬃcacy, but later trials have provided limited or no
evidence of eﬃcacy [31].

In contrast to its established eﬃcacy in trigeminal
carbamazepine has yielded inconsistent

neuralgia,

The results of RCTs that compared topical capsaicin
with placebo in patients with painful DPN, PHN, and

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

247

post-mastectomy pain have been inconsistent [31,68].
Interpretation of eﬃcacy is problematic in these studies
because the burning associated with capsaicin use may
have compromised blinding in the trials in which superi-
ority to placebo was found.

7. Additional recommendations for central NP

long-term follow-up data,

Based on the results of a small number of RCTs
[30,31,88], the following speciﬁc medications should be
considered for patients with central NP: TCAs for cen-
tral post-stroke pain; calcium channel a2-d ligands for
spinal cord injury pain; and cannabinoids for NP asso-
ciated with multiple sclerosis (grade B recommenda-
tion). Lack of
limited
availability, and concerns over precipitating psychosis
or schizophrenia, especially in individuals with environ-
mental or genetic risk factors [103], restrict the use of
cannabinoids to second-line therapy for patients with
multiple sclerosis NP at present, and additional trials
are needed to further establish their eﬃcacy and safety.
Many patients with central NP either do not have one
of these diagnoses or require alternative therapy. In
these situations, the ﬁrst- and second-line medications
recommended for peripheral NP can be considered for
the treatment of central NP (except for topical lido-
caine). However, it must be acknowledged that the evi-
dence base for such treatment is limited.

8. Conclusions

TCAs, SSNRIs, calcium channel a2-d ligands, and
topical lidocaine have demonstrated eﬃcacy in NP and
are recommended as ﬁrst-line medications. In patients
who have failed to respond to these ﬁrst-line medications
alone and in combination, opioid analgesics or tramadol
can be used as a second-line treatment alone or in com-
bination with one of the ﬁrst-line medications. Opioid
analgesics and tramadol can also be considered for
ﬁrst-line use in select clinical circumstances (Table 4).

Patients who have not responded adequately to these
medications used alone and in combination can be trea-
ted with one or more other recommended medications.
For patients who have not responded adequately to
pharmacologic management or those who have pain
that is associated with challenging comorbidities or with
a high level of disability or distress, prompt consultation
with a pain specialist or multidisciplinary pain manage-
ment center is recommended, including consideration of
a broad array of non-pharmacologic therapies and inva-
sive treatments.

It is important to emphasize that pharmacologic
management of the patient with chronic NP should be
considered an integral component of a more comprehen-
sive approach that also includes non-pharmacologic
treatments. Non-pharmacologic treatments
for NP

require increased attention and evaluation in controlled
trials in which they are administered alone and also in
combination with pharmacologic therapies.

Existing pharmacologic treatments for NP are lim-
ited, with no more than 40–60% of patients obtaining
partial relief of their pain. Continued development of
new medications for NP, additional trials involving
existing medications alone and in combination to iden-
tify characteristics of treatment responders, identiﬁca-
tion of eﬃcacious non-pharmacologic treatments for
NP, and the development of strategies to prevent NP
are therefore needed to advance the management of
NP [13]. The management of NP is expected to rapidly
evolve because of ongoing translational studies, and
these evidence-based management
recommendations
should be updated within ﬁve years.

Financial disclosure

Support for the consensus meeting on which this arti-
cle is based was provided by the IASP Neuropathic Pain
Special Interest Group and by the Neuropathic Pain
Institute, both of which have received unrestricted sup-
port for their activities from multiple pharmaceutical
companies. All authors received an honorarium for par-
ticipation in the consensus meeting from the University
of Rochester Oﬃce of Professional Education. RHD has
received research support, consulting fees, or honoraria
in the past year from Allergan, Balboa, CombinatoRx,
Dara, Eli Lilly, Endo, EpiCept, Fralex, GlaxoSmithK-
line, GW Pharmaceuticals, Johnson & Johnson, KAI
Pharmaceuticals, Merck, NeurogesX (also
stock
options), Ono, Organon, Pﬁzer, Supernus, US Food
and Drug Administration, US National Institute of
Health, US Veterans Administration, Wyeth, and XTL
Biopharmaceuticals. ABO has received research support
from Endo and the Mayday Fund, and is the recipient of
an institutional
award (T32
AG020493-02) from the National Institute on Aging.
MB has received research support, consulting fees, or
honoraria in the past year from Allergan, Astellas,
Cephalon, Dov, Eli Lilly, Eisia, Endo, Johnson & John-
son, Merck, NeurogesX, Novartis, Pﬁzer, Schwarz, and
Xenoport. JTF has received research support, consult-
ing fees, or honoraria in the past year from Abbott,
Adolor, Allergan, Celgene, Cephalon, Eli Lilly, GW
Pharmaceuticals, Ortho McNeil, Pﬁzer, Philadelphia
Health Care Trust, Purdue, and UCB Pharma. NBF
has received research support or honoraria in the past
year from Neurosearch A/S and UCB Nordic. TSJ has
received research support, consulting fees, or honoraria
in the past year from Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, John-
son & Johnson, Lundbeck Research Foundation, and
Pﬁzer. JDL has received a grant from Purdue and hon-
oraria from Endo, Medtronic, Pﬁzer, and US National
Institute of Health. TJN has received research support,

career development

248

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

consulting fees, or honoraria in the past year from Eli
Lilly, GW Pharmaceuticals, Medtronic, Pain Relief
Foundation, Pﬁzer, Schwarz, UCB Pharma, and UK
Department of Health. RKP has received research sup-
port, consulting fees, or honoraria in the past year from
Abbott, Ametek, Bayer, Biovail, Cephalon, Cytogel,
Endo, Forest, GlaxoSmithKline, GW Pharmaceuticals,
Janssen, King, Ligand, Medgenex, Merck, Mylan,
Neuromed, Organon, Ortho McNeil, Painceptor, Pﬁzer,
Pharmos, Progenics, Sarentis, Solvay, UCB Pharma,
Wex, and Xenon. ASCR has received research support,
consulting fees, honoraria, or travel expenses in the past
two years from Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eisai, Eli
Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Ono Pharma, Orga-
non, Pﬁzer, Sanoﬁ Pasteur/MSD, Solvay, Spinifex, Tro-
phus, and UCB Pharma. BRS has received research
support, consulting fees, or honoraria from Celgene,
DepoMed, Eli Lilly, and Pﬁzer. RDT has received
research support, consulting fees, or honoraria from
Allergan, Boehringer
Ingelheim, Bundesministerium
fu¨ r Bildung und Forschung, Deutsche Forschungsgeme-
inschaft, GlaxoSmithKline, Gru¨nenthal, Merck Sharpe
& Dohme, Pﬁzer, Schwarz, and US National Institute
of Health. DCT has received consulting fees or hono-
raria in the past year from Abbott, Alpharma, Astra-
Zeneca, Celgene, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, PriCara/
Ortho-McNeil, Schwarz, and Wyeth.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank Paul J. Lambiase and Mary Glei-
chauf for their invaluable assistance coordinating the
consensus meeting.

References

[1] Adams EH, Breiner S, Cicero TJ, Geller A, Inciardi JA, Schnoll
SH, et al. A comparison of the abuse liability of tramadol,
NSAIDs, and hydrocodone in patients with chronic pain. J Pain
Symptom Manage 2006;31:465–76.

[2] Angst MS, Clark JD. Opioid-induced hyperalgesia: a qualitative

systematic review. Anesthesiology 2006;104:570–87.

[3] Attal N, Cruccu G, Haanpa¨a¨ M, Hansson P, Jensen TS,
Nurmikko T, et al. EFNS guidelines on pharmacological treat-
ment of neuropathic pain. Eur J Neurol 2006;13:1153–69.

[4] Backonja M, Beydoun A, Edwards KR, Schwartz SL, Fonseca
V, Hes M, et al. Gabapentin for the symptomatic treatment of
painful neuropathy in patients with diabetes mellitus. JAMA
1998;280:1831–6.

[5] Backonja M, Glanzman RL. Gabapentin dosing for neuropathic
pain: evidence from randomized, placebo-controlled clinical
trials. Clin Ther 2003;25:81–104.

[6] Ballantyne JC, LaForge KS. Opioid dependence and addiction
during opioid treatment of chronic pain. Pain 2007;129:235–55.
[7] Bennett GJ. Neuropathic pain: an overview. In: Borsook D,
editor. Molecular neurobiology of pain. Seattle, WA: IASP
Press; 1997. p. 109–13.

[8] Beydoun A, Shaibani A, Hopwood M, Wan Y. Oxcarbazepine in
painful diabetic neuropathy: results of a dose-ranging study.
Acta Neurol Scand 2006;113:395–404.

[9] Bond M, Breivik H, Jensen TS, Scholten W, Soyannwo O,
Treede RD. Pain associated with neurological disorders. In:
Aarli JA, Dua T, Janca A, Muscetta A, editors. Neurological
disorders: public health challenges. Geneva: World Health
Organization Press; 2006. p. 127–39.

[10] Bone M, Critchley P, Buggy DJ. Gabapentin in postamputation
phantom limb pain: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled,
Pain Med
2002;27:481–6.

study. Reg Anesth

cross-over

[11] Boureau F, Legallicier P, Kabir-Ahmadi M. Tramadol in post-
herpetic neuralgia: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial. Pain 2003;104:323–31.

[12] Bowsher D. The lifetime occurrence of herpes zoster and
prevalence of postherpetic neuralgia: a retrospective survey in
an elderly population. Eur J Pain 1999;3:335–42.

[13] Campbell JN, Basbaum AI, Dray A, Dubner R, Dworkin RH,
Sang CN, editors. Emerging strategies for the treatment of
neuropathic pain. Seattle: IASP Press; 2006.

[14] Caraceni A, Zecca E, Bonezzi C, Arcuri E, Tur RY, Maltoni M,
et al. Gabapentin for neuropathic cancer pain: a randomized
controlled trial from the gabapentin cancer pain study group. J
Clin Oncol 2004;22:2909–17.

[15] Cardenas DD, Warms CA, Turner JA, Marshall H, Brooke
MM, Loeser JD. Eﬃcacy of amitriptyline for relief of pain in
spinal cord injury: results of a randomized controlled trial. Pain
2002;96:365–73.

[16] Chang G, Chen L, Mao J. Opioid tolerance and hyperalgesia.

Med Clin North Am 2007;91:199–211.

[17] Chu LF, Clark DJ, Angst MS. Opioid tolerance and hyperalgesia
in chronic pain patients after one month of oral morphine
therapy: a preliminary prospective study. J Pain 2006;7:43–8.

[18] Cicero TJ, Inciardi JA, Adams EH, Geller A, Senay EC, Woody
GE, et al. Rates of abuse of tramadol remain unchanged with
the introduction of new branded and generic products: results of
an abuse monitoring system, 1994–2004. Pharmacoepidemiol
Drug Saf 2005;14:851–9.

[19] Cohen HW, Gibson G, Alderman MH. Excess risk of myocar-
dial infarction in patients treated with antidepressant medica-
tions: association with use of
tricyclic agents. Am J Med
2000;108:2–8.

[20] Cruccu G, Anand P, Attal N, Garcia-Larrea L, Haanpa¨a¨ M,
Jorum E, et al. EFNS guidelines on neuropathic pain assess-
ment. Eur J Neurol 2004;11:153–62.

[21] Daniell HW. Hypogonadism in men consuming sustained-action

oral opioids. J Pain 2002;3:377–84.

[22] Dogra S, Beydoun S, Mazzola J, Hopwood M, Wan Y.
Oxcarbazepine in painful diabetic neuropathy: a randomized,
placebo-controlled study. Eur J Pain 2005;9:543–54.

[23] Dunner DL, Wohlreich MM, Mallinckrodt CH, Watkin JG,
Fava M. Clinical consequences of initial duloxetine dosing
strategies: comparison of 30 and 60 mg QD starting doses. Curr
Ther Res 2005;66:522–40.

[24] Dworkin RH. The eﬃcacy of second-generation anticonvulsants
in neuropathic pain. Presented at the 8th international confer-
ence on the mechanisms and treatment of neuropathic pain. San
Francisco, 2005.

[25] Dworkin RH, Backonja M, Rowbotham MC, Allen RR, Argoﬀ
CR, Bennett GJ, et al. Advances in neuropathic pain: diagnosis,
mechanisms, and treatment recommendations. Arch Neurol
2003;60:1524–34.

[26] Dworkin RH, Corbin AE, Young Jr JP, Sharma U, LaMoreaux
L, Bockbrader H, et al. Pregabalin for the treatment of
postherpetic neuralgia: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial.
Neurology 2003;60:1274–83.

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

249

[27] Eisenberg E, McNichol ED, Carr DB. Eﬃcacy and safety of
opioid agonists in the treatment of neuropathic pain of nonma-
lignant origin: systematic review and meta-analysis of random-
ized controlled trials. JAMA 2005;293:3043–52.

[28] Estanislao L, Carter K, McArthur J, Olney R, Simpson D. A
randomized controlled trial of 5% lidocaine gel
for HIV-
associated distal symmetric polyneuropathy. J Acquir Immune
Deﬁc Syndr 2004;37:1584–6.

[29] Fava M, Mulroy R, Alpert J, Nierenberg AA, Rosenbaum JF.
Emergence of adverse events
following discontinuation of
treatment with extended-release venlafaxine. Am J Psychiatry
1997;154:1760–2.

[30] Finnerup NB, Jensen TS. Spinal cord injury pain: mechanisms

and treatment. Eur J Neurol 2004;11:73–82.

[31] Finnerup NB, Otto M, Jensen TS, Sindrup SH. Algorithm for
neuropathic pain treatment: an evidence based proposal. Pain
2005;118:289–305.

[32] Freynhagen R, Strojek K, Griesing T, Whalen E, Balkenohl M.
Eﬃcacy of pregabalin in neuropathic pain evaluated in a 12-
week, randomised, double-blind, multicentre, placebo-controlled
trial of ﬂexible- and ﬁxed-dose regimens. Pain 2005;115:254–63.
[33] Furlan AD, Sandoval JA, Mailis-Gagnon A, Tunks E. Opioids
for chronic noncancer pain: a meta-analysis of eﬀectiveness and
side eﬀects. CMAJ 2006;174:1589–94.

[34] Galer BS, Rowbotham MC, Perander J, Friedman E. Topical
lidocaine patch relieves postherpetic neuralgia more eﬀectively
than a vehicle topical patch: results of an enriched enrollment
study. Pain 1999;80:533–8.

[35] Gammaitoni AR, Davis MW. Pharmacokinetics and tolerability
of lidocaine patch 5% with extended dosing. Ann Pharmacother
2002;36:236–40.

[36] Gilron I, Bailey JM, Tu D, Holden RR, Weaver DF, Houlden
RL. Morphine, gabapentin, or their combination for neuropathic
pain. N Engl J Med 2005;352:1324–34.

[37] Gimbel JS, Richards P, Portenoy RK. Controlled-release oxy-
codone for pain in diabetic neuropathy: a randomized controlled
trial. Neurology 2003;60:927–34.

[38] Goldstein DJ, Lu Y, Detke MJ, Lee TC, Iyengar S. Duloxetine
vs. placebo in patients with painful diabetic neuropathy. Pain
2005;116:109–18.

[39] Gorson KC, Schott C, Herman R, Ropper AH, Rand WM.
Gabapentin in the treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy: a
placebo-controlled, double-blind, crossover trial. J Neurol Neu-
rosurg Psychiatry 1999;66:251–2.

[40] Grainger J, Hammer A, Blum D, Silver M, Quessy S. Double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial of add-on lamotrigine in patients
with neuropathic pain and inadequate relief with gabapentin,
TCAs or non-narcotic analgesics. J Pain 2006;7:S34.

[41] Grosskopf J, Mazzola J, Wan Y, Hopwood M. A randomized,
placebo-controlled study of oxcarbazepine in painful diabetic
neuropathy. Acta Neurol Scand 2006;114:177–80.

[42] Grothe DR, Scheckner B, Albano D. Treatment of pain

syndromes with venlafaxine. Pharmacotherapy 2004;24:621–9.

[43] Hahn K, Arendt G, Braun JS, von Giesen H-J, Husstedt IW,
Maschke M, et al. A placebo-controlled trial of gabapentin for
painful HIV-associated
J Neurol
2004;251:1260–6.

sensory neuropathies.

[44] Hall GC, Carroll D, Parry D, McQuay HJ. Epidemiology and
treatment of neuropathic pain: the UK primary care perspective.
Pain 2006;122:156–62.

[45] Hammack JE, Michalak JC, Loprinzi CL, Sloan JA, Novotny
PJ, Soori GS, et al. Phase III evaluation of nortriptyline for
alleviation of symptoms of cis-platinum-induced peripheral
neuropathy. Pain 2002;98:195–203.

[46] Hansson PT, Dickenson AH. Pharmacological treatment of
peripheral neuropathic conditions based on shared commonal-
ities despite multiple etiologies. Pain 2005;113:251–4.

[47] Hansson PT, Fields HL, Hill RG, Marchettini P, editors.
Neuropathic pain: pathophysiology and treatment. Seattle,
WA: IASP Press; 2001.

[48] Harati Y, Gooch C, Swenson M, Edelman S, Greene D, Raskin
P, et al. Double-blind randomized trial of tramadol for the
treatment of
the pain of diabetic neuropathy. Neurology
1998;50:1842–6.

[49] Hardy T, Sachson R, Shen S, Armbruster M, Boulton AJM.
Does treatment with duloxetine for neuropathic pain impact
glycemic control? Diabetes Care 2007;30:21–6.

[50] Hempenstall K, Nurmikko TJ, Johnson RW, A’Hern RP, Rice
ASC. Analgesic therapy in postherpetic neuralgia: a quantitative
systematic review. PLoS Med 2005;2:628–44.

[51] Hippisley-Cox J, Pringle M, Hammersley V, Crown N, Wynn
A, Meal A, et al. Antidepressants as risk factor for ischaemic
heart disease:
study in primary care. BMJ
2001;323:666–9.

case-control

[52] Højsted J, Sjøgren P. Addiction to opioids in chronic pain

patients: a literature review. Eur J Pain 2007;11:490–518.

[53] Hollingshead J, Du¨hmke RM, Cornblath DR. Tramadol for
neuropathic pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005. [Art. No.:
CD003726].

[54] Huse E, Larbig W, Flor H, Birbaumer N. The eﬀect of opioids
reorganization. Pain

on phantom limb pain and cortical
2001;90:47–55.

[55] Ives TJ, Chelminski PR, Hammett-Stabler CA, Malone RM,
Perhac JS, Potisek NM, et al. Predictors of opioid misuse in
patients with chronic pain: prospective cohort study. BMC
Health Serv Res 2006;6:46.

[56] Jensen MP, Chodroﬀ MJ, Dworkin RH. The impact of neuro-
pathic pain on health-related quality of life: review and impli-
cations. Neurology 2007;68:1178–82.

[57] Jovey RD, Ennis J, Gardner-Nix J, Goldman B, Hays H,
Lynch M, et al. Use of opioid analgesics for the treatment of
chronic noncancer pain: a consensus statement and guidelines
from the Canadian Pain Society, 2002. Pain Res Manage
2003;8:3A–14A.

[58] Kalso E, Allan L, Dellemijn PLI, Faura CC, Ilias WK, Jensen
TS, et al. Recommendations for using opioids in chronic non-
cancer pain. Eur J Pain 2003;7:381–6.

[59] Katz NP, Adams EH, Benneyan JC, Birnbaum HG, Budman
SH, Buzzeo RW, et al. Foundations of opioid risk management.
Clin J Pain 2007;23:103–18.

[60] Khoromi S, Cui L, Nackers L, Max MB. Morphine, nortripty-
line and their combination vs. placebo in patients with chronic
lumbar root pain. Pain 2007;130:65–75.

[61] Khoromi S, Patsalides A, Parada S, Salehi V, Meegan JM, Max
MB. Topiramate in chronic lumbar radicular pain. J Pain
2005;6:829–36.

[62] Kieburtz K, Simpson D, Yiannoutsos C, Max MB, Hall CD,
Ellis RJ, et al. A randomized trial of amitriptyline and mexil-
etine for painful neuropathy in HIV infection. Neurology
1998;51:1682–8.

[63] Lesser H, Sharma U, LaMoreaux L, Poole RM. Pregabalin
relieves symptoms of painful diabetic neuropathy. Neurology
2004;63:2104–10.

[64] Levendog˘lu F, Og˘u¨ n CO¨ , O¨ zerbil O¨ , O¨ g˘u¨n TC, Ug˘urlu H.
Gabapentin is a ﬁrst line drug for the treatment of neuropathic
pain in spinal cord injury. Spine 2004;29:743–51.

[65] Loeser JD. Cranial neuralgias. In: Loeser JD, Butler SD,
Chapman CR, Turk DC, editors. Bonica’s management of
pain. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2001. p.
855–66.

[66] Manchikanti L, Cash KA, Damron KS, Manchukonda R,
Pampati V, McManus CD. Controlled substance abuse and illicit
drug use in chronic pain patients: an evaluation of multiple
variables. Pain Physician 2006;9:215–25.

250

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

[67] Martell BA, O’Connor PG, Kerns RD, Becker WC, Morales
KH, Kosten TR, et al. Opioid treatment for chronic back pain:
prevalence, eﬃcacy, and association with addiction. Ann Intern
Med 2007;146:116–27.

[68] Mason L, Moore RA, Derry S, Edwards JE, McQuay HJ.
Systematic review of topical capsaicin for the treatment of
chronic pain. BMJ 2004;328:991–4.

[69] Max MB, Culnane M, Schafer SC, Gracely RH, Walther DJ,
Smoller B, et al. Amitriptyline relieves diabetic neuropathy pain
in patients with normal or depressed mood. Neurology
1987;37:589–96.

[70] Max MB, Lynch SA, Muir J, Shoaf SE, Smoller B, Dubner R.
Eﬀects of desipramine, amitriptyline, and ﬂuoxetine on pain in
diabetic neuropathy. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1250–6.

[71] Meier T, Faust M, Hu¨ ppe M, Schmucker P. Reduktion
chronischer Schmerzen bei nichtpostherpetischen peripheren
Neuropathien nach topischer Behandlung mit Lidocainpﬂaster.
Schmerz 2004;18:172–8.

[72] Meier T, Wasner G, Faust M, Kuntzer T, Ochsner F, Hueppe M,
et al. Eﬃcacy of lidocaine patch 5% in the treatment of focal
peripheral neuropathic pain syndromes: a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled study. Pain 2003;106:151–8.

[73] Mercadante S, Arcuri E, Tirelli W, Villari P, Casuccio A.
Amitriptyline in neuropathic cancer pain in patients on morphine
therapy: a randomized placebo-controlled, double-blind cross-
over study. Tumori 2002;88:239–42.

[74] Merskey H, Bogduk N. Classiﬁcation of chronic pain: descrip-
tions of chronic pain syndromes and deﬁnitions of pain terms.
2nd ed. Seattle: IASP Press; 1994. [p. 212].

[75] Meyer-Rosberg K, Kvarnstro¨ m A, Kinnman E, Gordh T,
Nordfors LO, Kristoﬀerson A. Peripheral neuropathic pain:
a multidimensional
J Pain
2001;5:379–89.

patients. Eur

burden for

[76] Montgomery SA, Tobias K, Zornberg GL, Kasper S, Pande AC.
Eﬃcacy and safety of pregabalin in the treatment of generalized
anxiety disorder: a 6-week, multicenter, randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled comparison of pregabalin and venla-
faxine. J Clin Psychiatry 2006;67:771–82.

[77] Morley JS, Bridson J, Nash TP, Miles JB, White S, Makin MK.
Low-dose methadone has an analgesic eﬀect in neuropathic pain:
a double-blind randomized controlled crossover trial. Palliat
Med 2003;17:576–87.

[78] Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine. Levels of evidence
recommendation. <www.cebm.net/levels_of_

and grades of
evidence.asp>, [accessed 01.09.06].

[79] Pandey CK, Bose N, Garg G, Singh N, Baronia A, Agarwal A,
et al. Gabapentin for the treatment of pain in Guillain-Barre´
syndrome: a double-blinded, placebo-controlled,
crossover
study. Anesth Analg 2002;95:1719–23.

[80] Raja SN, Haythornthwaite JA, Pappagallo M, Clark MR,
Travison TG, Sabeen S, et al. Opioids versus antidepressants in
postherpetic neuralgia: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial.
Neurology 2002;59:1015–21.

[81] Rajagopal A, Vassilopoulou-Sellin R, Palmer JL, Kaur G,
Bruera E. Symptomatic hypogonadism in male survivors of
cancer with
to morphine. Cancer
2004;100:851–8.

exposure

chronic

[82] Raskin J, Pritchett YL, Wang F, D’Souza DN, Waninger AL,
Iyengar S, et al. A double-blind, randomized multicenter trial
comparing duloxetine with placebo in the management of
diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain. Pain Med 2005;6:346–56.
[83] Raskin J, Smith TR, Wong K, Pritchett YL, D’Souza DN,
Iyengar S, et al. Duloxetine versus routine care in the long-term
management of diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain. J Palliat
Med 2006;9:29–40.

[84] Raskin P, Donofrio PD, Rosenthal NR, Hewitt DJ, Jordan DM,
Xiang J, et al. Topiramate vs placebo in painful diabetic

neuropathy:
2004;63:865–73.

analgesic

and metabolic

eﬀects. Neurology

[85] Rasmussen PV, Sindrup SH, Jensen TS, Bach FW. Symptoms
and signs in patients with suspected neuropathic pain. Pain
2004;100:461–9.

[86] Ray WA, Meredith S, Thapa BP, Hall K, Murray KT. Cyclic
antidepressants and the risk of sudden cardiac death. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2004;75:234–41.

[87] Rice ASC, Maton S. Gabapentin in postherpetic neuralgia: a
randomised, double blind, placebo controlled study. Pain
2001;94:215–24.

[88] Rice ASC, Lever IJ, Zarnegar R. Cannabinoids and analgesia,
with special reference to neuropathic pain. In: McQuay HJ,
Kalso E, Moore RA, editors. Systematic reviews and meta-
analyses in pain. Seattle: IASP Press; in press.

[89] Richter RW, Portenoy R, Sharma U, Lamoreaux L, Bockbrader
H, Knapp LE. Relief of painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy
with pregabalin: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Pain
2005;6:253–60.

[90] Rickels K, Pollack MH, Feltner DE, Lydiard RB, Zimbroﬀ DL,
Bielski RJ, et al. Pregabalin for treatment of generalized anxiety
disorder: a 4-week, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial of pregabalin and alprazolam. Arch Gen Psychiatry
2005;62:1022–30.

[91] Robinson LR, Czerniecki JM, Ehde DM, Edwards WT, Judish
DA, Goldberg ML, et al. Trial of amitriptyline for relief of pain
in amputees: results of a randomized controlled study. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil 2004;85:1–6.

[92] Roose SP, Laghrissi-Thode F, Kennedy JS, Nelson JC, Bigger
JT, Pollock BG, et al. Comparison of paroxetine and nortrip-
tyline in depressed patients with ischemic heart disease. JAMA
1998;279:287–91.

[93] Rosenstock J, Tuchman M, LaMoreaux L, Sharma U.
Pregabalin for the treatment of painful diabetic peripheral
neuropathy: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Pain
2004;110:628–38.

[94] Rowbotham MC, Davies PS, Fields HL. Topical lidocaine gel

relieves postherpetic neuralgia. Ann Neurol 1995;37:246–53.

[95] Rowbotham MC, Davies PS, Verkempinck C, Galer BS.
Lidocaine patch: double-blind controlled study of a new treat-
ment method for post-herpetic neuralgia. Pain 1996;65:39–44.

[96] Rowbotham MC, Goli V, Kunz NR, Lei D. Venlafaxine
extended release in the treatment of painful diabetic neuropathy:
a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Pain 2004;100:
697–706.

[97] Rowbotham MC, Harden N, Stacey B, Bernstein P, Magnus-
Miller L. Gabapentin for the treatment postherpetic neuralgia: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1998;280:1837–42.

[98] Rowbotham MC, Reisner LA, Davies PS, Fields HL. Treatment
response in antidepressant-naı¨ve postherpetic neuralgia patients:
double-blind, randomized trial. J Pain 2005;6:741–6.

[99] Rowbotham MC, Twilling L, Davies PS, Reisner L, Taylor K,
Mohr D. Oral opioid therapy for chronic peripheral and central
neuropathic pain. N Engl J Med 2003;348:1223–32.

[100] Saarto T, Wiﬀen PJ. Antidepressants for neuropathic pain.

Cochrane Database of Syst Rev 2005. [Art. No.: CD005454].

[101] Sabatowski R, Galvez R, Cherry DA, Jacquot F, Vincent E,
Maisonobe P, et al. Pregabalin reduces pain and improved sleep
and mood disturbances in patients with postherpetic neuralgia:
results of a randomised, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Pain
2004;109:26–35.

[102] Schmader KE. The epidemiology and impact on quality of life of
postherpetic neuralgia and painful diabetic neuropathy. Clin J
Pain 2002;18:350–4.

[103] Semple DM, McIntosh AM, Lawrie SM. Cannabis as a risk
factor for psychosis: systematic review. J Psychopharmacol
2005;19:187–94.

R.H. Dworkin et al. / Pain 132 (2007) 237–251

251

[104] Serpell MG. Gabapentin in neuropathic pain syndromes: a
trial. Pain

placebo-controlled

double-blind,

randomized,
2002;99:557–66.

[105] Shlay JC, Chaloner K, Max MB, Flaws B, Reichelderfer P,
Wentworth D, et al. Acupuncture and amitriptyline for pain due
to HIV-related peripheral neuropathy: a randomized controlled
trial. JAMA 1998;280:1590–5.

[106] Siddall PJ, Cousins MJ, Otte A, Griesing T, Chambers R,
Murphy TK. Pregabalin in central neuropathic pain associated
with spinal cord injury: a placebo-controlled trial. Neurology
2006;67:1792–800.

[107] Sindrup SH, Andersen G, Madsen C, Smith T, Brøsen K, Jensen
TS. Tramadol relieves pain and allodynia in polyneuropathy: a
randomised, double-blind, controlled trial. Pain 1999;83:85–90.
[108] Sindrup SH, Bach FW, Madsen C, Gram LF, Jensen TS.
Venlafaxine versus imipramine in painful polyneuropathy: a
randomized, controlled trial. Neurology 2003;60:1284–9.

[109] Sindrup SH, Otto M, Finnerup NB, Jensen TS. Antidepressants
in the treatment of neuropathic pain. Basic Clin Pharmacol
Toxicol 2005;96:399–409.

[110] Smith DG, Ehde DM, Hanley MA, Campbell KM, Jensen MP,
Hoﬀman AJ, et al. Eﬃcacy of gabapentin in treating chronic
phantom limb and residual
limb pain. J Rehabil Res Dev
2005;42:645–54.

[111] Tai Q, Kirshblum S, Chen B, Millis S, Johnston M, DeLisa JA.
Gabapentin in the treatment of neuropathic pain after spinal
cord injury: a prospective, randomized double-blind, crossover
trial. J Spinal Cord Med 2002;25:100–5.

[112] Tasmuth T, Hartel B, Kalso E. Venlafaxine in neuropathic
J Pain

cancer. Eur

pain following treatment of breast
2002;6:17–24.

[113] Tata LJ, West J, Smith C, Farrington P, Card T, Smeeth L, et al.
General population based study of the impact of tricyclic and
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants on the risk
of acute myocardial, infarction. Heart 2005;91:465–71.

[114] Taylor CP. The biology and pharmacology of calcium channel

a2-d proteins. CNS Drug Rev 2004;10:183–8.

[115] Treede R-D, Jensen TS, Campbell JN, Cruccu G, Dostrovsky
JO, Griﬃn JW, et al. Neuropathic pain: redeﬁnition and a
grading system for clinical and research purposes. Neurology
2007; in press.

[116] Thase ME, Tran PV, Wiltse C, Pangallo BA, Mallinckrodt C,
Detke MJ. Cardiovascular proﬁle of duloxetine, a dual reuptake
inhibitor of serotonin and norepinephrine. J Clin Psychopharm
2005;25:132–40.

[117] The Pain Society. Recommendations for the appropriate use of
opioids for persistent non-cancer pain: a consensus statement
prepared on behalf of the Pain Society, the Royal College of
Anaesthetists, the Royal College of General Practitioners and the
Royal College of Psychiatrists. March 2004. <www.britishpain
society.org/opioids_doc_2004.pdf>, [accessed 16.05.06].

[118] Thienel U, Neto W, Schwabe SK, Vijapurkar U. Topiramate in
painful diabetic polyneuropathy: ﬁndings from three double-
blind
Scand
2004;110:221–31.

trials. Acta Neurol

placebo-controlled

[119] Tremont-Lukats IW, Challapalli V, McNichol ED, Lau J, Carr
DB. Systemic administration of local anesthetic agents to relieve
neuropathic pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Anesth
Analg 2005;101:1738–49.

[120] Vallejo R, de Leon-Casasola O, Benyamin R. Opioid therapy
and immunosuppression: a review. Am J Ther 2004;11:354–65.
[121] van de Vusse AC, Stomp-van den Berg SGM, Kessels AHF,
Weber WEJ. Randomised controlled trial of gabapentin in
Complex Regional pain Syndrome type I. BMC Neurol
2004;4:13. doi:10.1186/1471-2377-4-13.

[122] van Seventer R, Feister HA, Young Jr JP, Stoker M, Versavel M,
Rigaudy L. Eﬃcacy and tolerability of twice-daily pregabalin for
treating pain and related sleep interference in postherpetic
neuralgia: a 13-week, randomized trial. Curr Med Res Opin
2006;22:375–84.

[123] Vinik AI, Tuchman M, Saﬁrstein B, Corder C, Kirby L, Wilks
K, et al. Lamotrigine for treatment of pain associated with
diabetic neuropathy: results of two randomized double-blind,
placebo-controlled studies. Pain 2007;128:169–79.

[124] Watson CPN, Babul N. Eﬃcacy of oxycodone in neuropathic
pain: a randomized trial in postherpetic neuralgia. Neurology
1998;50:1837–41.

[125] Watson CPN, Moulin D, Watt-Watson J, Gordon A, Eisenhoﬀer
J. Controlled-release oxycodone relieves neuropathic pain: a
randomized controlled trial in painful diabetic neuropathy. Pain
2003;105:71–8.

[126] Watson CPN, Vernich L, Chipman M, Reed K. Nortriptyline
versus amitriptyline in postherpetic neuralgia: a randomized
trial. Neurology 1998;51:1166–71.

[127] Watson CPN, Watt-Watson JH, Chipman ML. Chronic non-
cancer pain and the long term utility of opioids. Pain Res
Manage 2004;9:19–24.

[128] Wernicke JF, Pritchett YL, D’Souza DN, Waninger A, Tran P,
Iyengar S, et al. A randomized controlled trial of duloxetine in
diabetic
Neurology
2006;67:1411–20.

neuropathic

peripheral

pain.

[129] Wiﬀen P, Collins S, McQuay H, Carroll D, Jadad A, Moore A.
Anticonvulsant drugs for acute and chronic pain. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2006. [Art. No.: CD001133].

[130] Wilder-Smith CH, Hill LT, Laurent S. Postamputation pain and
sensory changes in treatment-naive patients: characteristics and
responses to treatment with tramadol, amitriptyline, and pla-
cebo. Anesthesiology 2005;103:619–28.

[131] Wilder-Smith OHG, Arendt-Nielsen L. Postoperative analgesia:
relevance. Anesthesiology

importance

and

clinical

its
2006;104:601–7.

[132] Wong GY, Michalak JC, Sloan JA, Mailliard JA, Nikcevich DA,
Novotny PJ, et al. A Phase III double-blinded, placebo
controlled, randomized trial of gabapentin in patients with
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy: a North Central
Cancer treatment Group study. Presented at the American
Society of Clinical Oncology, Orlando, Florida, May 2005.

[133] Yucel A, Ozyalcin S, Talu GK, Kiziltan E, Yucel B, Andersen
OK, et al. The eﬀect of venlafaxine on ongoing and experimen-
tally induced pain in neuropathic pain patients: a double blind,
placebo controlled study. Eur J Pain 2005;9:407–16.

[134] Zacny JP. Proﬁling the subjective, psychomotor, and physiolog-
ical eﬀects of tramadol in recreational drug users. Drug Alcohol
Depend 2005;80:273–8.

[135] Zacny J, Bigelow G, Compton P, Foley K, Iguchi M, Sannerud
C. College on problems of drug dependence taskforce on
prescription opioid non-medical use and abuse: position state-
ment. Drug Alcohol Depend 2003;69:215–32.

