Toxicologic Pathology

http://tpx.sagepub.com/
 

The EMEA Guideline on First-in-Human Clinical Trials and Its Impact on Pharmaceutical Development

Toxicol Pathol

Mark N. Milton and Christopher J. Horvath
 2009 37: 363 originally published online 26 February 2009

DOI: 10.1177/0192623309332997

The online version of this article can be found at:

http://tpx.sagepub.com/content/37/3/363
 

Published by:

 
http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:

 
Society of Toxicologic Pathology

Additional services and information for 

Toxicologic Pathology

 can be found at:

Email Alerts: 

 
http://tpx.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts

Subscriptions: 

 
http://tpx.sagepub.com/subscriptions

Reprints: 

 
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav

Permissions: 

 
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav

>> 

Version of Record 

- Apr 20, 2009

OnlineFirst Version of Record
 

- Feb 26, 2009

What is This?
 

Downloaded from 

tpx.sagepub.com

 by guest on July 11, 2013

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Toxicologic Pathology, 37: 363-371, 2009
Copyright # 2009 by The Author(s)
ISSN: 0192-6233 print / 1533-1601 online
DOI: 10.1177/0192623309332997

The EMEA Guideline on First-in-Human Clinical Trials and Its

Impact on Pharmaceutical Development

MARK N. MILTON

1

AND CHRISTOPHER J. HORVATH

2

1Tempo Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA

2Taligen Therapeutics, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA

INTRODUCTION

the first

time. Severe,

On March 13, 2006, TGN1412, a monoclonal antibody, was
administered to humans for
life-
threatening toxicities ensued. The science behind these adverse
events and the immediate responses to this event have been
described in another article (Horvath and Milton 2009). The
TeGenero incident was a wake-up call to the pharmaceutical
industry, the clinical trials community, and the regulatory
agencies. The incident was investigated thoroughly by several
different groups, including the Expert Group on Phase One
Clinical Trials (chaired by Professor Gordon Duff), the Royal
Statistical Society, and the Early Stage Clinical Trial Task-
force. Each of these groups issued reports that summarized the
causes of the adverse events and proposed ways that such
adverse events could be avoided in future first-in-human (FIH)
studies (Expert Group on Phase One Clinical Trials 2006; Med-
icines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency [MHRA]
2006; Early Stage Clinical Trial Taskforce 2007; Senn et al.
2007; Royal Statistical Society 2007). At the same time as
these reports were being created, the Committee for Medicinal
Products for Human Use (CHMP) of the European Medicines
Agency (EMEA) was working on creating a guideline on

Mark Milton is currently affiliated with Novartis Biologics, Cambridge,

Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Address correspondence to: Mark Milton at mnmilt@gmail.com.
Abbreviations: ABPI, Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry;
BIA, BioIndustry Association; CHMP, Committee for Medicinal Products
for Human Use; CMC, Chemistry, Manufacturing & Controls; CPMP,
Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products; CTA, Clinical Trials
Authorization; CTX, Clinical Trials Exemption; DMARD, disease modifying
antirheumatic drug; DMPK, drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics; EMEA,
European Medicines Agency; EU, European Union; FAHMP, Federal
Agency for Medicines and Health Products; FDA, Food and Drug
Administration; FIH, first-in-human; GAD, L-glutamic acid decarboxylase;
GLP, good laboratory practice; HED, human equivalent dose; ICH, Interna-
tional Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registra-
tion of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use; IMP,
investigational medicinal
product; IND, investigational new drug; LAD, leukocyte adhesion deficiency;
MABEL, minimum achievable biological effect level; MHRA, Medicines and
Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency; MOA, mechanism of action; MRSD,
maximum recommended starting dose; NCE, new chemical entity; NHV, nor-
mal healthy volunteer; NOAEL, no observed adverse effect (dose) level; PAD,
pharmacologically active dose; PK, pharmacokinetics; PD, pharmacody-
namics; SWP, Safety Working Party; SSD, safe starting dose.

363

strategies to identify and mitigate risks for FIH clinical trials
with investigational medicinal products.

THE CREATION OF THE EMEA GUIDELINE

In January 2007, there was an announcement that a guide-
line on ‘‘Requirements for First-in-Man Clinical Trials for
Potential High-Risk Medicinal Products’’ would be created,
and approximately six months later, the guideline was finalized
(EMEA 2007c, 2007d). The draft guideline was released for
consultation on March 22, 2007, with the end of the consulta-
tion period (the deadline for comments) being May 23, 2007.
Comments on the draft guideline were received from over
fifty-eight different organizations, companies, and institutes.
The summarized comments on the draft guideline and the
CHMP’s response to these comments are all available on the
EMEA’s Web site, as is the original draft guideline (EMEA
2008). This transparency is in contrast to the FDA’s practice
of removing draft versions from the Web page after finaliza-
tion. The FDA also does not provide the responses to the com-
ments that the interested parties have submitted to the docket.
Obtaining the submitted comments from the FDA Web site is
feasible but not easily achieved. The EMEA then hosted a
workshop on the draft version of the guideline on June 12,
2007 (EMEA 2007a). The workshop covered background
information on the TGN1412 case, the details of the draft
guideline, and the comments that were provided on the draft
guideline. Breakout sessions that covered the major areas of
the draft guideline were also held. The guideline was adopted
by the CHMP on July 19, 2007, and came into effect on
September 1, 2007 (EMEA 2007c).

As an aside, it should be noted that within two weeks of the
TeGenero incident, the CHMP issued a concept paper on the
‘‘Development of a CHMP Guideline on the Non-Clinical
Requirements to Support Early Phase I Clinical Trials with
Pharmaceutical Compounds’’ (EMEA 2006). However, the
timing of the release of this concept paper was purely coinci-
dental since it had been agreed on with the Safety Working
Party (SWP) in February 2006. In addition, the thrust of the
concept paper was to expedite the initiation of clinical trials
in a manner similar to the FDA’s Guidance on Exploratory
INDs (FDA 2006). The current (2008–2009) work plan for the

Downloaded from 

tpx.sagepub.com

 by guest on July 11, 2013

364

MILTON AND HORVATH

TOXICOLOGIC PATHOLOGY

SWP indicates that a draft guideline will be released for review
in 4Q 2008 (EMEA 2007e). The national health authority in
Belgium,
the Belgian Federal Agency for Medicines and
Health Products (2006), has produced a document, ‘‘Guidance
to the Conduct of Exploratory Trials in Belgium,’’ that is a
working document concerning the conduct of clinical explora-
tory trials in Belgium. This document was produced under
political pressure and is not yet finalized. Despite these limita-
tions, this document complements the EMEA guideline since it
provides additional detail in certain areas.

The finalized EMEA guideline differed from the draft
guideline in several ways, including the title. The title of the
finalized guideline is ‘‘Guideline on Strategies to Identify and
Mitigate Risks for First-in-Human Clinical Trials with Investi-
gational Medicinal Products’’ (EMEA 2007c), whereas the title
of the draft guideline was ‘‘Guideline on Requirements for
First-in-Man Clinical Trials for Potential High-Risk Medicinal
Products’’ (EMEA 2007b). The subtle change in title highlights
a change in the intent of the guideline from ‘‘potential high-risk
medicinal’’ products to all investigational medicinal products
(IMPs). Implicit in this is the belief that any IMP is potentially
high risk unless data exist to the contrary. In addition, the scope
of the draft guidance was expanded from a focus on biologics
to include both biologics and new chemical entities (NCEs).
These changes arose based on the written comments that were
provided by interested stakeholders, as well as discussions at a
workshop that was held on the draft guidance. Some of the
comments that were provided by interested parties who were
primarily focused on the development of biologics seem to
imply that biologics were being unduly singled out and that,
if such a guideline were to be implemented, it should apply
to both biologics and NCEs. The decision to expand the scope
of the guideline to apply to both biologics and NCEs is a pru-
dent decision because it places the focus on the pharmacology
of the target and the properties of a product rather than the cate-
gorization of a given clinical candidate. Despite the fact that
the guideline applies to both biologics and NCEs, the heritage
of the guideline is quite clear, and the guideline reads very
much like a biologics guideline into which some mention of
NCEs has been inserted.

THE CONTENT OF THE EMEA GUIDELINE

The guideline is wide-ranging in scope and is intended to
assist sponsors in the transition from nonclinical to early clin-
ical development. It identifies factors influencing risk for new
investigational medicinal products and considers quality
aspects, nonclinical and clinical testing strategies, and designs
for FIH clinical trials. Strategies for mitigating and managing
risk are given, including the calculation of the initial dose to
be used in humans, the subsequent dose escalation, and the con-
duct of the clinical trial.

The guideline is not a stand-alone document and should be
read in conjunction with several nonclinical and clinical EU
guidelines. These guidelines include the following:

 Non-Clinical Safety Studies for the Conduct of
Human Clinical Trials for Pharmaceuticals (ICH
M3), CPMP/ICH/286/95
 Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-
Derived Pharmaceuticals (ICH S6), CPMP/ICH/
302/95
 The Non-Clinical Evaluation of the Potential for
Delayed Ventricular Repolarisation (QT Interval Pro-
longation) by Human Pharmaceuticals (ICH S7B),
CPMP/ICH/423/02
 Safety Pharmacology Studies for Human Pharmaceu-
 Toxicokinetics: The Assessment of Systemic Exposure
 Position Paper on the Non-Clinical Safety Studies to
Support Clinical Trials with a Single Micro Dose,
CPMP/SWP/2599/02
 Guideline for Good Clinical Practice (ICH E6),
 General Considerations for Clinical Trials (ICH E8),
 EUDRALEX Vol. 10—Clinical Trials (in particular,
chap. 1: Application and Application Form, and
chap. 2: Monitoring and Pharmacovigilance)

in Toxicity Studies (ICH S3A), CPMP/ICH/384/95

ticals (ICH S7A), CPMP/ICH/539/00

CPMP/ICH/135/95

CPMP/ICH/291/95

It should be noted that an expert working group has been estab-
lished to write an addendum to the ICH S6 guidance (ICH
2008a). A clarification (and sometimes amplification) of this
guidance is needed as substantial experience and new informa-
tion has been gained since 1997. Disharmony across regulatory
regions was identified to be a result of differences in implemen-
tation and interpretation of the S6 guidance and in part
because of regional specific ‘‘Points to Consider’’ documents.
The addendum will address species selection, study design,
reproductive/developmental
and
immunogenicity, although at this time, it is unclear as to the
exact details and impact of the addendum. It is hoped that the
addendum will reach Step 2 (i.e., be available for review) in
November 2009 and Step 4 (i.e., adoption) in June 2010.
In section 4, the EMEA guideline acknowledges that

carcinogenicity,

toxicity,

for many new investigational medicinal products, the
non-clinical safety pharmacology and toxicology
programme provides sufficient safety data for estimating
risk prior to first administration in humans. However, for
some novel medicinal products this non-clinical safety
programme might not be sufficiently predictive of
serious adverse reactions in humans and the non-clinical
testing and the design of the first-in-human study
requires special consideration. When planning a
first-in-human clinical trial, sponsors and investigators
should identify the factors of risk and apply risk
mitigation strategies accordingly as laid down in this
guideline. In addition to the principles expressed in this
guideline, some special populations such as paediatrics
may deserve specific considerations.

Downloaded from 

tpx.sagepub.com

 by guest on July 11, 2013

Vol. 37, No. 3, 2009

EMEA GUIDELINE ON FIH CLINICAL TRIALS

365

The focus of risk identification and risk mitigation before
performing a FIH study is a somewhat new approach.
Previously, the approach had been primarily focused on hazard
identification (a description of the danger; i.e., what are the
target organ[s] and adverse effects caused by the agent) with
a lesser emphasis on risk identification (the likelihood of a
toxic effect at expected exposure levels and conditions) and
risk mitigation. The distinction between hazard identification
and risk identification may appear to be a subtle one, but the
difference is important. A compound that may have a high or
hazardous profile may pose no risk to humans if exposure
levels are low and the toxic potency is low. In addition, the
mention of the pediatric population is an interesting one
because it is very rare (if it has ever occurred before) that the
first time that a novel IMP was administered to a human would
be to a child rather than to an adult. One can only speculate as
to why this population was specifically mentioned unless the
intent was for the guideline to be used for first-time administra-
tion to a new subject population.

Various risk factors that should be taken into account are
described in the guideline at both a high level and at a very
detailed level. At the high level, the guideline states, ‘‘Predict-
ing the potential severe adverse reactions for the first-in-human
use of an investigational medicinal product involves the iden-
tification of the factors of risk. Concerns may be derived from
particular knowledge or lack thereof regarding the mode of
action, the nature of the target, and/or the relevance of animal
models.’’ This statement makes the point that absence of
evidence is not the same as evidence of absence and starts to
lay the groundwork for the conclusion that new products should
be regarded as having high risk unless data exist to the contrary.
The guideline then describes in great depth the criteria that
should be discussed in the Clinical Trial Authorization (CTA)
application for an FIH study. The list is lengthy and is not
intended to be a checklist, since the guideline also notes that the
criteria should be taken into account on a case-by-case basis.
However, the mere existence of such a list will inevitably mean
that it will be viewed as a checklist. Similarly, the guideline
describes in great
length the information that should be
available related to the following:

1. Demonstration of the relevance of the animal model

(i.e., animal species)

2. Pharmacodynamics
3. Pharmacokinetics
4. Safety Pharmacology
5. Toxicology
6. Estimation of the first dose in humans.

It should be noted that the risk assessment will be performed on
a ‘‘case-by-case’’ basis and that a ‘‘weight-of-evidence’’
approach will be used. This confirms the approach advocated
by ICH S6 and suggests that such an approach is just as valid
for NCEs as it is for biologics. In the opinion of the authors, this
is an important and appropriate principle, especially with the
realization that some NCEs (e.g., PEGylated small molecule

compounds) and some synthetic compounds (e.g., peptides and
oligonucleotide compounds) may have properties similar to
biologics.

1

The guideline notes that novel mechanisms of action
(MOA) do not necessarily add to the risk, per se, but consider-
ation should be given to the novelty and extent of knowledge of
the supposed mode of action. This statement alludes to the fact
that we may not know the primary MOA at the time of the FIH
study, as was the case with pregabalin (Lyrica
, Pfizer; Silver-
man 2008). At the time of the FIH study for this compound, it
was believed that the MOA was activation of L-glutamic acid
decarboxylase (GAD). Subsequently, it was discovered that
this was not the MOA and that pregabalin’s true MOA was
binding to the a2d subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels.
According to the guideline, the type of knowledge that may
be required includes the nature and intensity (extent, amplifica-
tion, duration, reversibility) of the effect on the specific target
and nontargets and subsequent mechanisms, if applicable. This
simple statement contains two important points, namely, the
importance of nontarget-mediated (i.e., off-target) effects and
the importance of the downstream effects of the interaction
of the product with its target. It is presumed that nontarget in
this context is synonymous with ‘‘nonintended target.’’ Addi-
tional information related to the nature of the dose response
(steepness, shape, linearity, presence of a maximum effect) is
also recommended. The guideline identifies certain modes of
action that might require special attention. These include tar-
gets that have pleiotropic effects or are ubiquitously expressed
(e.g., as often occur in the immune system) and those that have
a biological cascade or cytokine release,
including those
leading to an amplification of an effect that might not be suffi-
ciently controlled by a physiologic feedback mechanism (e.g.,
in the immune system or blood coagulation system). Monoclo-
nal antibodies against the T cell targets CD3 or CD28 are given
as examples of products that have this latter type of MOA.

The analysis of the risks associated with a given MOA not
only should be based on data generated for a particular target
but should also take into account data generated from the pre-
vious exposure of humans to compounds that have related
modes of action and evidence from genetically modified ani-
mal models (transgenic, knock-in, or knock-out). Interestingly,
the guideline does not describe the use of data from humans
with genetic polymorphisms in the intended target or related
to the intended MOA. Such data would be far more informative
than the corresponding animal data. For example, the primary
pharmacologic effects of administration of an anti-CD18
monoclonal antibody (i.e., leukocytosis and increased suscept-
ibility to infection) are predicted by the phenotype of individ-
uals with leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD), related to
one of several functional defects in this selectin (Sharar et al.
1991; Etzioni 2007).

In addition to an understanding of the intended MOA, it is
expected that the sponsor will provide a detailed description
of the nature of the target. This information may include
information on the structure, tissue distribution, cell specificity,
disease specificity, regulation, polymorphisms, level of expression,

Downloaded from 

tpx.sagepub.com

 by guest on July 11, 2013

366

MILTON AND HORVATH

TOXICOLOGIC PATHOLOGY

and biological function of the human target, including ‘‘down-
stream’’ effects, and how it might vary between individuals in
different populations of healthy subjects and patients.

Because the selection of the starting dose for an FIH study
will be based on animal data from either toxicology or pharma-
cology studies, it is not surprising that the guideline also
recommends that the sponsor should address the relevance of
the animal models (species). This topic is addressed in two sep-
arate sections of the guideline. The guideline emphasizes that a
weight-of-evidence approach should be used for determining
the relevance of the animal models and that if the animal mod-
els are of questionable relevance for the investigation of the
toxicological and/or pharmacological properties of the IMP,
then this should be considered as adding to the risk. That is, the
results of preclinical testing are relevant only to the extent that
the target biology and compound pharmacology are compara-
ble to humans. For this reason, it is incumbent on the sponsor
to demonstrate convincingly the relevance of the chosen
animal species.

The EMEA guideline describes the assessment of the
relevance of the animal models as taking into account many
factors, including the target, its structural homology, distribu-
tion, signal transduction pathways, the nature of the pharmaco-
logical effects, and metabolism and other pharmacokinetic
aspects. The guideline places a clear emphasis on the need to
ensure that the species used in the toxicology studies are phar-
macologically relevant, with lesser emphasis on similarity of
the metabolism of the clinical candidate in animals and humans
(as has typically been the case for NCEs). The use of nonrele-
vant species in toxicology studies is strongly discouraged.
Although pharmacological relevance is often part of the justi-
fication of the selection of the species to be used for the safety
evaluation of biologics, it is rarely the case for NCEs, where the
selection of the species used for the toxicology studies tradi-
tionally uses exposure and/or metabolism data. In reality, such
data are most often used to justify the selection of the dog (for
NCEs) and monkeys (for biologics) as the nonrodent species to
be used in the toxicology studies. The rat is almost universally
used as the rodent species in safety assessment studies for
NCEs (Baldrick 2008), with very little justification for the
selection of this species other than historical precedent.

The description of the elements that are important in the
selection of the relevant species clearly shows that
this
guidance was originally written with biologics in mind and was
not intended to be applied to NCEs. Yet the preclinical studies
for NCEs traditionally emphasize comparative in vitro metabo-
lism and biodistribution studies as part of the species selection
criteria. Little, if any, mention is given in the guideline to the
distribution of the product within the body and the metabolism
of the product by the body. For a biologic, it is usually assumed
that the compound will distribute poorly to tissues and be
essentially restricted to the blood due its size. By contrast,
NCEs will more readily distribute throughout the body due to
their relatively small size. The concentrations of NCEs in
tissues will also be affected by the metabolism and/or active
transport of these agents. Therefore, an assessment of the

relevance of a given species should take into account not only
the distribution of the target in different tissues but also the dis-
tribution of the compound to those tissues in which the target is
expressed. It should be noted that little data exist related to the
relationship between the distribution of an NCE in animals and
in humans.

With so much weight being given to the importance of
pharmacological relevance in the selection of the species to
be used in the toxicology studies, it is possible that clinical trial
participants could encounter greater risk if toxicologic mechan-
isms are not fully evaluated. The guideline clearly gives the
impression that the risk will most likely arise from biologic
mechanisms (i.e., the intended pharmacological mechanism)
rather than from chemical mechanisms. This is not surprising
given the genesis of this guideline (i.e., as a guideline focused
on biologics and the traditional focus on exaggerated pharma-
cology as the mechanism of toxicity for most biologics). It is
assumed (as stated in ICH S6) that metabolism of biologics will
yield small peptides and individual amino acids and that clas-
sical biotransformation studies as performed for NCEs are not
needed (ICH 1996). It is also commonly assumed that any
metabolites that are generated do not have a pharmacological
and/or toxicological profile that
than that of
the parent molecule. However, it should be noted that such
assumptions may not be valid in all cases (e.g., for
oligonucleotide-based products, fusion proteins, and immuno-
conjugates). In addition, most biologics are very selective and
have limited cross-reactivity with targets other
than the
intended target. The opposite is true for NCEs, where metabo-
lism can result in molecules with altered pharmacological and
toxicological properties and where both the parent and the
metabolites may cross-react with targets other
than the
intended pharmacological target. Consequently, this leads to
the possibility that unless one is careful, a focus on MOA-
based toxicity may underestimate the human toxicity risk for
NCEs, especially if the toxicity is caused by a metabolite.
Although the FDA (2008) has issued a guidance on the safety
testing of drug metabolites, this guidance was not intended to
address FIH studies. Clearly, the challenge in the selection of
the relevant species serves to emphasize the need for an
extensive, weight-of-evidence approach in which both pharma-
cological and metabolic relevance are considered.

is different

The EMEA guideline also addresses several CMC aspects.
Briefly, the guideline notes that the sponsor should determine
the strength and potency of the product, that the material used
in nonclinical studies should be representative of the material
to be used in the FIH study, and that the sponsor should demon-
strate that very small doses can be accurately administered if
the doses to be used in the FIH study are very low.

Selection of FIH Dose

Because the adverse events observed with TGN1412 were
observed after the administration of the first dose, it is not
surprising that the selection of the FIH dose is a major topic
in the EMEA guideline. The guideline states that all available

Downloaded from 

tpx.sagepub.com

 by guest on July 11, 2013

Vol. 37, No. 3, 2009

EMEA GUIDELINE ON FIH CLINICAL TRIALS

367

information has to be taken into consideration for the dose
selection, and this has to be made on a case-by-case basis. In
general, the no adverse effect (dose) level (NOAEL) deter-
mined in nonclinical safety studies performed in the most sen-
sitive and relevant animal species, adjusted with allometric
factors or on the basis of pharmacokinetics, gives the most
important information. The relevant dose is then reduced or
adjusted by appropriate safety factors according to the particu-
lar aspects of the molecule and the design of the clinical trials.
However, for IMPs where factors influencing risk have been
identified (which in reality will most likely be all products
except ‘‘me-too’’ products), the use of the above approach is
not appropriate and the use of the minimal anticipated biologi-
cal effect (dose) level (MABEL) approach is recommended.
The MABEL is the anticipated dose level leading to a minimal
biological effect level in humans. The guideline states that the
calculation of MABEL should use all in vitro and in vivo
information available from PK/PD data. Such data may include
the following:

1.

2.

3.

target binding and receptor occupancy studies in
vitro in target cells from human and the relevant
animal species
concentration-response curves in vitro in target cells
from human and the relevant animal species and
dose/exposure-response in vivo in the relevant
animal species
exposures at pharmacological doses in the relevant
animal species

As was mentioned previously for calculating the FIH dose
using NOAEL data, safety factors should also be applied to the
calculation of a FIH dose using the MABEL approach. How-
ever, the EMEA guideline does not give insight as to the
magnitude of the safety factor that should be used. The FDA
‘‘Guidance for
Industry: Estimating the Maximum Safe
Starting Dose in Initial Clinical Trials for Therapeutics in Adult
Healthy Volunteers,’’ which was issued in July 2005, addresses
the use of a safety factor in detail (FDA 2005). This guidance
states that the default safety factor that should normally be used
is 10 and that this value is a historically accepted number
although no justification for the selection of this value is
provided. The FDA guidance indicates several considerations
for increasing the safety factor, consistent with the EMEA
guideline. The FDA guidance also describes situations under
which the safety factor may be decreased. These situations
include me-too products and when the duration of the toxicol-
ogy study is longer than the proposed clinical schedule in
healthy volunteers. In the latter situation, it is assumed that the
toxicities are cumulative and are not related to the Cmax of the
product (i.e., are acute events). The FDA guidance focuses on
the use of the NOAEL to establish the maximum recommended
starting dose (MRSD) for the FIH clinical trial. However, the
guidance also addresses the pharmacologically active dose
(PAD) but does not provide much detail on this topic because
the ‘‘selection of a PAD depends upon many factors and differs

markedly among pharmacological drug classes and clinical
indications; therefore, selection of a PAD is beyond the scope
of this guidance.’’ Despite this statement, the guidance does
encourage the sponsor to calculate the PAD and the human
equivalent dose (HED). The guidance further notes that if the
pharmacological HED is greater than the MRSD, it may be
appropriate to decrease the FIH dose for pragmatic or scientific
reasons, especially for certain classes of products (e.g., vasodi-
lators, anticoagulants, monoclonal antibodies, or growth
factors). Unlike the EMEA guideline, the FDA guidance does
not encourage the use of PK/PD in the calculation of the
MRSD. In fact, the guidance states that ‘‘although the process
outlined in this guidance uses administered doses, observed
toxicities, and an algorithmic approach to calculate the MRSD,
an alternative approach could be proposed that places primary
emphasis on animal pharmacokinetics and modeling rather
than dose. In a limited number of cases, animal pharmacoki-
netic data can be useful in determining initial clinical doses.
However, in the majority of investigational new drug applica-
tions (INDs), animal data are not available in sufficient detail to
construct a scientifically valid, pharmacokinetic model whose
aim is to accurately project an MRSD.’’ The reluctance to
incorporate PK/PD in the determination of the MRSD appears
to be based on the fact that using such data would rely on mul-
tiple untested assumptions regarding the behavior of the prod-
uct in humans. It should be noted that a major effect of the
EMEA guidance should be to prevent a clinical trial application
in which it is considered that ‘‘animal data not available in
sufficient detail.’’

According to the Duff Report, the selection of the starting
dose for the TGN1412 clinical trial was based on the approach
described in the FDA’s guidance (Expert Group on Phase One
Clinical Trials 2006; TeGenero 2006). The NOAEL from the
repeat-dose cynomolgus monkey toxicology study was
50 mg/kg. An allometric conversion factor of 3.1 was used to
convert this dose to the HED on a body surface area basis
(16 mg/kg). A safety factor of 10 was then applied which
yielded a MSRD of 1.6 mg/kg. The company then applied a
further safety factor of 16 and selected a starting dose of
0.1 mg/kg. Overall, the safety factor used was 160. The ratio-
nale for the use of the additional safety factor is unclear and
highlights the rather arbitrary nature of safety factors. Often,
the actual safety factor used is based on a combination of the
standard approach (i.e., a safety factor of 10), pragmatism
(i.e., the dose strengths available for use in the study), and tra-
dition (i.e., the use of round numbers). For TGN1412, it seems
more likely that the dose of 0.1 mg/kg was chosen arbitrarily
and that the resulting safety factor was calculated retrospec-
tively. The topic of calculating the safe starting dose for
pharmaceuticals in general, and TGN1412 in particular, has
been discussed by Horvath and Milton (2009).

There are many challenges related to the calculation of the
MABEL, the most notable of which is the definition of what
is ‘‘minimal.’’ However, the guideline does not provide insight
into this topic. In addition, despite describing in detail the
factors that should be taken into account in the calculation of

Downloaded from 

tpx.sagepub.com

 by guest on July 11, 2013

368

MILTON AND HORVATH

TOXICOLOGIC PATHOLOGY

MABEL, the guideline does not provide an example of how
MABEL could be calculated. The Duff Report does give exam-
ples of MABEL calculations for two other products, although
neither of these examples is easy to follow (Expert Group on
Phase One Clinical Trials 2006). Members of the Association
of the British Pharmaceutical Industry and the BioIndustry
Association (ABPI/BIA) subsequently calculated probable
receptor occupancy (included in the Duff Report) and pre-
sented their calculations of the MABEL for TGN1412 at an
EMEA workshop held to discuss the draft guideline for FIH
clinical
trials for potential high-risk medicinal products
(EMEA 2007a). More recently, Lowe et al. (2007) have
published examples of how the dose of FIH studies can be
calculated, including the calculation of MABEL for a mono-
clonal antibody. To date, there are no examples of how to
calculate MABEL for an NCE. Regardless of which method
of calculating the starting dose for TGN1412 (i.e., NOAEL,
PAD, or MABEL) might have been the most appropriate,
the complete absence of any discussion of the anticipated
PD effects of the FIH dose within the TGN1412 clinical trial
application is a glaring omission.

Although the EMEA guideline describes two different
(NOAEL and MABEL) approaches for the calculation of the
FIH dose, the sponsor is not restricted to using just these two
approaches. Sponsors should look at the totality of the data
available to them and evaluate several different approaches
to the calculation of the safe starting dose (SSD) and then take
the most conservative approach. The calculation of the SSD as
described in the EMEA guideline applies only to studies that
will be performed in NHVs. The guideline acknowledges
that ‘‘other approaches may also be considered in specific
situations, e.g. for studies with conventional cytotoxic IMPs
in oncology patients.’’

Another draft

regulatory guidance,

ICHM3(R2), also
addresses the issue of the selection of the SSD (ICH 2008b).
ICHM3(R2) is a document whose purpose is to recommend
international standards for, and promote harmonization of, the
nonclinical safety studies recommended to support human
clinical trials of a given scope and duration and marketing
authorization. The draft guidance describes five approaches
to nonclinical studies to support exploratory clinical investiga-
tions. These approaches range from support to clinical trials
that use microdoses to clinical trials that include doses in the
therapeutic range. Whether this guidance, in its finalized form,
will provide harmonization or clarity remains to be seen since
regional guidances also need to be taken into consideration, and
such regional guidances may not be in strict alignment with the
finalized ICH guidance.

Clinical Study Design

the creation and use of stopping rules. The use of healthy
volunteers should be fully justified because the expression of
the pharmacological target (due to differences in phenotype
and/or genotype) in healthy subjects may be different to that
in patients. In addition, it is important that the healthy volun-
teers be able to tolerate any potential side effects. In designing
the study, it is important that the sponsor considers, based on
the available data, what could be the worst that could happen
in the trial—to expect the unexpected and to be prepared for the
worst.

The guideline has clearly focused on the safety of the volun-
teers that will participate in the first cohort in the study but does
not provide much, if any, guidance as to the maximum dose
that should be administered in the study based on the sponsor’s
knowledge of the pharmacology of the molecule and the animal
toxicology data. This is a somewhat surprising omission
because it is imperative that we perform the same kind of risk
assessment at all dose levels that we perform for the first dose
level. If the MABEL approach is used successfully for the cal-
culation of the SSD, the administration of the product to the
first dose cohort should be uneventful. The lack of observed
toxicity in that first dose cohort should not be interpreted as
meaning that the product will have a benign safety profile. It
is quite possible that severe toxicities will be observed at higher
dose levels and that all that has been achieved is to delay the
inevitable consequence of the administration of a toxic product
to a human population that will derive no therapeutic benefit
from the product. In principle, then, it would seem prudent to
estimate the PK/PD results of each dose level in the FIH trial
and to revisit these projections after reviewing results of the
first cohort. Such a practice will place increased emphasis on
‘‘real-time’’ PK/PD analysis and may lead to slower dose esca-
lation as apparent safety alone may be insufficient to allow pro-
ceeding to the next dose level.

To address the issue of the potential for effects at higher
dose levels, the guideline advocates the creation of stopping
rules and a cautious approach to dose escalation. With regard
to dose escalation, the guideline clearly states that PK and
PD data (as well as safety data) obtained from a dose cohort
should be compared to available nonclinical data before the
decision to escalate to the next dose cohort is made. On the sur-
face, this seems to be a simple task to perform, but the guidance
does not provide insight into how PK/PD will be used in the
dose escalation decision in one vital area, namely, interindivi-
dual variability. It is unclear whether the dose escalation deci-
sion should be based on the mean or individual PK (or PD)
parameters, although based on discussion with a European
regulator, the use of mean data would most likely be accepta-
ble. Such a distinction is very important for highly variable
products that have a narrow therapeutic window.

Finally, the EMEA guideline provides input into the design
and conduct of the FIH study, with numerous recommendations
for limiting and managing the risk to humans. These recom-
mendations include the sequence and rate of dose administra-
tion in the first dose cohort, the dose escalation scheme, and

THE IMPACT OF THE TEGENERO INCIDENT ON PHARMACEUTICAL

DEVELOPMENT

Since the TeGenero incident took place, those of us engaged
in preclinical development have been swamped with suggestions

Downloaded from 

tpx.sagepub.com

 by guest on July 11, 2013

Vol. 37, No. 3, 2009

EMEA GUIDELINE ON FIH CLINICAL TRIALS

369

TABLE 1.—Potential impact of the TeGenero incident on the different disciplines.

Function

Points to Consider and Potential Impacts

Pharmacology

 Design and conduct of animal efficacy studies

– Relevance of animal species and models of disease
– Number of species or models used
– Number of times a given efficacy study should be performed
–
– Conduct of studies ‘‘in the spirit of GLP’’
–

Increased group size for statistical rigor

Increased use of PK/PD

 Better understanding of the pharmacology of the target

– Consequences of modulating the target
– Polymorphisms and variability of expression of target in animals and humans
– Duration of effect, including ‘‘on-off’’ rate and rate of regeneration of target
– Definition of a minimal effect

 Better tools

– More robust and sensitive PD assays
– More PD assays for NCEs
– Preditive cytokine release assays

 Enhanced role of target expression in selection of Tox species

Toxicology

– How do we address differences in target expression based on supplier, age, gender, etc.?
– Do we need to determine tissue distribution of target for a chemical?

 What is more important for a chemical on-target or off-target toxicity?

 Revisions to standard testing paradigms

Inclusion of limited toxicity assessments in animal efficacy studies
Increased number of animals/group in order to improve statistical rigor

– Robust PD markers for both NCEs and biologics
–
–
– Selection of Tox species for NCEs based on pharmacological responsiveness and not just metabolic stability
– Cautious interpretation of studies that do not show toxicity

 Greater need for PK/PD modelers in nonclinical studies
 Robust PD markers for both NCEs and biologics
 More nonclinical studies to define PK/PD than are presently conducted
 FIH studies may be more protracted

– Caution will be required at every dose level
– Any adverse event that was not observed in animal toxicology studies may halt dose escalation
– Slow IV infusions (60 min) instead of bolus administration
– Sequential administration of product to subjects within a cohort
– Possibly larger cohort size

conduct of the study

 Clinical protocols will need to be flexible to allow for changes to dose levels and PK/PD sampling schemes without undue delay to the
 Slow conduct of clinical trial due to lag time between cohorts due to stopping rules and increased reliance on PK/PD for dose escalation
 Need to build a PK/PD model in real-time based on data obtained from FIH study
 Greater scrutiny of any observed side effect
 Additional resources may be required

– Real-time (bedside) PD assays
– Expedited bioanalytical sample and PK analysis
–
– Cross-functional approach to dose escalation decisions
Increased costs for FIH study

‘‘Rescue’’ procedures for patients that develop adverse events


 Will need better competitive intelligence regarding other compounds with similar MOAs
 Greater use of the Scientific Advice process in the EU before the FIH study
 Will need to provide a greater range of dose strengths for the FIH study
 May need to provide solution doses to aid flexibility in dose escalation (oral products)

PK/ADME

Clinical

Regulatory

CMC

for reducing the risks for the subjects who participate in FIH
studies from a variety of sources (expert reports, editorials,
guidelines, etc.), and it can be difficult to reconcile them all.
These suggestions affect
the disciplines of pharmacology,
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, and toxicology.
However, once we have understood what is now required of
us, we are left to determine who should implement the
recommendations in the guideline. There are many potential

implications of the EMEA guideline and many points to con-
sider. Some of these points to consider and potential impacts
are summarized in Table 1.

It is clear that FIH clinical trials will be conducted in an
even more cautious manner and that they will take longer to
conduct and be costlier. It may be reasonable to speculate that
sponsors would move FIH clinical trials away from the EU.
However, it is also reasonable to anticipate that the FDA would

Downloaded from 

tpx.sagepub.com

 by guest on July 11, 2013

370

MILTON AND HORVATH

TOXICOLOGIC PATHOLOGY

default to the approaches described in the EMEA guideline,
even though they may not issue their own guidance on this
topic. Historically, many sponsors developing biologics have
conducted their FIH trials in the EU, particularly prior to
the replacement of the Clinical Trial Exemption (CTX) with
the Clinical Trial Application (CTA). It will be interesting to
see how the regulatory environment for FIH studies continues
to evolve. For example, will the expectation be that the same
cautious approach should be taken each time that the product
is studied in a new population for the first time (e.g., patient
vs. NHV; children vs. adults; single dose vs. multiple dose;
drug-drug interaction studies)? Will the role and/or rigor of the
pharmacology or toxicology review be increased? For exam-
ple, the EMEA do not presently require the individual study
reports for review prior to approving the FIH protocol but may
decide that going forward, these documents should be made
available to them as part of their review, as is the case in the
United States. Despite the increased awareness of the risks
inherent in FIH studies with high-risk medicinal products, there
does not seem to have been much, if any, effect on the conduct
of FIH clinical trials in the United Kingdom. At the 2008
annual meeting of the Drug Information Assocation, sponsors
were encouraged to seek advice from the MHRA before sub-
mitting their IMPDs. The MHRA have a flexible approach and
prefer to review medicinal products on a case-by-case basis
rather than a ‘‘by-the-book’’ basis. The MHRA are more fre-
quently advising sponsors that their products are not high-
risk medicinal products than they are advising them that their
products are high-risk medicinal products. In the period 2007
to May 2008, 267 Phase 1 clinical trials were conducted in the
United Kingdom. Of these, the MHRA identified five products
(< 2%) as being high risk, and only one of these products was
discussed with an external advisory group. In addition, there
does not appear to be an impact on the review cycle for the
IMPD. In April and May 2008, 46 Phase I clinical trial appli-
cations were reviewed with an average review time of 12.5
days (Jones 2008).

1

Undoubtedly, the TeGenero incident has brought pharma-
ceutical testing into the spotlight, particularly for trials using
human volunteers. The period from the time of the TeGenero
incident until early July 2008 was very quiet in terms of
adverse events in Phase I clinical trials with NCEs or biologics.
In early July, a participant in a Phase 1 study to evaluate the
bioavailability of RhuDex
in a new formulation suffered a
heart problem several days after administration of the drug and
subsequently died (MediGene 2008). RhuDex
is an orally
administered disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD)
that is designed to inhibit T cell activation by blocking the
CD80 receptor, which will lead to a decrease in inflammatory
cytokines. RhuDex
has been administered to approximately
eighty individuals, and positive safety data have been
announced in a Phase IIa trial in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis. At this point in time (approximately 2 weeks after the
tragic death of the clinical trial participant), it is uncertain as to
the role of the drug in this adverse event, but the reporting of
the event by the press in the United Kingdom shows a keen

1

1

interest in the protection of the safety of volunteers in clinical
trials (Sweeney 2008).

it

that

is essential

Despite all of these concerns and the changes in the regula-
tory environment, not much will change in how we prepare for
FIH studies. We will be essentially conducting the same work
that we have previously, although we will be looking at the data
and literature in a far more critical manner. There will be an
increased need for integration of data and interpretations across
disciplines, rather than the current, somewhat line-function-
based approach. In reality, the distinction of roles based on line
functions is outdated, particularly for companies that are
developing biologics where the toxicity is due to exaggerated
pharmacology. In this case, it is difficult, if not impossible,
to tell where pharmacology ends and toxicology begins. For
this reason,
toxicologists developing
biologics become better acquainted with pharmacology (and
immunology). The pharmacologist and toxicologist should
work very closely together or even be one and the same person.
This will open up opportunities for the toxicologist to act as a
leader on cross-functional project teams, at least as it pertains
to the identification and mitigation of risks in the FIH clinical
trial. The toxicologist may be able work in close collaboration
with the clinician to use preclinical data to forecast what
pharmacodynamic activity will occur at each dose level in the
FIH study rather than the standard current practice of advising
what dose levels are not acceptable for the FIH dose. This
enhanced requirement for a pharmacology-based approach to
nonclinical safety assessment would logically extend to the
pharmacology/toxicology reviewers in regulatory agencies,
despite recent trends in the opposite direction (e.g., CDER
assuming responsibility for CBER projects at the FDA).

CONCLUSIONS

At first blush, the TeGenero incident appears to have had
rapid and far-reaching effects on the preclinical development
programs to support FIH clinical trials. The most tangible of
these is creation of the EMEA guideline for identification and
mitigation of risk in FIH studies. This guideline builds on the
foundation of ICH S6,
in which a case-by-case, science-
driven approach to safety testing is described, and the FDA gui-
dance for estimating FIH starting doses, with additional
emphasis on understanding and projecting the likely effects
of the first pharmacologically active dose administered to
humans. For perhaps the first time, this approach is now impli-
citly condoned for NCEs as well as for biologics and empha-
sizes a thorough understanding of
the pharmacology in
addition to the toxicology. We may never be able to tell
whether the guideline has indeed improved the safety of the
clinical trial participants due to the extreme rarity of the types
of events such as the TeGenero incident. The EMEA guideline
will, however, undoubtedly reduce the risk for participants in
clinical trails, although there will be consequences of this
added caution. It is likely that there will be an increase in the
cost and time required to develop a product and a decrease in
productivity of development organizations, particularly prior

Downloaded from 

tpx.sagepub.com

 by guest on July 11, 2013

Vol. 37, No. 3, 2009

EMEA GUIDELINE ON FIH CLINICAL TRIALS

371

to Phase II testing. In addition, the pharmaceutical industry
may be less willing to develop products for novel and unvali-
dated targets, especially for the treatment of small patient
populations. It is probable that if the EMEA guideline had been
in place at the time of the TeGenero clinical trial, the events
that unfolded after the administration of TGN1412 to the first
dose cohort would not have occurred. However, it is quite pos-
sible that the guidance may have simply delayed the inevitable
tragic consequences of the administration of TGN1412 to
healthy volunteers until a higher dose level.

Regardless, the EMEA guideline is here to stay, and it is up
to us to determine how to safely and effectively develop prod-
ucts in this new regulatory environment. Whatever we do, we
should ensure the safety of the clinical trial participants and
work diligently to ensure that the events of March 2006 do not
occur again.

REFERENCES

Baldrick, P. (2008). Safety evaluation to support first-in-man investigations II:

Toxicology studies. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 51, 237–43.

Belgian Federal Agency for Medicines and Health Products. (2006). Guidance

to the conduct of exploratory trials in Belgium. Brussels, Belgium.

Early Stage Clinical Trial Taskforce. (2007). Early Stage Clinical Trial Task-
force—Joint ABPI/BIA report. Association of the British Pharmaceutical
Industry and BioIndustry Association.

Etzioni, A. (2007). Leukocyte adhesion deficiencies: Molecular basis, clinical

findings, and therapeutic options. Adv Exp Bio Med 601, 51–60.

European Medicines Agency (EMEA). (2006). Concept paper on the develop-
ment of a CHMP guideline on the non-clinical requirements to support
early Phase I clinical trials with pharmaceutical compounds. EMEA/
CHMP/SWP/91850/2006.

European Medicines Agency (EMEA). (2007a). EMEA workshop on the
guideline for first-in-man clinical trials for potential high-risk medicinal
products.
http://www.emea.europa.eu/pdfs/conferenceflyers/first_in_
man/17720307en.pdf.

European Medicines Agency (EMEA). (2007b). Guideline on requirements for
first-in-man clinical trials for potential high-risk medicinal products.
EMEA/CHMP/SWP/28367/2007 Corr (Draft).

European Medicines Agency (EMEA). (2007c). Guideline on strategies to
identify and mitigate risks for first-in human clinical trials with investiga-
tional medicinal products. EMEA/CHMP/SWP/28367/07.

European Medicines Agency (EMEA). (2007d). Work plan for the Safety

Working Party (SWP) 2007–2008. EMEA/152420/2006 Corr.

European Medicines Agency (EMEA). (2007e). Work plan for the Safety
Working Party (SWP) 2008–2009. http://www.emea.europa.eu/pdfs/
human/swp/swpworkprogramme.pdf (accessed March 4, 2008).

European Medicines Agency (EMEA). (2008). Scientific guidelines for human
medicinal products—Clinical efficacy and safety guidelines. http://www.
emea.europa.eu/htms/human/humanguidelines/efficacy.htm (accessed
March 26, 2008).

Expert Group on Phase One Clinical Trials (chairman: Professor Gordon W.
Duff). (2006). Expert group on phase one clinical trials: Final report.
TSO (The Stationary Office).

Horvath, C. J., and Milton, M. N. (2009). The TeGenero incident and the Duff
Report conclusions: A series of unfortunate events or an avoidable event?
Toxicol Pathol 37, 372–383.

International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for
Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). (1996). ICH har-
monised
of
biotechnology-derived pharmaceuticals. S6. http://www.ich.org/LOB/
media/MEDIA503.pdf (accessed March 8, 2008).

guideline. Preclinical

evaluation

tripartite

safety

International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for
Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). (2008a). Final
concept paper. S6(R1): Preclinical safety evaluation of biotechnology-
derived pharmaceuticals. Revision of the ICH S6 Guideline.

International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for
Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). (2008b). ICH
harmonised tripartite guideline. Guidance on nonclinical safety studies
for the conduct of human clinical trials and marketing authorization for
pharmaceuticals. M3(R2). Step 2. July 15. http://www.ich.org/LOB/
media/MEDIA4744.pdf (accessed August 21, 2008).

Jones, D. R. (2008). Exploratory clinical trial applications experience from a
EU regulatory viewpoint. Presented at the annual meeting of the Drug
Information Association, Boston, MA, USA.

Lowe, P. J, et al. (2007). On the anticipation of the human dose in first-in-man
trials from preclinical and prior clinical information in early drug devel-
opment. Xenobiotica 37, 1331–54.

Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). (2006).
Investigations into adverse incidents during clinical trials of TGN1412
(interim report). MHRA, London.

MediGene AG. (2008). MediGene AG (DX:MDG) puts clinical Phase I study

with RhuDex(R) on hold. July 8.

Royal Statistical Society. (2007). Report of the working party on statistical

issues in first-in-man studies. London.

Senn, S., Amin, D., Bailey, R., Bird, S., Bogacka, B., Colman, P., Garett, A.,
Grieve, A., and Lachman, P. (2007). Statistical issues in first-in-man
studies. J Royal Stat Soc A 170, 517–79.

Sharar, S. R., Winn, R. K., Murry, C. E., Harlan, J. M., and Rice, C. L. (1991).
A CD18 monoclonal antibody increases the incidence and severity of
subcutaneous abscess formation after high-dose Staphylococcus aureus
injection in rabbits. Surgery 110, 213–19.

Silverman, R. B. (2008). From basic science to blockbuster drug: The discov-

ery of Lyrica. Angew Chem Intl Ed 47, 3500–04.

Sweeney, C. (2008). Scots father dies after clinical drug trial. The Times,

London.

TeGenero AG.
TGN1412.

(2006).

Investigational Medicinal Product Dossier

for

U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). (2005). Guidance for industry:
Estimating the maximum safe starting dose in initial clinical trials for
therapeutics in adult healthy volunteers. Washington, DC.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). (2006). Guidance for industry,
investigators and reviewers: Exploratory IND studies. Washington, DC.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). (2008). Guidance for industry:

Safety testing of drug metabolites. Washington, DC.

For reprints and permissions queries, please visit SAGE’s Web site at http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav

Downloaded from 

tpx.sagepub.com

 by guest on July 11, 2013

