R E V I E W S

Nuclear pore complex
(NPC). A multisubunit protein 
complex in the nuclear 
envelope that serves as a 
transport channel between the 
nucleus and the cytoplasm. 
NPCs are permeable for small 
molecules but restrict the 
passive diffusion of 
macromolecules larger than  
30 kDa.

Nuclear lamina
A fibrous intermediate filament 
network that consists of lamins 
and underlies the inner nuclear 
membrane.

Kinetochore
A multimeric protein complex 
that is formed on centromeric 
DNA and mediates the 
attachment of spindle 
microtubules to chromosomes 
during mitosis.

Institute of Biochemistry, 
Eidgenössische Technische 
Hochschule Zurich, HPM 
F11.1, Schafmattstrasse18, 
8093 Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to U.K.  
e-mail: ulrike.kutay@bc.biol.
ethz.ch
doi:10.1038/nrm2641

Orchestrating nuclear envelope 
disassembly and reassembly  
during mitosis

Stephan Güttinger, Eva Laurell and Ulrike Kutay

Abstract | Cell division in eukaryotes requires extensive architectural changes of the nuclear 
envelope (NE) to ensure that segregated DNA is finally enclosed in a single cell nucleus in 
each daughter cell. Higher eukaryotic cells have evolved ‘open’ mitosis, the most extreme 
mechanism to solve the problem of nuclear division, in which the NE is initially completely 
disassembled and then reassembled in coordination with DNA segregation. Recent progress 
in the field has now started to uncover mechanistic and molecular details that underlie the 
changes in NE reorganization during open mitosis. These studies reveal a tight interplay 
between NE components and the mitotic machinery.

More than 100 years ago, Schneider and Flemming pro­
vided the first comprehensive descriptions of the key 
structural changes in nuclear organization during mito­
sis1,2. Since then, the model of how mitosis proceeds has 
been tremendously refined, both on the phenomenological  
and molecular level.

Of all of the different parts of the nucleus that are reor­
ganized during mitosis, the nuclear envelope (NE) is of 
special importance as it constitutes its defining boundary. 
The NE can be seen as an extended sheet of the endo­
plasmic reticulum (ER) that covers chromatin. It is formed 
by two closely juxtaposed membranes, termed outer and 
inner nuclear membrane (ONM and INM, respectively). 
Although the NE completely encapsulates chromatin, it  
is not a uniformly closed membrane barrier. Rather,  
it is perforated by holes that are formed at sites of fusion 
between the INM and ONM (FIG. 1a). These holes are 
occupied by nuclear pore complexes (NPCs), which serve 
as both molecular sieves and transport hubs (FIG. 1b). The 
ONM is continuous with the rough ER, which it also 
resembles in protein composition. The INM contains a 
unique set of membrane proteins that establish contact 
with the chromatin and the nuclear lamina. In addition to 
its barrier function, the NE is important for various cellu­
lar processes, such as chromatin organization, regulation 
of gene expression, nuclear positioning and migration 
(for reviews, see ReFs 3–7).

The correct capturing of mitotic chromosomes by 
spindle microtubules is essential for faithful cell divi­
sion. Higher eukaryotes form a cytoplasmic spindle, 
which requires NE breakdown (NEBD) to allow access 

of spindle microtubules to kinetochores. NEBD not only 
involves the removal of NE membranes, but also the dis­
assembly of large macromolecular assemblies, such as 
NPCs and the lamina. After DNA segregation, a NE is 
reformed around each mass of chromatin in the future 
daughter cells to re­establish a nuclear boundary3,8.

The temporal coordination of nuclear disassembly and 
assembly is subject to the general control of mitotic entry 
and exit. An important aspect of spatial control relies 
on the ability of cells to identify chromatin. Chromatin 
identity is defined by the Ran system throughout the 
cell cycle3,9–11. Ran is a small, Ras­like GTPase that is 
loaded with GTP by its nuclear, chromatin­associated 
Ran guanine nucleotide-exchange factor (RanGEF) RCC1, 
leading to a high concentration of nuclear RanGTP. 
In the cytoplasm, Ran converts to the GDP­bound 
form, stimulated by cytoplasmic Ran GTPase-activating  
protein 1 (RanGAP1). This creates a RanGTP gradient 
across the NE that is used to control the direction ality 
of nuclear transport in interphase. The generation of 
RanGTP by chromatin­associated RCC1 continues 
during mitosis and gives rise to a surrounding cloud of 
RanGTP9, which provides spatial information for various 
processes occuring on chromatin, such as spindle and  
NE assembly3,9–11.

Here, we review how structural changes of the NE 
during ‘open’ mitosis are mediated and controlled. We 
cover the processes that lead to NEBD, follow the func­
tion of single NE components through metaphase and 
anaphase, and describe key mechanisms that control the 
reformation of the NE.

178 | MARCH 2009 | VOluME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

a

ER

Intermediate
filaments

Actin

Plectin
Nesprin 3

PNS

Nuclear pore
complex

SUN1,
SUN2

INM

Nurim
Lamin A/C
and lamin B

Chromatin

LBR

HP1

Nesprin 1, 2

ONM

Emerin

LEM2

SUN1

LAP1

BAF

b

NUP358
NUP214
NUP88
Aladin

CG1

POM121
GP210
NDC1
POM121

MAN1

LAP2

NUP50

NUP153

ELYS
TPR

R E V I E W S

NUP98
RAE1
Centrin 2

NUP62
NUP58
NUP54

NUP107
NUP160
NUP133
NUP96, NUP85
NUP43, NUP37
SEC13, SEH1

NUP93
NUP205
NUP188
NUP155
NUP53

Figure 1 | The main structural features of the nuclear envelope. a | The inner and outer nuclear membranes (INM and 
Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
ONM, respectively) are separated by the perinuclear space (PNS). The nuclear lamina underlies the nucleoplasmic face of 
the INM. INM proteins link the nuclear envelope (NE) membrane to chromatin and the lamina, whereas ONM proteins 
provide a connection from the nucleus to the cytoskeleton. The lamin B receptor (LBR) interacts both with B‑type lamins 
and chromatin‑associated heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) in conjunction with core histones, and supports postmitotic 
NE formation125,138,159. Members of the LEM (lamina‑associated protein 2 (LAP2), emerin, MAN1)‑domain family bind to 
lamins and interact with chromatin through barrier‑to‑autointegration factor (BAF)66. LEM proteins have been implicated 
in DNA replication, NE assembly and gene regulation160. SUN proteins in the INM interact with nesprins in the ONM, 
thereby forming so‑called LINC complexes that establish connections to actin and intermediate filaments in the 
cytoplasm6. Nurim is a multispanning INM protein with no assigned function161. Proteomic approaches have identified 
more than 60 novel putative transmembrane proteins in the NE162,163 (not shown). b | Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are 
large macromolecular assemblies of 60–120 MDa that display eight‑fold rotational symmetry164,165. They are built from 
~30 different proteins, termed nucleoporins (Nups). Three ring‑like substructures constitute the major backbone of the 
NPC and surround the central transport channel. Other major architectural features of the NPC are cytoplasmic 
filaments and the nuclear basket. Many Nups are part of NPC subcomplexes, which are used as building blocks166.  
One of the most prominent subcomplexes is the NUP107–160 complex (dark green), which localizes to both sides of the 
NPC and is a major constituent of the NPC scaffold. The central channel of the NPC is filled with FG‑repeat‑containing 
Nups, which provide interaction sites for transport receptors. ELYS is known as MEL‑28 in Caenorhabditis elegans. 
POM121, pore membrane protein of 121 kDa; RAE1, RNA export 1; SEC13, secretory pathway 13; SEH1, SEC13 
homologue 1; TPR, translocated promoter region.

Taking apart the NE during mitosis
Microscopy studies have contributed to the detailed know­
ledge of the course of nuclear division in different species 
(FIG. 2). NEBD during open mitosis comprises several  
distinct steps, including NPC disassembly, depoly mer­
ization of the nuclear lamina and the clearance of NE 
membranes from chromatin (FIG. 3).

The process of NEBD. An initial event of NEBD is the 
dispersal of soluble nucleoporins12–14, many of which are 
released from the NE as mitotically stable nucleoporin 
subcomplexes. upon NPC disassembly, nuclear pores 
no longer restrain the passive diffusion of nuclear and 
cytoplasmic components. In mammalian cells, NPC dis­
assembly starts in late prophase and is completed within 
minutes, as revealed by kinetic analysis13. At the temporal 
resolution of this analysis, it seems that most nucleo porins 
disassemble synchronously, with the exception of the 
peripheral FG­repeat nucleoporin NuP98, which starts 
to disperse slightly ahead of the bulk of nucleo porins13. 
Removal of NuP98 could thus be the initial trigger 

for the subsequent wave of NPC disassembly. Also, in 
Drosophila melanogaster embryos and starfish oocytes, 
NPC disassembly is fast, and certain peripheral nucleo­
porins leave the NE slightly earlier than central NPC 
subcomplexes12,14–16.

NEBD is supported by a microtubule­dependent 
tearing mechanism in mammalian somatic cells17,18. 
Microtubules that are attached to the outer face of the 
nucleus exert pulling forces that cause NE invaginations 
around the centrosomes. This leads to the formation of a 
few holes on the distal side of the nucleus. These holes are 
apparent as discontinuities in the nuclear lamina and have 
been interpreted as the result of mechanical stretching of 
the lamina. It is also conceivable that they represent NE 
fenestrae initially caused by NPC removal and expanded 
by microtubule­dependent pulling. Microtubules also 
assist in clearing chromosomes from NE membranes, 
which might facilitate spindle assembly17–19.

Nuclear disassembly continues with lamina depoly­
merization20. The first signs of lamina disassembly 
are already detectable in early prophase, when A­type 

Guanine nucleotide- 
exchange factor
A protein that catalyses the 
exchange of GDP for GTP on  
G proteins.

GTPase-activating protein
A factor that stimulates the 
intrinsic GTPase activity  
of small GTPases, thereby 
inducing the hydrolysis of 
bound GTP to GDP.

Nucleoporin
A protein constituent of the 
nuclear pore complex (NPC). 
each NPC is composed of  
~30 different nucleoporins, 
which are present in multiples 
of 8, reflecting the eight-fold 
rotational symmetry of the 
NPC. Approximately one-third 
of nucleoporins contain 
Phe-Gly repeats that are 
binding sites for transport 
receptors.

Centrosome
The microtubule-organizing 
centre in animal cells. It 
consists of a pair of centrioles 
surrounded by the 
pericentriolar matrix. During 
mitosis, centrosomes serve as 
spindle poles.

NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology 

 VOluME 10 | MARCH 2009 | 179

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

a

s
n
a
o
z
a
t
e
M

c

b

Open mitosis

Closed mitosis

i

g
n
u
F

Semi-closed mitosis

d

Semi-closed mitosis

Nuclear pore 
complex
Solubilized nucleoporins

INM proteins
Transmembrane
nucleoporins

MTOCs
Microtubules
Lamina

Chromatin
Kinetochore

Figure 2 | From ‘open’ to ‘closed’ mitosis. The terms ‘open’ and ‘closed’ mitosis refer  
Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
to the extremes of a range of possible fates of the nuclear envelope (NE) during mitosis167.  
a | In open mitosis, which is used in somatic cells of higher eukaryotes, the NE is 
completely disassembled and removed from chromatin and a cytoplasmic spindle is 
formed by microtubules that emanate from cytoplasmic centrosomes. b | In closed 
mitosis, the NE stays intact. Here, microtubule‑organizing centres (MTOCs) are either 
constantly part of the NE (for example, in Saccharomyces cerevisiae) or are inserted into 
the NE during mitotic entry (for example, in Schizosaccharomyces pombe), and in both 
cases MTOCs direct the formation of a nuclear spindle. The establishment of a nuclear 
spindle requires nuclear uptake of tubulin. Closed mitosis is the most common 
mechanism in lower eukaryotes. A prevalent intermediate between open and closed 
mitosis is the partial disassembly of the NE. c | In higher eukaryotes, semi‑closed mitosis is 
accomplished by certain cell types, such as in Caenorhabditis elegans early embryos or 
during syncytial embryonic divisions in Drosophila melanogaster. Here, the NE only 
partially opens up near to centrosomes to allow cytoplasmic spindle microtubules to 
reach the nuclear interior without the need for major rearrangements of NE components. 
In syncytial cells, this ensures that spindle microtubules capture the correct 
chromosomes in the common cytoplasm. The NE finally breaks down during anaphase.  
d | Some lower eukaryotes, such as the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans, also 
undergo semi‑closed mitosis and partially disassemble their nuclear pore complexes to 
achieve the rapid influx of tubulin. INM, inner nuclear membrane.

Cyclin-dependent kinase
(CDK). A family of protein 
kinases, the activity of which 
depends on the formation of a 
complex with cyclin subunits. 
Different CDK–cyclin 
complexes orchestrate distinct 
steps in the cell cycle.

lamins start to be released into the nucleoplasm21. 
Visible changes in the organization of B­type lamins 
occur only after the NE permeability barrier has been 
disrupted by NPC disassembly18,21,22. At the same time, 
INM proteins detach from lamins and chromatin18, 
and NE membrane proteins retract into the membrane  
system of the ER23–26.

Triggering NEBD: kinases and their targets. NPC dis­
assembly, lamina depolymerization and the dissociation  
of INM proteins from their nuclear binding sites are 
controlled by the activation of mitotic kinases, which 
directly contribute to the phosphorylation of NE proteins 
(Supplementary information S1 (table)). It is assumed that 
these phosphorylation events disrupt interactions among 
NE components during mitosis. However, the functional 
consequences of phosphorylation have only been assessed 
for a few kinase targets.

Of all of the kinases that are implicated in NEBD, the 
role of cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) is the best under­
stood. CDK1 directly contributes to the dis assembly of the  
nuclear lamina. The phosphorylation of lamins by CDK1 
results in lamina depolymerization in vitro27, and the 
mutation of CDK1 phosphorylation sites in lamin A/C 
blocks lamina disassembly at the onset of mitosis28. 
Furthermore, CDK1 might also be directly involved in 
NPC disassembly. Many nucleo porins are phosphorylated 
on CDK1 sites during mitosis, inc luding members of the 
NuP107–160 and NuP53–93 subcomplexes, NuP98, 
NDC1, GP210 and others29–33 (Supplementary information  
S1 (table)). Moreover, the inhibition of CDK1 blocks NE 
permeabilization during NEBD in vitro19, and recom­
binant CDK1–cyclin B causes the dissociation of a subset 
of nucleoporins from isolated D. melanogaster embryo 
nuclei34. Also, the release of INM proteins from lamins and 
chromatin might depend on CDK1 phosphoryl ation35. 
Known CDK1 targets at the INM are lamina­associated  
protein 2α (lAP2α)36, lAP2β37 and lamin B receptor (lBR)38.  
It is noteworthy that not only B­type cyclins are important 
for nuclear disassembly, as depletion of cyclin A2 from  
Hela cells has been shown to significantly delay NEBD39.
A couple of additional kinases are known to contri­
bute to NEBD in various species, including protein 
kinase C (PKC), Aurora A and polo­like kinase 1 (PlK1). 
In vertebrate cells, high levels of PKCβ activity have 
been observed immediately before NEBD40, and the βII  
isoform of PKC translocates to the nucleus at the G2–M 
transition41,42. This coincides with a rise in the levels of 
nuclear diacylglycerol42, which is required for PKC activ­
ation. PKC inhibition results in G2 arrest in vivo43 and 
blocks NEBD in vitro19,44. So far, lamin B is the only known 
target of PKCβII in NEBD41,43, but additional targets are 
likely to exist. In Caenorhabditis elegans, Aurora A has 
been implicated in NEBD45,46, but it is not known which of  
its targets affects nuclear disassembly. Similarly, a lack  
of PlK1 activity delays NEBD in C. elegans47 and human 
somatic cells48.

Notably, also during the semi­closed mitosis of 
Aspergillus nidulans, NPCs are partially disassembled 
by the release of 14 nucleoporins49 to allow for nuclear 
entry of Cdk1–cyclin B50. This partial NPC disassembly 
depends on the activity of two kinases, NimA (never in 
mitosis A) and Cdk1. The activity of NimA correlates 
with the phosphorylation of SonBnNup98 and its dispersal 
from the NPC51. Whether NimA­related kinases sup­
port nuclear disassembly in organisms undergoing open 
mitosis remains to be investigated. Notably, however, 
the expression of NIMA in mammalian cells induces  
chromatin condensation52,53 and NEBD53.

180 | MARCH 2009 | VOluME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

a

G2

Prophase

Metaphase

R E V I E W S

b

Chromatin condensation
TOPOIIα, condensins,
histone H3 phosphorylation

Retraction of INM
proteins into the ER,
tubulation of the ER

MT nucleation
and separation
of chromosomes
Aurora A, PLK1,
CDK1, NEK2

MT-dependent
tearing of the NE
Dynein

NPC and lamina
disassembly
CDK1, PKC

Chromatin
INM proteins

Kinetochore
Lamins

Microtubules
MTOCs

Nuclear pore complex
NUP107–160 and ELYS

Transmembrane nucleoporins

Figure 3 | Nuclear envelope breakdown during ‘open’ mitosis. a | The images show HeLa cells in which the inner 
Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
nuclear membrane (INM, green; stained by green fluorescent protein fused to lamina‑associated protein 2β), DNA (blue; 
stained with Hoechst) and microtubules (red; stained by red fluorescent protein–α‑tubulin) are visualized in G2, prophase 
and metaphase. Scale bars, 10 μm. b | At the end of G2 phase, the activation of mitotic kinases, including the master 
mitotic regulator cyclin‑dependent kinase 1 (CDK1), triggers entry into prophase, which is associated with a series of 
events that include the start of chromatin condensation, formation of microtubule asters around centrosomes and 
centrosome separation. Microtubules that are attached to the nuclear envelope (NE) in conjunction with the 
minus‑end‑directed motor dynein lead to NE invaginations around centrosomes and to the formation of holes on the 
opposing site of the NE. At the same time, nuclear pore complex (NPC) disassembly commences and is probably caused by 
the phosphorylation of nucleoporins. The transition into prometaphase is marked by the loss of the NE permeability 
barrier. Phosphorylation of nuclear lamins and INM proteins by CDK1, protein kinase C (PKC) and probably other kinases 
results in lamina disassembly and allows for the retraction of NE membranes into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In 
metaphase, most soluble components of the NE are dispersed throughout the cytoplasm, whereas INM proteins reside  
in the tubular mitotic ER. ELYS is known as MEL‑28 in Caenorhabditis elegans. MTOC, microtubule‑organizing centre; 
NEK2, NimA‑related kinase 2; PLK1, polo‑like kinase 1; TOPOIIα, topoisomerase IIα.

Taken together, the concerted action of multiple kinases 
might be required to accomplish nuclear dis assembly. In 
the future, it will be important to distinguish between the 
indirect and direct effects of some of the aforementioned 
kinases on NEBD.

Nocodazole
A drug that inhibits the 
polymerization of 
microtubules. 
Nocodazole-treated cells enter 
mitosis but cannot form a 
mitotic spindle and 
consequently arrest in 
prometaphase.

Centrosomes and microtubules in NEBD. At the onset 
of mitosis, microtubule asters form at centrosomes 
and then move apart along the NE54. Furthermore, in 
mammalian somatic cells, microtubule­dependent 
tearing of the NE during prophase triggers the form­
ation of holes, and supports the removal of membranes 
from chromatin during prometaphase17–19. In vitro, 

importin­β and RanGTP regulate this microtubule­
driven process through the Ran gradient by an unknown 
mechanism19.

Both centrosome migration and NE tearing require 
dynein, a cytoplasmic minus­end­directed micro tubule 
motor that associates with the NE at the end of G2 
(ReFs 17,55,56). The dynein­binding proteins lIS1 and 
NDEl1 colocalize with dynein to the NE in prophase, 
and their absence delays the transition into prometaphase 
in neural stem cells, probably by affecting NEBD57. 
Notably, microtubule­dependent tearing is not essential 
for the disruption of the NE, as NEBD is delayed rather 
than blocked in nocodazole­treated cells17–19.

NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology 

 VOluME 10 | MARCH 2009 | 181

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

It is still unclear which microtubule attachment sites 
at the NE are used for centrosome tethering and micro­
tubule­dependent NE remodelling in mammalian cells. 
In C. elegans, the Hook­family member zygote defective  
protein 12 (ZYG­12) mediates attachment between 
centro somes and the ONM by providing a link to the 
dynein subunit DlI­1 (ReF. 58). However, no NE­associated 
orthologues of ZYG­12 have been described in mammals 
so far. Rather, the INM protein emerin, which can bind 
to β­tubulin and partly localizes to the ONM, has been 
suggested to connect centrosomes to the NE59. Whether 
this potential function of emerin is relevant for mitotic 
onset is unknown.

Changes in chromatin. Entry into mitosis is accompanied 
by the structural reorganization of chromatin into con­
densed chromosomes. Chromatin condensation involves 
several factors, including topoisomerase IIα (TOPOIIα) as 
well as condensin I and II complexes. Moreover, histones 
and changes in their post­translational modifications are 
important for mitotic chromatin compaction. Specifically, 
phosphorylation of residue S10 in histone H3 is tightly 
linked to chromosome condensation (for reviews,  
see ReFs 60–63).

Chromatin starts to condense before NEBD. Once the 
NE is permeabilized, the rate of condensation in Hela 
cells increases more than threefold and is then completed 
in a few minutes18. The increase in condensation rate 
upon NEBD coincides with nuclear entry of condensin I, 
which is cytoplasmic in interphase. By contrast, con­
densin II is nuclear throughout interphase and supports 
chromosome condensation during early prophase64,65. 
Condensed chromosomes are initially localized at the 
nuclear periphery64, probably because chromatin–NE 
contacts are not yet completely broken. In addition, 
chromosomes might be captured by NPC–kinetochore 
interactions, as some nucleoporins are known to localize 
to kinetochores in mitosis (see below).

In addition to global changes in chromatin organiza­
tion, the phosphorylation of specific chromatin­associated  
proteins affects their interaction with INM proteins, 
which in turn might support NEBD. One example is the 
mitotic phosphorylation of the barrier­to­autointegration 
factor (BAF), an essential DNA­binding protein enriched 
at the NE66.  BAF phosphorylation in vitro reduces its 
binding to chromatin and to INM proteins of the lEM 
(lAP2, emerin, MAN1) protein family67,68, and might pro­
mote the dissociation of lEM proteins from chromatin  
during mitosis.

The NE and the mitotic ER. The disassembly of the 
nuclear lamina and the phosphorylation of INM and 
chromatin proteins allow for the complete absorption 
of NE membranes and their resident proteins into the 
mitotic ER23,24. Not only the NE, but also the ER is dram­
atically reorganized during mitosis, such that it forms an 
exclusively tubular network that is devoid of membrane 
sheets25. Recent data obtained using C. elegans embryos 
suggest that mitotic NE and ER remodelling share  
common requirements, namely for the GTPase RAB­5 as 
well as for YOP­1 and RET­1 (ReF. 69). RET­1 and YOP­1 

Topoisomerase
An enzyme that binds to DNA 
and catalyses its unknotting by 
transiently breaking 
phosphodiester bonds.

Condensin
A five-subunit protein complex 
that is associated with mitotic 
chromosomes and is 
implicated in chromosome 
condensation. Two types of 
condensin complexes exist  
in vertebrate cells — 
condensin I and II — which 
share the ATPase subunits 
structural maintenance of 
chromosomes 2 (sMC2)  
and sMC4.

Reticulon
A member of the reticulon 
family of membrane proteins 
that are associated with the 
tubular endoplasmic reticulum 
(eR). Reticulons as well as 
members of the DP1/YOP1 
protein family contain two long 
hydrophobic domains that are 
each proposed to insert as 
wedge-like hairpins into lipid 
bilayers and to promote the 
formation of eR tubules.

COPI
(Coatomer protein complex I). 
A cytosolic protein complex 
that is composed of seven 
polypeptides that coats 
membrane transport vesicles. 
The COPI complex is required 
for the formation of 
Golgi-derived vesicles for 
retrograde transport to the eR.

are membrane­bending proteins of the reticulon and DP1 
protein families, respectively, that shape ER tubules70. 
Depletion of RAB­5 or YOP­1 and RET­1 not only affects 
the structure of the mitotic ER but also inhibits NEBD69. 
Interestingly, lack of RAB­5 or the transmembrane 
nucleo porin GP­210 lead to similar NEBD phenotypes: 
delays in NPC and lamina disassembly69,71. Although 
further work is needed to shed light on the underlying 
mechanism, these data suggest that the sheet­to­tubule 
transition of membranes might facilitate NEBD. Whether 
this involves sheet­to­tubule transition of NE membranes, 
or whether the reorganization of the ER affects NEBD 
more indirectly, are open questions. Because depletion 
of the nucleoporin GP­210 phenocopies the effect of 
RAB­5 or YOP­1 and RET­1 depletion, GP­210 might 
be a good candidate to support NE­specific membrane 
remodelling.

Another link between membrane remodelling fac­
tors and NEBD stems from studies on the disassembly of 
in vitro assembled nuclei using Xenopus laevis extracts72,73. 
Nuclear disassembly in this system was reported to 
depend on components that are involved in the forma­
tion of coatomer protein complex I (COPI)­type vesicles, 
although evidence for an in vivo function of the COPI 
complex in NEBD is still missing.

NPC components and the mitotic spindle
Although the NE does not exist as a functional unit dur­
ing mitosis, some of its components have key roles in 
the regulation of different mitotic processes after NEBD. 
Interestingly, different nucleoporin subcomplexes  
influence spindle formation and anaphase onset.

Nucleoporins in spindle assembly and kinetochore function.  
During spindle assembly, microtubules are reorganized 
such that minus ends are focused into two poles at centro­
somes, whereas plus ends interact with chromo somes 
through kinetochores and align them on the metaphase 
plate. Spindle assembly is not only aided by centro­
somes and chromatin, but also by microtubule­binding 
proteins, such as molecular motors and regulators of 
microtubule dynamics74. One nucleoporin that has been 
implicated in spindle assembly is RNA export 1 (RAE1). 
RAE1 forms a complex with NuP98, and both are 
involved in RNA export during interphase75,76. In mitosis, 
RAE1 binds to microtubules and is required for spindle 
formation in vitro and in vivo77  (FIG. 4). Although RAE1 
itself has no microtubule­stabilizing or micro tubule­ 
bundling activity, it is part of a spindle­associated  
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex, the integrity of 
which is essential for spindle assembly by an unknown 
mechanism77. In mitotic cells, RAE1 interacts and colo­
calizes with NuMA (nuclear mitotic apparatus protein), 
a microtubule­associated protein that promotes micro­
tubule bundling at spindle poles. Both depletion and 
overexpression of RAE1 lead to increased formation of 
multipolar spindles, an effect that can be counteracted by 
NuMA depletion or co­overexpression, respectively78. 
Thus, the exact balance of RAE1 and NuMA levels 
seems to be crucial for correct bipolar spindle formation  
in vivo.

182 | MARCH 2009 | VOluME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

MTOC

Microtubule

a

NUP107–160
complex

RAE1
RNP

NUP98

RAE1

NUP98

NUMA

N

U
c o

0

P10 7 –16
ple x
m

R A E 1
R N P

N U P 9 8

NUMA

RAE1

NUP98
Spindle formation

Chromosome

b

Inner kinetochore Outer kinetochore

SUMO

TOPOIIα

Sumoylation on free or
kinetochore-bound
RanBP2?

TOPOIIα

ELYS

NUP107–160
complex

NDC80–
HEC1
complex

CENP-F

Ran

CRM1

RanBP2

RanGAP

Stable kinetochore
MT attachment

SUMO

TOPOIIα

Sister chromatid
decatenation

Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology

Figure 4 | Nucleoporins in spindle assembly and kinetochore function.  
a | The nucleoporin NUP107–160 complex and RNA export 1 (RAE1)‑containing 
ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) localize to spindle microtubules and are required for bipolar 
spindle formation. RAE1 is also involved in microtubule bundling by the microtubule‑
associated protein nuclear mitotic apparatus protein (NUMA). The balance of RAE1 and 
NUMA levels is crucial for correct spindle assembly. Whether RAE1 functions in these 
processes alone or in conjunction with its binding partner NUP98 is unclear. b | The 
NUP107–160 complex in conjunction with its chromatin‑targeting factor ELYS (MEL‑28 
in Caenorhabditis elegans)80,132–134 is recruited to kinetochores primarily through the 
NDC80–HEC1 complex84, a major building block of outer kinetochores. The presence of 
the NUP107–160 complex at kinetochores influences the attachment of kinetochore 
microtubules (MTs), both by recruitment of Ran‑binding protein 2 (RanBP2; also known  
as NUP358) and Ran GTPase‑activating protein 1 (RanGAP1), and by stabilizing the 
attachment of centromere protein F (CENP‑F), a protein that is required for kinetochore–
microtubule interactions. RanBP2 and RanGAP1 recruitment to the kinetochore depends 
on the formation of a complex with the exportin CRM1 (also known as XPO1) and 
RanGTP. How RanBP2 and RanGAP1 affect kinetochore MT attachment is not known.  
In addition, RanBP2 is required for sumoylation of topoisomerase IIα (TOPOIIα) and its 
targeting to the inner kinetochore, where TOPOIIα functions in sister chromatid 
decatenation. Whether TOPOIIα is sumoylated (SUMO) by free or kinetochore‑bound 
RanBP2 is not known. MTOC, microtubule‑organizing centre.

R E V I E W S

prometaphase79. But intriguingly, a prominent fraction 
of the NuP107–160 complex localizes to kinetochores 
in both C. elegans embryos80 and mammalian cells81–83. 
Cells that are depleted of the NuP107–160 complex dis­
play a prolonged prometaphase, defects in chromosome 
congression and a delay in anaphase onset84. The absence 
of the NuP107–160 complex at kinetochores causes 
defects in chromosome attachment and in the forma­
tion of stable microtubule–kinetochore interactions. 
The molecular mechanism of the underlying defect is 
not completely clear, but centromere protein F (CENP­F), 
a protein that is involved in microtubule attachment, is 
more easily stripped from kinetochores in the absence 
of the NuP107–160 complex84.

The NuP107–160 complex also helps to attract other 
nucleoporins to kinetochores, namely the Ran­binding 
protein 2 (RanBP2; also known as NuP358)–RanGAP1 
complex. RanBP2 has sUMO E3 ligase activity and forms 
a stable complex with sumoylated RanGAP1 throughout 
the cell cycle85,86. Furthermore, the exportin CRM1 (also 
known as XPO1) binds to kinetochores in a NuP107–160  
complex­dependent  manner,  suggesting  that  this 
nucleo porin subcomplex has a central scaffolding role at 
both NPCs and kinetochores84,87. Whereas NuP107–160 
and CRM1 are found at kinetochores that are already 
in prophase, RanBP2 and RanGAP1 are not recruited 
until prometaphase88. Their association coincides with 
the establishment of stable microtubule–kinetochore 
attachments and depends on microtubules and CRM1 
(ReFs 87,89). The depletion of RanBP2–RanGAP1 leads 
to defects in bipolar spindle formation, the accumu­
lation of unaligned chromosomes and a lack of cold-
stable microtubules88,89. It will be interesting to see if the 
enzymatic activities of RanBP2 and RanGAP1 in pro­
tein sumoylation and in the stimulation of the GTPase 
activity of Ran, respectively, are required for normal 
kinetochore function.

The intriguing connection between NPC compo­
nents and spindle assembly raises the question of how 
NPC disassembly and microtubule–kinetochore attach­
ment are linked. One factor that is connected to both 
kinetochores and the NuP107–160 complex is CENP­F, 
which  interacts  with  the  NuP133  subunit  of  the 
NuP107–160 complex on the one hand84, and is required 
for kinetochore–microtubule interactions through the 
NDEl1–NDE1–lIS1–dynein pathway on the other90. 
Thus, understanding the spatial and temporal dynam­
ics of the protein interaction network around CENP­F 
might be a promising avenue to follow.

In addition to RAE1, the NUP107–160 nucleoporin 
subcomplex has been implicated in spindle forma­
tion using X. laevis egg extracts79, in which it evenly 
decorates in vitro assembled spindles. Depletion of the 
NuP107–160 complex compromises spindle assembly, 
either by the absence of the complex or indirectly by the 
co­depletion of associated factors.

In  mitotic  mammalian  cells,  the  NuP107–160  
complex can also be detected at spindle poles and prox­
imal microtubules during a narrow time window in 

Nucleoporins and the spindle assembly checkpoint. The 
correct bipolar attachment of kinetochores to the mitotic 
spindle is monitored by the spindle assembly checkpoint 
(SAC; BOX 1). Mitotic arrest deficient 1 (MAD1) and 
MAD2, which are key regulators of the SAC, are asso­
ciated with NPCs during interphase91. As cells enter 
prophase, MAD1 and MAD2 accumulate on unattached 
kinetochores92–94 and monitor microtubule occupancy to 
prevent premature anaphase onset. MAD1 is responsible  
for targeting of the MAD1–MAD2 complex to both 
NPCs and kinetochores. Two additional regulators of 

NUP107–160 complex
An essential, multimeric 
nucleoporin subcomplex that 
consists of ~10 subunits. It is 
the major constituent of the 
central nuclear pore complex 
(NPC) scaffold and it 
symmetrically localizes to both 
sides of the NPC.

NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology 

 VOluME 10 | MARCH 2009 | 183

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

Centromere
A specialized heterochromatin 
region on each chromosome 
where sister chromatids are 
held together and on which the 
kinetochore is formed during 
mitosis.

RanBP2
(Ran-binding protein 2). The 
major constituent of the 
cytoplasmic filaments of the 
nuclear pore complex. RanBP2 
has small ubiquitin-like 
modifier (sUMO) e3 ligase 
activity and forms a stable 
complex with sumoylated Ran 
GTPase-activating protein 1 
(RanGAP1) throughout the cell 
cycle. Furthermore, it contains 
four Ran-binding domains, 
which facilitate the 
disassembly of 
RanGTP-containing export 
complexes.

SUMO
(small ubiquitin-like modifier). 
A ubiquitin-like polypeptide 
that can be covalently 
attached to Lys residues on 
target proteins by an enzyme 
cascade. Unlike ubiquitin, it 
does not target proteins for 
proteasomal degradation. 
Attachment of sUMO to Ran 
GTPase-activating protein 1 
(RanGAP1) is required for the 
localization of RanGAP to 
nuclear pore complexes in 
metazoan cells.

CRM1
A RanGTP-binding nuclear 
transport receptor that 
mediates the export of 
proteins that have Leu-rich 
nuclear export signals.

Cold-stable microtubules
Microtubules that resist 
depolymerization at low 
temperatures.

Haploinsufficient
A gene is haploinsufficient in a 
diploid organism when one 
functional allele is insufficient 
to maintain a wild-type state.

Securin
An inhibitor of the enzyme 
separase that cleaves the sister 
chromatin cohesion protein 1 
(sCC1) subunit of cohesin to 
allow for sister chromatid 
separation.

Aneuploidy
Having too many or too few 
copies of a chromosome.

MAD1–MAD2, namely p31comet (an inhibitor of MAD2 
activation) and MPS1 (a kinase that is required for target­
ing of MAD1 and MAD2 to kinetochores), also localize  
to NPCs95,96. Not only in mammalian cells, but also in 
budding yeast the Mad1–Mad2 complex is associated  
with NPCs97 and partially relocalizes from NPCs to 
kinetochores on activation of the spindle checkpoint97,98. 
Thus, key members of the SAC pathway are kept at the 
nuclear pore during interphase. Whether NPC associa­
tion helps to keep them in an inhibited state is unknown. 
Furthermore, it has not been addressed whether the asso­
ciation of MADs with NPC components outside kineto­
chores persists during mitosis in mammalian cells and 
whether this affects the spindle checkpoint response.

The ties between the SAC pathway and nucleo porins 
extend beyond MAD1–MAD2, as the SAC protein  
BuB3 shows homology to the nucleoporin RAE1 
(ReF. 99). Both haploinsufficient Bub3+/– and Rae1+/– mice 
show mitotic defects, such as increased missegregation  
of chromosomes and a failure to arrest in mitosis after 
the induction of spindle damage100, suggesting that 
RAE1, like BuB3, could have a function in the spindle 
checkpoint. Indeed, RAE1, in complex with its partner 
NuP98, interacts with a CDH1 (also known as FZR1)­
associated fraction of anaphase­promoting complex/
cyclosome (APC/C) during prometaphase (see ReF. 101) 
(BOX 1). CDH1 is an activator of APC/C and confers sub­
strate specificity to it. RAE1–NuP98 specifically inhibits 
APC/CCDH1­mediated ubiquitylation of securin in vitro102. 
Consistently, Rae1+/– Nup98+/– mice show premature 
securin degradation, leading to precocious anaphase 
onset and increased aneuploidy102,103. These data indicate 
that the RAE1–NuP98 heterodimer assists in regulating 
APC/CCDH1 during early mitosis. Although APC/CCDH1  
complex formation is assumed to be prevented by 
CDK­dependent phosphorylation of CDH1 until ana­
phase onset104, an additional mechanism that involves 
the RAE1–NuP98 heterodimer might be in place to 

inhibit premature APC/C activation by CDH1. Notably, 
RAE1 has also been implicated in the negative regula­
tion of APC/CCDH1 activity during cell cycle exit from 
G1 in differentiating neuroblastoma cells105. Collectively, 
these findings suggest an intimate link between RAE1 
and APC/CCDH1 activity. How RAE1 association with  
APC/CCDH1 is controlled throughout the cell cycle 
deserves to be the subject of future studies.

RanBP2 and resolution of sister chromatids. After all 
chromosomes have been faithfully captured by micro­
tubules, anaphase is initiated and sister chromatids are 
separated. This requires decatenation of sister chroma­
tids at centromeres by TOPOIIα. The recruitment of 
TOPOIIα to centromeres requires its sumoylation, 
which is promoted by RanBP2 in mammalian cells106. 
Strikingly, mice that express low levels of RanBP2 display 
defects in chromosome separation owing to the impaired 
association of TOPOIIα with centromeres106. Similar  
to TOPOIIα inhibition, reduced levels of RanBP2 lead to 
the formation of anaphase bridges, and consequently, mice 
with reduced levels of RanBP2 develop severe aneuploidy 
and are prone to spontaneous tumour formation106. This 
makes RanBP2 the first example of a nucleoporin that has 
tumour­suppressing activity.

NE assembly
The NE starts to reform around each segregated mass 
of chromatin in late anaphase, and nuclear reassembly 
is completed in telophase. In each of the future daughter 
cells, the reassembly of the NE must ensure the enclosure 
of the whole set of chromosomes into a single nucleus. 
This requires coordination between processes that affect 
chromatin status on the one hand, and recruitment of 
membranes and NPC insertion on the other. The attrac­
tion of NE components back to chromatin is controlled in 
a spatially and temporally defined fashion. An important 
spatial cue originates from the production of RanGTP on 

 Box 1 | The spindle assembly checkpoint
The onset of anaphase is tightly regulated by the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC). The SAC ensures that sister 
chromatid separation is initiated only after all chromosomes have established correct bipolar attachment.  
Sister chromatid separation requires the degradation of securin, an inhibitor of the cohesin-cleaving enzyme separase.  
Securin degradation depends on the activity of the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C), a multisubunit E3 
ubiquitin ligase (for reviews, see ReFs 101,104). Cell division cycle 20 (CDC20) and CDH1 (also known as FZR1) are 
non-core subunits of the APC/C that are responsible for activation and substrate specificity of the complex. Whereas 
CDC20 functions early during mitosis, it is exchanged for CDH1 during anaphase. The SAC specifically inhibits CDC20 
and thereby blocks APC/C-dependent ubiquitylation of cyclin B and securin, which is required to promote anaphase. 
Members of the SAC include mitotic arrest deficient 1 (MAD1), MAD2, MPS1, BUB1, BUB3 and BUBR1 (Mad3 in yeast). 
MAD2 and BUBR1 directly interact with CDC20 and are thought to be the main mediators of APC/CCDC20 inactivation. 
Notably, BUB3 is a co-inhibitor of BUBR1 and displays sequence similarity to the nucleoporin RNA export 1 (RAE1).

In prophase, different SAC members, including MAD1 and MAD2, accumulate on unattached kinetochores. MAD1 and 

MAD2 form a stable complex throughout the cell cycle, with MAD1 responsible for the targeting of the complex to 
kinetochores and nuclear pore complexes (NPCs). Furthermore, the kinases MPS1 and BUB1 are required at kinetochores 
to load the MAD1–MAD2 complex. Whereas all MAD1 is found in complex with MAD2, MAD2 itself is also present as free 
protein. It can adopt an open (O-MAD2) and a closed (C-MAD2) conformation. Only C-MAD2 can bind MAD1 or CDC20, 
and the transformation of O-MAD2 to C-MAD2 is thought to be the rate-limiting step of inhibitory CDC20 complex 
formation156. The MAD2 template model predicts that transformation of O-MAD2 to C-MAD2 is catalysed on 
MAD1–C-MAD2 at unattached kinetochores, thereby generating CDC20–C-MAD2 complexes that function as a 
diffusible signal to inhibit APC/C ( for a discussion, see ReF. 101). It is not clear whether the NPC association of 
MAD1–C-MAD2 has any functional significance in the context of the SAC.

184 | MARCH 2009 | VOluME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

the surface of mitotic chromatin that helps to liberate NPC 
components from inhibitory complexes with importins 
close to chromatin11,107–109 (see below). Furthermore, 
changes in chromatin structure and composition that 
occur during its decondensation might allow for the 
timely reassociation of NE constituents. These steps are 
temporally guided by the overall orchestration of mitotic 
exit. Dephosphorylation of nucleoporins, chromatin­
associated factors and NE membrane proteins requires 
the inactivation of mitotic kinases, such as CDK1, and the 
action of protein phosphatases. The best­understood con­
tribution to this stems from protein phosphatase 1, which, 
by use of specific targeting subunits, controls anaphase 
chromosome structure110, chromatin decondensation111  
and lamin B dephosphorylation112.

Preparation of chromatin for NE reassembly. The forma­
tion of a compact cluster of neighbouring chromosomes 
in late anaphase is one mechanism to ensure the reas­
sembly of the NE around the entire chromatin mass. In 
fact, the volume occupied by chromatin is the smallest 
at this stage of mitosis110,113. The principle that under­
lies the formation of a compact cluster of neighbour­
ing chromosomes is based on both bringing individual 
chromosomes into close proximity during poleward 
movement and compacting individual chromo somes 
by axial shortening (FIG. 5a,b). Chromosome compac­
tion is dependent on Aurora kinase activity as well as on 
microtubule dynamics113. This microtubule dependency 
has recently been accentuated by the discovery that the 
chromokinesin KID (also known as KIF22 and kinesin 10) 
contributes to anaphase chromatin compaction in both 
Hela cells and mouse zygotes114. KID is a DNA­binding, 
plus­end­directed motor that localizes to chromosome 
arms and to spindle microtubules, and is known to have 
an earlier role during mitosis, such as in prometaphase 
chromosome movements towards the spindle equator115. 
The contribution of KID to proper nuclear assembly 
during later steps of mitosis is most striking in mouse 
oocytes and early embryos, in which the loss of KID­
mediated anaphase chromosome compaction leads to a 
high frequency of micronuclei and multinucleated cells, 
causing embryonic death114. By contrast, neither male 
meiosis nor somatic mitosis is affected by KID defi­
ciency. It is unclear why KID deficiency is more delete­
rious in mouse early embryos than later in development 
— either there is a redundant activity to KID in somatic 
cells, or an intrinsic feature makes maternally controlled  
nuclear divisions more susceptible to the loss of this 
chromokinesin.

Another aspect in the preparation of chromatin for NE 
assembly has been unravelled through studies on the role 
of the AAA+ ATPase and ubiquitin­dependent chaperone  
p97 (also known as Cdc48 and VCP) in NE formation. 
In X. laevis egg extracts, p97, in conjunction with its 
heterodimeric ubiquitin­binding cofactor ufd1–Npl4, is 
needed for the formation of a closed NE around partially 
decondensed chromatin116. But how can the require­
ment for p97–ufd1–Npl4 be explained in molecular 
terms? Recent work has revealed that p97–ufd1–Npl4 
promotes NE formation by extracting polyubiquitylated 

Aurora B from chromatin, both during nuclear assembly 
in the X. laevis nuclear assembly system in vitro and 
during the first divisions of the C. elegans early embryo  
in vivo117. Persistence of active Aurora B kinase on chro­
matin has an inhibitory effect on both proper chromatin 
decondensation and NE reformation in these embry­
onic systems. Consistently, the requirement for p97 in 
nuclear assembly in vitro can be overcome by inhibiting  
Aurora B kinase activity. understanding whether and  
how the inhibition of chromatin decondensation  
and NE reformation by Aurora B are linked will require 
the identification of the Aurora B substrates that exert 
these effects. Known Aurora B targets, such as subunits 
of the condensin I complex118 and histone H3 (ReF. 119), 
are prime candidates for such substrates. Interestingly, 
changes in post­translational modifications of H3, 
including its phosphorylation and dephosphorylation 
during mitotic entry and exit, respectively, correlate 
with chromatin arm dissociation and re­association of 
heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1)120–122. HP1, in turn, 
might contribute to NE assembly — for example, by 
aiding the recruitment of INM proteins123, such as its 
interaction partner lBR124,125.

Although it is unclear whether the role of p97 in NE 
formation is conserved in somatic cells, it is intriguing 
that ubiquitylation of Aurora B has also been implicated 
in the control of the dynamic association of Aurora B with 
chromatin in Hela cells. The dissociation of Aurora B 
from chromosomes and its accumulation at the spindle 
midzone following anaphase onset are dependent on 
the e3 ubiquitin ligase cullin 3 (Cul3) and its substrate­ 
specific adaptor proteins KlH3 and KlH9 (ReF. 126). 
In cells that are depleted of Cul3 or KlH3 and KlH9, 
Aurora B fails to dissociate from segregating chromo­
somes and remains active, resulting in prolonged histone 
H3 phosphorylation. It has not been addressed, however, 
whether this causes a delay in chromatin decondensation  
and/or NE reformation in somatic cells.

NPC reassembly. An early event in NE reformation is the 
initiation of NPC assembly during late anaphase (FIG. 5b), 
which is marked by chromatin recruitment of so­called 
NPC ‘prepores’127 that are composed of the NuP107–160 
complex13,82,128. Depletion of the NuP107–160 complex 
leads to a reduction in NPC number in somatic cells128,129 
and results in the formation of pore­free nuclei in a 
X. laevis nuclear reformation assay82,128.

At least three mechanisms control the binding of the 
NuP107–160 complex to chromatin, and these might act 
in concert to guide the assembly of a chromatin­associated  
prepore in a spatially and temporally controlled manner.  
First, in the mitotic cytoplasm, the NuP107–160 complex 
is chaperoned by importin­β. The binding of importin­β 
to RanGTP, which is generated by the chromatin­bound 
RanGEF RCC1, induces the dissociation of importin­β 
from the NuP107–160 complex, thereby liberating the 
complex for chromatin binding130,131. Some form of 
temporal regulation must support this spatial control,  
as RanGTP production around chromatin persists 
throughout mitosis. This second mechanism might 
involve dephosphorylation of the NuP107–160 complex 

Sister chromatid
Two linked copies of a 
replicated chromosome that 
are the product of DNA 
replication. They are  
separated during the 
metaphase–anaphase 
transition of mitosis and then 
segregated into the two 
daughter cells.

Decatenation
The process in which rings or 
chains are untangled from each 
other. DNA sister chromatids 
become entangled or 
catenated as a consequence of 
DNA replication and must be 
decatenated to allow for sister 
chromatid separation and 
segregation during mitosis.

Anaphase bridge
Chromatin fibres that connect 
the two separating 
chromosome masses during 
anaphase. Anaphase bridges 
can lead to chromosome 
amplifications, translocations 
or deletions and are 
considered a hallmark of 
genomic instability.

Chromokinesin
A subgroup of molecular 
motors belonging to the kinesin 
family that associate with 
chromosome arms during 
mitosis.

Micronucleus
A nuclear envelope-enclosed 
chromosome (or group  
of chromosomes) that is not 
incorporated with most of the 
chromosomes into the newly 
formed nucleus during cell 
division. 

AAA+ ATPase
(ATPase associated with 
various cellular activities).  
A protein that contains one  
or two ATP-binding domains, 
and that forms ring-like 
oligomers and functions in 
conformational remodelling of 
macromolecules.

Aurora B
A member of the Aurora family 
of ser/Thr protein kinases. 
Aurora B is a component of the 
chromosome passenger 
complex and is required for 
several aspects of mitosis, such 
as kinetochore function, the 
spindle assembly checkpoint 
and cytokinesis.

NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology 

 VOluME 10 | MARCH 2009 | 185

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

a

Early anaphase

Late anaphase

Telophase

b

Formation of prepores and
recruitment of membrane
tubules
NUP107–160 and ELYS, RanGTP

NE reformation
• INM proteins bind DNA
• NE sheet formation
   removal of reticulons
• Membrane closure

Lamina assembly

Chromatin compaction
KID, Aurora B?

Completion of NPC assembly

Lamins

Transmembrane
nucleoporins

INM proteins
NUP107–160 and ELYS

MTOCs
Microtubules

Chromatin
Kinetochore

Figure 5 | Nuclear envelope reassembly after mitosis. a | The images show HeLa cells in which the inner nuclear 
membrane (INM, green; stained by green fluorescent protein fused to lamina‑associated protein 2β (LAP2β)), DNA (blue; 
Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology
stained with Hoechst) and microtubules (red; stained by red fluorescent protein–α‑tubulin) are visualized in early 
anaphase, late anaphase and telophase. Scale bars, 10 μm. b | In anaphase, separating chromatin masses are compacted 
by the action of the DNA‑binding chromokinesin KID (also known as KIF22 and kinesin 10). At this stage of mitosis,  
INM proteins, such as LAP2β, are still dispersed in the tubular mitotic endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Nuclear pore complex 
(NPC) assembly is initiated during anaphase by the recruitment of nucleoporin NUP107–160 complexes through ELYS 
(MEL‑28 in Caenorhabditis elegans) to chromatin, resulting in the formation of chromatin‑bound ‘prepores’. This requires 
the RanGTP‑dependent liberation of NUP107–160 complexes from an inhibitory association with importin‑β. During late 
anaphase, ER membrane tubules start binding to the chromatin surface. What mediates the initial attachment of the 
tubules to chromatin is unknown. During telophase, the retraction of membrane‑bending proteins (reticulons) into the 
peripheral ER allows the remodelling of ER tubules into flattened membrane sheets on the chromatin surface. Binding of 
INM proteins to DNA/chromatin supports the attachment of membrane sheets to chromatin. The first traces of lamins can 
be detected on chromatin at this stage. NPC formation is completed by the step‑wise recruitment of further NPC 
constituents and the nuclear envelope (NE) is sealed. Finally, transport‑competent NPCs allow for the nuclear import of 
lamins to complete the assembly of the nuclear lamina. MTOC, microtubule‑organizing centre.

E3 ubiquitin ligase
The last enzyme in a cascade 
of enzymes (e1, e2 and e3) 
that mediates the attachment 
of mono- or polyubiquitin to 
target proteins. e3 enzymes 
are binding platforms for e2 
ligases and substrate proteins 
and thereby confer specificity 
to the ubiquitylation reaction.

Annulate lamellae
stacks of membrane cisternae, 
usually localized in the 
cytoplasm, that are densely 
packed with nuclear pore 
complexes.

during anaphase, although the exact timing and the phos­
phatases that are responsible for this are unknown. A 
third contribution to the control of chromatin association 
of the NuP107–160 complex has been revealed by the  
discovery  of  its  chromatin­targeting  factor  ElYS 
(MEl­28 in C. elegans), which is required to confine 
postmitotic NPC assembly to the surface of chroma­
tin80,132,133. Consistently, RNA interference­mediated 
knockdown of vertebrate ElYS results in a reduction 
in the number of NPCs in the NE accompanied by an 
increase in ectopic NPC assembly in annulate lamellae as a 
result of un coupling NPC assembly from chromatin132,133. 
likewise, mutations in MEl­28 lead to defects in NE 
morphology and NPC assembly in C. elegans80,134.

The binding of ElYS to chromatin depends on an 
AT­hook DNA­binding motif in the carboxyl terminus of 
ElYS and occurs at AT­rich chromatin regions135,136. But 
what controls ElYS association with chromatin? Again, 
several mechanisms can be envisioned to collectively 
control this reaction. Spatial control is brought about by 
the RanGTP­dependent recruitment of ElYS to chrom­
atin133,134. Temporal regulation might depend on the 
dephosphorylation of ElYS or chromatin proteins during  
anaphase as well as on the timely exposure of AT­rich 
DNA regions during chromatin decondensation.

Subsequent events in NPC assembly include the asso­
ciation of membranes and other soluble nucleo porins 
with the chromatin­associated prepore, to produce a 

186 | MARCH 2009 | VOluME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

closed NE that contains transport­competent NPCs 
(see below). live­cell imaging of somatic cells shows 
that NPC assembly is not just the reversal of its early 
mitotic breakdown and that NPC components join in 
a defined order13. Membrane recruitment is manifested 
by the association of the transmembrane nucleoporins 
POM121 (pore membrane of 121 kDa) and probably 
NDC1 with the chromatin­associated prepore. This 
is followed by the attachment of other central NPC  
subcomplexes, such as the NuP93, NuP98 and NuP62 
complexes, the recruitment of which correlates with the 
gain of nuclear import activity.

Starting NE membrane reformation. The NE reforms 
from the mitotic ER by a process that involves the attrac­
tion of INM proteins to the surface of decondensing  
chromatin137,138, membrane­remodelling events that 
allow for the formation of a uniformly spaced double 
membrane139 and the generation of pores that house 
NPCs. Different NE membrane proteins probably 
orchestrate distinct steps in the membrane recruitment 
and remodelling process, which has been proposed to be 
accomplished by a massive reorganization of the tubular 
mitotic ER network on the chromatin surface140.

The first step in NE membrane reformation is the 
binding of the tips of ER tubules to chromatin141. Proteins 
that are known to eventually reside in curved parts of 
NE membranes, such as the pore membrane proteins 
NDC1 (ReFs 33,142) and POM121 (ReF. 143), the NPC­
associated protein SuN1 (ReF. 144) or the membrane­
coating NuP107–160 complex145,146, might be present 
on these tips and mediate chromatin association. The 
recruitment of ER tubules is followed by the attraction 
of more membrane material in­between the initial con­
tact sites, finally leading to the formation of expanded, 
flattened NE patches on chromatin140. The conversion 
of chromatin­associated tubules to membrane sheets is 
kinetically controlled by removal of ER­tubule­forming 
proteins of the reticulon family from the reforming NE141. 
Consistently, reticulon overexpression delays NE forma­
tion, whereas reticulon depletion by RNA interference  
speeds it up141.

DNA­binding INM proteins might stabilize the  
association of membrane sheets with chromatin at this 
point, as exogenous DNA inhibits flat sheet formation140. 
In support of this idea, it has been shown that several 
INM proteins can directly bind to DNA and that DNA can 
compete for membrane recruitment to chromatin during 
NE assembly in vitro147. Furthermore, ~50% of mamma­
lian INM proteins show a striking enrichment in basic, 
extralumenal domains147, suggesting that the binding of 
several different INM proteins to DNA could together 
account for the efficient recruitment of membranes  
to chromatin.

Besides a direct contribution of DNA, changes  
in chromatin assist membrane protein recruitment. In 
C. elegans, BAF is essential for NE reformation, presum­
ably by triggering the recruitment of INM proteins that 
have lEM domains to chromatin148. Surprisingly, the 
depletion of vaccinia­related kinase 1 (VRK1), which 
mediates the phosphorylation of BAF and thereby causes 

R E V I E W S

its chromatin dissociation, also compromises NE for­
mation148. Depletion of VRK1 causes lEM proteins to 
remain bound to chromatin during mitosis, which might 
in turn inhibit postmitotic NE assembly.

During early telophase, different regions of chromatin  
initially attract distinct sets of NE proteins. Whereas lBR, 
lAP2β and lamin B bind to more peripheral chrom atin 
regions, lAP2α, BAF, emerin and traces of A­type lamins 
localize to so­called ‘core’ regions that face the spindle 
midzone and spindle poles149,150. Although some asso­
ciation of nuclear lamins is observed during early stages 
of NE reformation150,151, the bulk of nuclear lamins are 
reassembled into the lamina only after the nuclei have 
regained competence for nuclear import152.

Coordination of closed NE formation and NPC insertion. 
A crucial step in nuclear reformation is the closure of the 
NE to re­establish its boundary function. At the same 
time, pores that are occupied by NPCs must be gener­
ated in the assembling double membrane. Therefore, a 
mechanism must exist to coordinate membrane closure 
and NPC insertion. The deposition of a chromatin­
associated prepore built by the NuP107–160 complex 
during anaphase is a crucial event, because depletion of 
its chromatin anchor ElYS leads to the formation of a 
pore­free NE in vitro133.

But how are membrane pores generated at the sites 
of prepore deposition? Two different models have been 
proposed to explain this. The first model proposes 
that pores are inserted into patches of flattened double 
membranes on the surface of chromatin153. This would 
require a membrane fusion event between the ONM 
and INM that is not understood mechanistically. Such 
fusion could be linked to the site of prepore deposition 
by the recruitment of the membrane fusion machin­
ery to the chromatin­bound NuP107–160 complex. 
The paradigm of this mode of NPC insertion is found 
in NPC assembly in yeasts with closed mitosis and in 
metazoan cells during interphase. Another model sug­
gests that the chromatin­associated prepore128 attracts 
membranes from aside, such that membranes would 
encircle the chromatin­associated prepore140 and render 
membrane fusion unnecessary for pore formation. 
Clearly, to distinguish between these two possibilities, 
a molecular understanding of membrane fusion dur­
ing interphase NPC assembly is required to be able to 
test whether factors that trigger pore formation during 
interphase NPC assembly also affect postmitotic NPC 
assembly.

A final step in NE assembly is the sealing of the NE. 
This requires both the formation of a continuous sheet 
of double membrane around chromatin and the clos­
ing of remaining holes that connect the INM and ONM 
by annular membrane fusion8. Annular fusion involves 
the constriction of a membrane ring, which results 
in the separation of two membranes by an unknown 
mechanism. If the second of the aforementioned mod­
els holds true, membrane remodelling around reassem­
bling NPCs could be a way to overcome a need for such 
annular fusion events by filling the remaining holes 
with NPCs140.

NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology 

 VOluME 10 | MARCH 2009 | 187

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

SNARE
(soluble N-ethylmaleimide-
sensitive fusion protein 
attachment protein receptor). 
A large protein family of 
membrane-anchored 
coiled-coil proteins that 
contribute to the specificity of 
membrane trafficking and 
promote membrane fusion.

ERC
(extrachromosomal ribosomal 
DNA circle). A self-replicating, 
non-centromeric plasmid that 
is generated sporadically by 
homologous recombination in 
chromosomal repeats of 
ribosomal DNA.

Is, then, membrane fusion at all required for the 
establishment of a closed NE from the mitotic ER net­
work? Notably, in vitro nuclear assembly experiments 
have shown that NE reformation requires  sNARe­
mediated fusion of chromatin­associated NE mem­
brane patches154. However, a functional NE can also be 
reformed in vitro under conditions that are assumed to 
block SNARE­mediated membrane fusion, but only if 
a reconstituted ER network is used as source of mem­
branes140. Thus, the SNARE­dependent reformation of 
the NE on sperm chromatin in vitro154 might represent 
an ER reformation step that is coupled to chromatin. 
likewise, the transition from mitotic to interphase ER 
organization might also occur in part on the chromatin 
surface in vivo.

During NE reformation, it might be necessary to 
prevent the precocious formation of a closed NE by 
uncontrolled membrane closure uncoupled from NPC 
insertion. One possibility to account for such a control 
mechanism is derived from in vitro studies that suggest 
that the transmembrane nucleoporin POM121, together 
with the NuP107–160 complex, is part of a potential 
checkpoint to coordinate NPC and membrane assem­
bly155. In vitro, depletion of POM121 from membranes 
causes a block in membrane fusion after vesicles have 
docked to chromatin. Co­depletion of the NuP107–160 
complex overrides the fusion defect, leading to the form­
ation of a closed NE that is devoid of NPCs155. It will be 
important to understand the underlying molecular 
mechanism of this postulated checkpoint and to unravel 
its significance to NE reformation in vivo. Alternatively, 
the cell might just rely on a defined kinetic pathway for 
nuclear assembly, which ensures that the deposition of 
the NuP107–160 complex on chromatin is tightly coordi­
nated with membrane recruitment, assembly of complete 
NPCs and membrane closure.

Conclusions and perspectives
During cell division, dynamic changes in the organization 
of cellular compartments occur not only to guarantee the 
faithful transmission of the genetic material but also to 
maintain proper compartmentalization of daughter cells. 
The disassembly and reassembly of the nucleus during 
open mitosis is intimately linked to the overall orches­
tration of mitosis by kinases and the pathways that regu­
late their timely activation and inactivation. Although 
progress in the field has been rapid over the past few years, 
major challenges remain to gain an even deeper molecular 
understanding.

Phosphorylation events are crucial for NEBD, but the 
causal relationship between kinase activity and the spe­
cific steps in NEBD are largely unknown. The functional 
consequences of phosphorylation have been assessed in 
only a few kinase targets. In addition to protein phos­
phorylation, other post­translational modifications of 
NE components, such as sumoylation or ubiquitylation, 
might also have relevance for NE dynamics during mito­
sis. Clearly, we still do not know the complete repertoire 
of components that are involved in nuclear disassembly. 
Although roles of the microtubule cytoskeleton and of ER 
dynamics in NEBD have emerged, intriguing questions 
remain. For example, how are molecular motors attached 
to the NE to facilitate NEBD? Do factors that are involved 
in mitotic remodelling of the ER have a direct role in NE 
disassembly? Another poorly explored area is the role of 
NE membrane lipids and lipid signalling in mitotic NE 
and ER organization — a role that is expected to be anal­
ogous to the function of lipids in membrane dynamics of 
other organelles. Collectively, our efforts to identify and 
characterize the machinery that is involved in nuclear 
disassembly are still in their infancy, but might hopefully 
bring up new candidate factors that could also serve as 
potential drug targets in cancer treatment.

 Box 2 | NPC biogenesis and ageing
In dividing metazoan cells, nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are assembled during interphase and after mitosis. However, 
recent work has discovered a lack of NPC assembly in postmitotic, differentiated cells157. The expression of scaffold 
nucleoporins is downregulated and pre-existing scaffold nucleoporins are not exchanged in both somatic cells of adult 
worms and differentiated mouse myotubes. If there is no NPC biogenesis in quiescent cells, the accumulation of damage 
in old NPCs might cause changes in NPC transport or barrier properties. Strikingly, nuclei that are isolated from 
non-proliferative brain regions of old rats tend to be more leaky compared with those of young animals. Thus, the lack of 
NPC turnover in differentiated cells correlates with age-related defects in the NE permeability barrier.

Ageing is not limited to metazoan organisms, as unicellular species also age. Asymmetric division of budding yeast 

generates two cells with different life expectations — whereas mother cells age, daughter cells rejuvenate and regain a 
preset replicative life span. This phenomenon is attributed to the asymmetric distribution of ageing factors during cell 
division, including the accumulation of extrachromosomal ribosomal DNA circles (eRCs) in mother but not daughter cells.

How ERCs are confined to mother cells has recently found an explanation buried in the NE158. Anaphase yeast cells 

establish a lateral diffusion barrier in the NE that ensures that most pre-existing NPCs are retained in the mother. These 
pre-existing NPCs are suggested to tether ERCs, thereby preventing their inheritance to the daughter. Indeed, the 
association of reporter DNA circles with NPCs is abrogated in cells that lack the NPC basket components myosin-like 
protein 1 and 2 (Mlp1 and Mlp2, respectively), leading to randomized segregation of DNA circles. Furthermore, a 
non-functional diffusion barrier that is generated by the deletion of budneck-associated factor 6 (Bud6) affects ageing. 
Δbud6 mothers age slower, whereas their daughter cells display premature ageing, which correlates with the deficiency 
of mother cells to retain old NPCs and DNA circles.

Although there is no evidence for an involvement of ERCs in human ageing, it is noteworthy that stem cells also divide 

asymmetrically, giving rise to self-renewing and differentiating daughter cells. By analogy to budding yeast, it will be 
interesting to determine how cellular membrane systems might contribute to the asymmetric inheritance of cell fate 
determinants in organisms that are undergoing ‘open’ mitosis.

188 | MARCH 2009 | VOluME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

R E V I E W S

Compared with the role of kinases in NEBD, our 
knowledge of protein phosphatases in nuclear reas­
sembly is mediocre at best. This area of research will  
benefit from deciphering the role of protein phosphatases 
in mitotic exit in general. Recent discoveries provide the 
first insights into how changes in chromatin impinge on 
NE reassembly. But how is chromatin decondensation 
linked in molecular terms to the attraction of NPC com­
ponents and the re­establishment of the NE? Progress 
on this subject will probably depend on advances in our 
understanding of mitotic chromosome organization and 
dynamics.

Notably, recent data have revealed unexpected 
links  between  NPC  assembly  and  ageing  (BOX  2) 
— a connection that will provoke new interests in 

understanding the regulation of NPC biogenesis during  
development.

last, but not least, the NE is not a passive element in 
mitotic progression. Many NE components have active 
roles in the control of cell division. A number of nucleo­
porins influence spindle assembly, kinetochore function 
and chromosome segregation. Conversely, proteins that are 
involved in the SAC are found at NPCs during interphase. 
It seems that there are close ties between NPCs on the one 
hand and kinetochore proteins or SAC factors on the other. 
We anticipate that more of these links will be revealed and 
expect that mechanistic studies will lead to a more inte­
grated picture of how mitotic events, from NPC disassem­
bly over spindle formation and chromosome segregation  
to the final steps in cell division, are connected.

3.  Hetzer, M., Walther, T. C. & Mattaj, I. W. Pushing the 

20.  Gerace, L. & Blobel, G. The nuclear envelope lamina is 

35.  Pfaller, R., Smythe, C. & Newport, J. W. Assembly/

19.  Mühlhäusser, P. & Kutay, U. An in vitro nuclear 

34.  Onischenko, E. A., Gubanova, N. V., Kiseleva, E. V. & 

disassembly system reveals a role for the RanGTPase 
system and microtubule-dependent steps in nuclear 
envelope breakdown. J. Cell Biol. 178, 595–610 
(2007).

Hallberg, E. Cdk1 and okadaic acid-sensitive 
phosphatases control assembly of nuclear pore 
complexes in Drosophila embryos. Mol. Biol. Cell 16, 
5152–5162 (2005).

18.  Beaudouin, J., Gerlich, D., Daigle, N., Eils, R. & 

33.  Mansfeld, J. et al. The conserved transmembrane 

Ellenberg, J. Nuclear envelope breakdown proceeds 
by microtubule-induced tearing of the lamina. Cell 
108, 83–96 (2002).

nucleoporin NDC1 is required for nuclear pore 
complex assembly in vertebrate cells. Mol. Cell 22, 
93–103 (2006).

NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology 

 VOluME 10 | MARCH 2009 | 189

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

1. 

2. 

Schneider, A. Untersuchungen über Plathelminthen. 
Jahrb. Oberhess. Ges. Naturwiss. Heilk. 14, 69–81 
(1873) (in German).
Flemming, W. Zellsubstanz, Kern und Zelltheilung. 
(Vogel, Leipzig, 1882) (in German).

envelope: structure, function, and dynamics of the 
nuclear periphery. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 21,  
347–380 (2005).

4.  Gruenbaum, Y., Margalit, A., Goldman, R. D., 

Shumaker, D. K. & Wilson, K. L. The nuclear lamina 
comes of age. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 6, 21–31 
(2005).
Tzur, Y. B., Wilson, K. L. & Gruenbaum, Y. SUN-domain 
proteins: ‘velcro’ that links the nucleoskeleton to the 
cytoskeleton. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 7, 782–788 
(2006).
Stewart, C. L., Roux, K. J. & Burke, B. Blurring the 
boundary: the nuclear envelope extends its reach. 
Science 318, 1408–1412 (2007).

5. 

6. 

7.  Akhtar, A. & Gasser, S. M. The nuclear envelope and 

transcriptional control. Nature Rev. Genet. 8,  
507–517 (2007).

8.  Burke, B. & Ellenberg, J. Remodelling the walls of the 

nucleus. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3, 487–497 
(2002).

9.  Kalab, P., Pralle, A., Isacoff, E. Y., Heald, R. & Weis, K. 

Analysis of a RanGTP-regulated gradient in mitotic 
somatic cells. Nature 440, 697–701 (2006).
Analyses the distribution of RanGTP in mitotic 
somatic cells and shows that the RanGTP  
gradient around chromatin contributes to spindle 
assembly.

10.  Quimby, B. B. & Dasso, M. The small GTPase Ran: 

interpreting the signs. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 15,  
338–344 (2003).

11.  Clarke, P. R. & Zhang, C. Spatial and temporal 

coordination of mitosis by Ran GTPase. Nature Rev. 
Mol. Cell Biol. 9, 464–477 (2008).

12.  Terasaki, M. et al. A new model for nuclear  

envelope breakdown. Mol. Biol. Cell 12, 503–510 
(2001).

13.  Dultz, E. et al. Systematic kinetic analysis of mitotic 

dis- and reassembly of the nuclear pore in living cells. 
J. Cell Biol. 180, 857–865 (2008).

14.  Katsani, K. R., Karess, R. E., Dostatni, N. & Doye, V. 

In vivo dynamics of Drosophila nuclear envelope 
components. Mol. Biol. Cell 19, 3652–3666  
(2008).

15.  Kiseleva, E., Rutherford, S., Cotter, L. M., Allen, T. D. 

& Goldberg, M. W. Steps of nuclear pore complex 
disassembly and reassembly during mitosis in early 
Drosophila embryos. J. Cell Sci. 114, 3607–3618 
(2001).

16.  Lenart, P. et al. Nuclear envelope breakdown in 

starfish oocytes proceeds by partial NPC disassembly 
followed by a rapidly spreading fenestration of  
nuclear membranes. J. Cell Biol. 160, 1055–1068 
(2003).

17.  Salina, D. et al. Cytoplasmic dynein as a facilitator of 

nuclear envelope breakdown. Cell 108, 97–107 
(2002).

reversibly depolymerized during mitosis. Cell 19, 
277–287 (1980).
First demonstration that the mitotic disassembly of 
the nuclear lamina coincides with phosphorylation 
of lamin proteins.

21.  Georgatos, S. D., Pyrpasopoulou, A. & 

Theodoropoulos, P. A. Nuclear envelope breakdown in 
mammalian cells involves stepwise lamina disassembly 
and microtubule-drive deformation of the nuclear 
membrane. J. Cell Sci. 110, 2129–2140 (1997).

22.  Lee, K. K., Gruenbaum, Y., Spann, P., Liu, J. &  

Wilson, K. L. C. elegans nuclear envelope proteins 
emerin, MAN1, lamin, and nucleoporins reveal unique 
timing of nuclear envelope breakdown during mitosis. 
Mol. Biol. Cell 11, 3089–3099 (2000).

23.  Ellenberg, J. et al. Nuclear membrane dynamics and 

reassembly in living cells: targeting of an inner nuclear 
membrane protein in interphase and mitosis. J. Cell 
Biol. 138, 1193–1206 (1997).

24.  Yang, L., Guan, T. & Gerace, L. Integral membrane 

proteins of the nuclear envelope are dispersed 
throughout the endoplasmic reticulum during mitosis. 
J. Cell Biol. 137, 1199–1210 (1997).

25.  Puhka, M., Vihinen, H., Joensuu, M. & Jokitalo, E. 

Endoplasmic reticulum remains continuous and 
undergoes sheet-to-tubule transformation during cell 
division in mammalian cells. J. Cell Biol. 179,  
895–909 (2007).

26.  Stick, R., Angres, B., Lehner, C. F. & Nigg, E. A. The 

fates of chicken nuclear lamin proteins during mitosis: 
evidence for a reversible redistribution of lamin B2 
between inner nuclear membrane and elements of the 
endoplasmic reticulum. J. Cell Biol. 107, 397–406 
(1988).

27.  Peter, M., Nakagawa, J., Doree, M., Labbe, J. C. & 

Nigg, E. A. In vitro disassembly of the nuclear lamina 
and M phase-specific phosphorylation of lamins by 
cdc2 kinase. Cell 61, 591–602 (1990).

28.  Heald, R. & McKeon, F. Mutations of phosphorylation 

sites in lamin A that prevent nuclear lamina 
disassembly in mitosis. Cell 61, 579–589 (1990).

29.  Favreau, C., Worman, H. J., Wozniak, R. W., Frappier, T. 

& Courvalin, J. C. Cell cycle-dependent 
phosphorylation of nucleoporins and nuclear pore 
membrane protein Gp210. Biochemistry 35,  
8035–8044 (1996).

30.  Macaulay, C., Meier, E. & Forbes, D. J. Differential 

mitotic phosphorylation of proteins of the nuclear pore 
complex. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 254–262 (1995).

31.  Glavy, J. S. et al. Cell-cycle-dependent phosphorylation 

of the nuclear pore Nup107–160 subcomplex.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 3811–3816 (2007).

Shokat, K. M. Covalent capture of kinase-specific 
phosphopeptides reveals Cdk1–cyclin B substrates. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 1442–1447 (2008).

disassembly of the nuclear envelope membrane: cell 
cycle-dependent binding of nuclear membrane vesicles 
to chromatin in vitro. Cell 65, 209–217 (1991).

36.  Dechat, T. et al. Detergent–salt resistance of LAP2 in 

interphase nuclei and phosphorylation-dependent 
association with chromosomes early in nuclear 
assembly implies functions in nuclear structure 
dynamics. EMBO J. 17, 4887–4902 (1998).

37.  Dreger, M., Otto, H., Neubauer, G., Mann, M. & 

Hucho, F. Identification of phosphorylation sites in 
native lamina-associated polypeptide 2β. Biochemistry 
38, 9426–9434 (1999).

38.  Courvalin, J. C., Segil, N., Blobel, G. & Worman, H. J. 
The lamin B receptor of the inner nuclear membrane 
undergoes mitosis-specific phosphorylation and is a 
substrate for p34cdc2-type protein kinase. J. Biol. 
Chem. 267, 19035–19038 (1992).

39.  Gong, D. et al. Cyclin A2 regulates nuclear-envelope 

breakdown and the nuclear accumulation of cyclin B1. 
Curr. Biol. 17, 85–91 (2007).

40.  Dai, Z., Dulyaninova, N. G., Kumar, S., Bresnick, A. R. 

& Lawrence, D. S. Visual snapshots of intracellular 
kinase activity at the onset of mitosis. Chem. Biol. 14, 
1254–1260 (2007).

41.  Goss, V. L. et al. Identification of nuclear II protein 

kinase C as a mitotic lamin kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 
19074–19080 (1994).

42.  Deacon, E. M. et al. Generation of diacylglycerol 

molecular species through the cell cycle: a role for 
1-stearoyl, 2-arachidonyl glycerol in the activation of 
nuclear protein kinase C-II at G2/M. J. Cell Sci. 115, 
983–989 (2002).

43.  Thompson, L. J. & Fields, A. P. βII protein kinase C is 
required for the G2/M phase transition of cell cycle. 
J. Biol. Chem. 271, 15045–15053 (1996).

44.  Collas, P. Sequential PKC- and Cdc2-mediated 
phosphorylation events elicit zebrafish nuclear 
envelope disassembly. J. Cell Sci. 112, 977–987 
(1999).

45.  Hachet, V., Canard, C. & Gönczy, P. Centrosomes 

promote timely mitotic entry in C. elegans embryos. 
Dev. Cell 12, 531–541 (2007).

46.  Portier, N. et al. A microtubule-independent role for 

centrosomes and Aurora A in nuclear envelope 
breakdown. Dev. Cell 12, 515–529 (2007).

47.  Chase, D. et al. The polo-like kinase PLK-1 is required 
for nuclear envelope breakdown and the completion of 
meiosis in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genesis 26, 
26–41 (2000).

48.  Lenart, P. et al. The small-molecule inhibitor BI 2536 

reveals novel insights into mitotic roles of polo-like 
kinase 1. Curr. Biol. 17, 304–315 (2007).

S. A. Systematic deletion and mitotic localization of 
the nuclear pore complex proteins of Aspergillus 
nidulans. Mol. Biol. Cell 17, 4946–4961 (2006).
50.  Wu, L., Osmani, S. A. & Mirabito, P. M. A role for 

NIMA in the nuclear localization of cyclin B in 
Aspergillus nidulans. J. Cell Biol. 141, 1575–1587 
(1998).

32.  Blethrow, J. D., Glavy, J. S., Morgan, D. O. &  

49.  Osmani, A. H., Davies, J., Liu, H. L., Nile, A. & Osmani, 

R E V I E W S

51.  De Souza, C. P., Osmani, A. H., Hashmi, S. B. & 

76.  Pritchard, C. E., Fornerod, M., Kasper, L. H. &  

99.  Taylor, S. S., Ha, E. & McKeon, F. The human 

Osmani, S. A. Partial nuclear pore complex 
disassembly during closed mitosis in Aspergillus 
nidulans. Curr. Biol. 14, 1973–1984 (2004).

52.  O’Connell, M. J., Norbury, C. & Nurse, P. Premature 

chromatin condensation upon accumulation of NIMA. 
EMBO J. 13, 4926–4937 (1994).

53.  Lu, K. P. & Hunter, T. Evidence for a NIMA-like mitotic 

pathway in vertebrate cells. Cell 81, 413–424  
(1995).

54.  Rosenblatt, J. Spindle assembly: asters part their 

separate ways. Nature Cell Biol. 7, 219–222 (2005).
55.  Robinson, J. T., Wojcik, E. J., Sanders, M. A., McGrail, 
M. & Hays, T. S. Cytoplasmic dynein is required for the 
nuclear attachment and migration of centrosomes 
during mitosis in Drosophila. J. Cell Biol. 146,  
597–608 (1999).

56.  Gönczy, P., Pichler, S., Kirkham, M. & Hyman, A. A. 

Cytoplasmic dynein is required for distinct aspects of 
MTOC positioning, including centrosome separation, 
in the one cell stage Caenorhabditis elegans embryo. 
J. Cell Biol. 147, 135–150 (1999).

57.  Hebbar, S. et al. Lis1 and Ndel1 influence the timing 
of nuclear envelope breakdown in neural stem cells. 
J. Cell Biol. 182, 1063–1071 (2008).

58.  Malone, C. J. et al. The C. elegans hook protein, 

ZYG-12, mediates the essential attachment between 
the centrosome and nucleus. Cell 115, 825–836 
(2003).

59.  Salpingidou, G., Smertenko, A., Hausmanowa-

Petrucewicz, I., Hussey, P. J. & Hutchison, C. J. A novel 
role for the nuclear membrane protein emerin in 
association of the centrosome to the outer nuclear 
membrane. J. Cell Biol. 178, 897–904 (2007).

60.  Belmont, A. S. Mitotic chromosome structure and 
condensation. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 18, 632–638 
(2006).

61.  Hirano, T. Chromosome cohesion, condensation, and 

separation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69, 115–144 
(2000).

van Deursen, J. M. RAE1 is a shuttling mRNA export 
factor that binds to a GLEBS-like NUP98 motif at the 
nuclear pore complex through multiple domains. 
J. Cell Biol. 145, 237–254 (1999).

77.  Blower, M. D., Nachury, M., Heald, R. & Weis, K.  
A Rae1-containing ribonucleoprotein complex is 
required for mitotic spindle assembly. Cell 121,  
223–234 (2005).

78.  Wong, R. W., Blobel, G. & Coutavas, E. Rae1 

interaction with NuMA is required for bipolar spindle 
formation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103,  
19783–19787 (2006).

79.  Orjalo, A. V. et al. The Nup107–160 nucleoporin 

complex is required for correct bipolar spindle 
assembly. Mol. Biol. Cell 17, 3806–3818  
(2006).

80.  Galy, V., Askjaer, P., Franz, C., Lopez-Iglesias, C. & 

Mattaj, I. W. MEL-28, a novel nuclear-envelope and 
kinetochore protein essential for zygotic nuclear-
envelope assembly in C. elegans. Curr. Biol. 16, 
1748–1756 (2006).

81.  Belgareh, N. et al. An evolutionarily conserved NPC 

subcomplex, which redistributes in part to 
kinetochores in mammalian cells. J. Cell Biol. 154, 
1147–1160 (2001).

82.  Harel, A. et al. Removal of a single pore subcomplex 
results in vertebrate nuclei devoid of nuclear pores. 
Mol. Cell 11, 853–864 (2003).

83.  Loiodice, I. et al. The entire Nup107–160 complex, 

including three new members, is targeted as one entity 
to kinetochores in mitosis. Mol. Biol. Cell 15,  
3333–3344 (2004).

84.  Zuccolo, M. et al. The human Nup107–160 nuclear 
pore subcomplex contributes to proper kinetochore 
functions. EMBO J. 26, 1853–1864 (2007).

85.  Joseph, J., Tan, S. H., Karpova, T. S., McNally, J. G. & 
Dasso, M. SUMO-1 targets RanGAP1 to kinetochores 
and mitotic spindles. J. Cell Biol. 156, 595–602 
(2002).

homologue of Bub3 is required for kinetochore 
localization of Bub1 and a Mad3/Bub1-related protein 
kinase. J. Cell Biol. 142, 1–11 (1998).

100. Babu, J. R. et al. Rae1 is an essential mitotic 

checkpoint regulator that cooperates with Bub3 to 
prevent chromosome missegregation. J. Cell Biol. 
160, 341–353 (2003).

101. Musacchio, A. & Salmon, E. D. The spindle-assembly 
checkpoint in space and time. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell 
Biol. 8, 379–393 (2007).

102. Jeganathan, K. B., Malureanu, L. & van Deursen, J. M. 

The Rae1–Nup98 complex prevents aneuploidy by 
inhibiting securin degradation. Nature 438,  
1036–1039 (2005).

103. Jeganathan, K. B., Baker, D. J. & van Deursen, J. M. 
Securin associates with APCCdh1 in prometaphase 
but its destruction is delayed by Rae1 and Nup98 
until the metaphase/anaphase transition. Cell Cycle 5, 
366–370 (2006).

104. Peters, J. M. The anaphase promoting complex/

cyclosome: a machine designed to destroy. Nature 
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 7, 644–656 (2006).

105. Cuende, J., Moreno, S., Bolanos, J. P. & Almeida, A. 
Retinoic acid downregulates Rae1 leading to APCCdh1 
activation and neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y differentiation. 
Oncogene 27, 3339–3344 (2008).

106. Dawlaty, M. M. et al. Resolution of sister 
centromeres requires RanBP2-mediated 
SUMOylation of topoisomerase II. Cell 133,  
103–115 (2008).
Shows a requirement for the nucleoporin and 
SUMO E3 ligase RanBP2 in the resolution of sister 
chromatids during mitosis by directing sumoylation 
of topoisomerase IIα, ensuring its targeting to 
centromeres.

107. Hetzer, M., Gruss, O. J. & Mattaj, I. W. The Ran 
GTPase as a marker of chromosome position in 
spindle formation and nuclear envelope assembly. 
Nature Cell Biol. 4, E177–E184 (2002).

108. Weis, K. Regulating access to the genome: 

62.  Johansen, K. M. & Johansen, J. Regulation of chromatin 

86.  Pichler, A., Gast, A., Seeler, J. S., Dejean, A. & 

structure by histone H3S10 phosphorylation. 
Chromosome Res. 14, 393–404 (2006).

Melchior, F. The nucleoporin RanBP2 has SUMO1 E3 
ligase activity. Cell 108, 109–120 (2002).

nucleocytoplasmic transport throughout the cell cycle. 
Cell 112, 441–451 (2003).

63.  Xu, Y. X. & Manley, J. L. New insights into mitotic 

87.  Arnaoutov, A. et al. Crm1 is a mitotic effector of Ran-

109. Harel, A. & Forbes, D. J. Importin beta: conducting a 

chromosome condensation: a role for the prolyl 
isomerase Pin1. Cell Cycle 6, 2896–2901 (2007).

64.  Hirota, T., Gerlich, D., Koch, B., Ellenberg, J. & Peters, 
J. M. Distinct functions of condensin I and II in mitotic 
chromosome assembly. J. Cell Sci. 117, 6435–6445 
(2004).

65.  Ono, T., Fang, Y., Spector, D. L. & Hirano, T. Spatial 

and temporal regulation of condensins I and II in 
mitotic chromosome assembly in human cells. Mol. 
Biol. Cell 15, 3296–3308 (2004).

GTP in somatic cells. Nature Cell Biol. 7, 626–632 
(2005).

much larger cellular symphony. Mol. Cell 16,  
319–330 (2004).

88.  Salina, D., Enarson, P., Rattner, J. B. & Burke, B. 

110.  Vagnarelli, P. et al. Condensin and Repo-Man–PP1 

Nup358 integrates nuclear envelope breakdown with 
kinetochore assembly. J. Cell Biol. 162, 991–1001 
(2003).

co-operate in the regulation of chromosome 
architecture during mitosis. Nature Cell Biol. 8,  
1133–1142 (2006).

89.  Joseph, J., Liu, S. T., Jablonski, S. A., Yen, T. J. & 

111.  Landsverk, H. B., Kirkhus, M., Bollen, M., Kuntziger, T. 

Dasso, M. The RanGAP1–RanBP2 complex is 
essential for microtubule–kinetochore interactions 
in vivo. Curr. Biol. 14, 611–617 (2004).

& Collas, P. PNUTS enhances in vitro chromosome 
decondensation in a PP1-dependent manner. 
Biochem. J. 390, 709–717 (2005).

66.  Margalit, A., Brachner, A., Gotzmann, J., Foisner, R. & 

90.  Vergnolle, M. A. & Taylor, S. S. Cenp-F links 

112. Steen, R. L., Martins, S. B., Tasken, K. & Collas, P. 

Gruenbaum, Y. Barrier-to-autointegration factor — a 
BAFfling little protein. Trends Cell Biol. 17, 202–208 
(2007).

67.  Bengtsson, L. & Wilson, K. L. Barrier-to- 

autointegration factor phosphorylation on Ser-4 
regulates emerin binding to lamin A in vitro and 
emerin localization in vivo. Mol. Biol. Cell 17,  
1154–1163 (2006).

68.  Nichols, R. J., Wiebe, M. S. & Traktman, P. The 
vaccinia-related kinases phosphorylate the N’ 
terminus of BAF, regulating its interaction with DNA 
and its retention in the nucleus. Mol. Biol. Cell 17, 
2451–2464 (2006).

69.  Audhya, A., Desai, A. & Oegema, K. A role for Rab5 in 

structuring the endoplasmic reticulum. J. Cell Biol. 
178, 43–56 (2007).

70.  Shibata, Y., Voeltz, G. K. & Rapoport, T. A. Rough 
sheets and smooth tubules. Cell 126, 435–439 
(2006).

71.  Galy, V. et al. A role for gp210 in mitotic nuclear-
envelope breakdown. J. Cell Sci. 121, 317–328 
(2008).

72.  Liu, J., Prunuske, A. J., Fager, A. M. & Ullman, K. S. 

The COPI complex functions in nuclear envelope 
breakdown and is recruited by the nucleoporin 
Nup153. Dev. Cell 5, 487–498 (2003).

73.  Cotter, L., Allen, T. D., Kiseleva, E. & Goldberg, M. W. 
Nuclear membrane disassembly and rupture. J. Mol. 
Biol. 369, 683–695 (2007).

74.  Walczak, C. E. & Heald, R. Mechanisms of mitotic 

spindle assembly and function. Int. Rev. Cytol. 265, 
111–158 (2008).

75.  Powers, M. A., Forbes, D. J., Dahlberg, J. E. & Lund, E. 

The vertebrate GLFG nucleoporin, Nup98, is an 
essential component of multiple RNA export 
pathways. J. Cell Biol. 136, 241–250 (1997).

kinetochores to Ndel1/Nde1/Lis1/dynein microtubule 
motor complexes. Curr. Biol. 17, 1173–1179 
(2007).

91.  Campbell, M. S., Chan, G. K. & Yen, T. J. Mitotic 
checkpoint proteins HsMAD1 and HsMAD2 are 
associated with nuclear pore complexes in interphase. 
J. Cell Sci. 114, 953–963 (2001).

92.  Li, Y. & Benezra, R. Identification of a human mitotic 
checkpoint gene: hsMAD2. Science 274, 246–248 
(1996).

93.  Chen, R. H., Waters, J. C., Salmon, E. D. & Murray, 

A. W. Association of spindle assembly checkpoint 
component XMAD2 with unattached kinetochores. 
Science 274, 242–246 (1996).

94.  Chen, R. H., Shevchenko, A., Mann, M. & Murray, 
A. W. Spindle checkpoint protein Xmad1 recruits 
Xmad2 to unattached kinetochores. J. Cell Biol. 143, 
283–295 (1998).

95.  Liu, S. T. et al. Human MPS1 kinase is required for 
mitotic arrest induced by the loss of CENP-E from 
kinetochores. Mol. Biol. Cell 14, 1638–1651  
(2003).

96.  Tighe, A., Staples, O. & Taylor, S. Mps1 kinase activity 
restrains anaphase during an unperturbed mitosis and 
targets Mad2 to kinetochores. J. Cell Biol. 181,  
893–901 (2008).
Iouk, T., Kerscher, O., Scott, R. J., Basrai, M. A. & 
Wozniak, R. W. The yeast nuclear pore complex 
functionally interacts with components of the spindle 
assembly checkpoint. J. Cell Biol. 159, 807–819 
(2002).

97. 

98.  Scott, R. J., Lusk, C. P., Dilworth, D. J., Aitchison, J. D. 

& Wozniak, R. W. Interactions between Mad1p and 
the nuclear transport machinery in the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Biol. Cell 16,  
4362–4374 (2005).

Recruitment of protein phosphatase 1 to the nuclear 
envelope by A-kinase anchoring protein AKAP149 is a 
prerequisite for nuclear lamina assembly. J. Cell Biol. 
150, 1251–1262 (2000).

113. Mora-Bermudez, F., Gerlich, D. & Ellenberg, J. 

Maximal chromosome compaction occurs by axial 
shortening in anaphase and depends on Aurora 
kinase. Nature Cell Biol. 9, 822–831 (2007).
114. Ohsugi, M. et al. Kid-mediated chromosome 
compaction ensures proper nuclear envelope 
formation. Cell 132, 771–782 (2008).
Identifies the chromokinesin KID as a major player 
in anaphase chromatin compaction and 
demonstrates its importance during mouse early 
development.

115. Mazumdar, M. & Misteli, T. Chromokinesins: 

multitalented players in mitosis. Trends Cell Biol. 15, 
349–355 (2005).

116. Hetzer, M. et al. Distinct AAA-ATPase p97 complexes 
function in discrete steps of nuclear assembly. Nature 
Cell Biol. 3, 1086–1091 (2001).

117. Ramadan, K. et al. Cdc48/p97 promotes reformation 
of the nucleus by extracting the kinase Aurora B from 
chromatin. Nature 450, 1258–1262 (2007).
Shows that the requirement for the AAA+ ATPase 
p97 in chromatin decondensation and postmitotic 
nuclear assembly lies in the extraction of 
ubiquitylated Aurora B from chromatin.

118. Lipp, J. J., Hirota, T., Poser, I. & Peters, J. M. Aurora B 

controls the association of condensin I but not 
condensin II with mitotic chromosomes. J. Cell Sci. 
120, 1245–1255 (2007).

119. Hsu, J. Y. et al. Mitotic phosphorylation of histone H3 

is governed by Ipl1/aurora kinase and Glc7/PP1 
phosphatase in budding yeast and nematodes.  
Cell 102, 279–291 (2000).

190 | MARCH 2009 | VOluME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

120. Hirota, T., Lipp, J. J., Toh, B. H. & Peters, J. M. Histone 

137. Wilson, K. L. & Newport, J. A trypsin-sensitive 

155. Antonin, W., Franz, C., Haselmann, U., Antony, C. & 

receptor on membrane vesicles is required for nuclear 
envelope formation in vitro. J. Cell Biol. 107, 57–68 
(1988).

138. Pyrpasopoulou, A., Meier, J., Maison, C., Simos, G. & 

Georgatos, S. D. The lamin B receptor (LBR)  
provides essential chromatin docking sites at the 
nuclear envelope. EMBO J. 15, 7108–7119  
(1996).

Mattaj, I. W. The integral membrane nucleoporin 
pom121 functionally links nuclear pore complex 
assembly and nuclear envelope formation. Mol. Cell 
17, 83–92 (2005).

156. Mapelli, M. & Musacchio, A. MAD contortions: 

conformational dimerization boosts spindle checkpoint 
signaling. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 17, 716–725 (2007).

157. D’Angelo, M. A., M., R., Panowski, S. H. & Hetzer, 

R E V I E W S

H3 serine 10 phosphorylation by Aurora B causes 
HP1 dissociation from heterochromatin. Nature 438, 
1176–1180 (2005).

121. Fischle, W. et al. Regulation of HP1–chromatin 

binding by histone H3 methylation and 
phosphorylation. Nature 438, 1116–1122 (2005).
122. Mateescu, B., England, P., Halgand, F., Yaniv, M. & 

Muchardt, C. Tethering of HP1 proteins to chromatin 
is relieved by phosphoacetylation of histone H3. 
EMBO Rep. 5, 490–496 (2004).

123. Kourmouli, N. et al. Dynamic associations of 

heterochromatin protein 1 with the nuclear envelope. 
EMBO J. 19, 6558–6568 (2000).

124. Ye, Q. & Worman, H. J. Interaction between an 

integral protein of the nuclear envelope inner 
membrane and human chromodomain proteins 
homologous to Drosophila HP1. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 
14653–14656 (1996).

125. Polioudaki, H. et al. Histones H3/H4 form a tight 

complex with the inner nuclear membrane protein 
LBR and heterochromatin protein 1. EMBO Rep. 2, 
920–925 (2001).

126. Sumara, I. et al. A Cul3-based E3 ligase removes 
Aurora B from mitotic chromosomes, regulating 
mitotic progression and completion of cytokinesis in 
human cells. Dev. Cell 12, 887–900 (2007).

127. Sheehan, M. A., Mills, A. D., Sleeman, A. M., Laskey, 
R. A. & Blow, J. J. Steps in the assembly of replication-
competent nuclei in a cell-free system from Xenopus 
eggs. J. Cell Biol. 106, 1–12 (1988).

128. Walther, T. C. et al. The conserved Nup107–160 

complex is critical for nuclear pore complex assembly. 
Cell 113, 195–206 (2003).
This study, together with reference 82, 
demonstrates the pivotal role of the NUP107–160 
complex in early steps of postmitotic NPC 
assembly.

129. Boehmer, T., Enninga, J., Dales, S., Blobel, G. & 

Zhong, H. Depletion of a single nucleoporin, Nup107, 
prevents the assembly of a subset of nucleoporins into 
the nuclear pore complex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
100, 981–985 (2003).

130. Walther, T. C. et al. RanGTP mediates nuclear  

pore complex assembly. Nature 424, 689–694 
(2003).

131. Harel, A. et al. Importin β negatively regulates nuclear 
membrane fusion and nuclear pore complex assembly. 
Mol. Biol. Cell 14, 4387–4396 (2003).

132. Rasala, B. A., Orjalo, A. V., Shen, Z., Briggs, S. & 

Forbes, D. J. ELYS is a dual nucleoporin/kinetochore 
protein required for nuclear pore assembly and proper 
cell division. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103,  
17801–17806 (2006).

133. Franz, C. et al. MEL-28/ELYS is required for the 

recruitment of nucleoporins to chromatin and 
postmitotic nuclear pore complex assembly. EMBO 
Rep. 8, 165–172 (2007).

134. Fernandez, A. G. & Piano, F. MEL-28 is downstream of 

the Ran cycle and is required for nuclear-envelope 
function and chromatin maintenance. Curr. Biol. 16, 
1757–1763 (2006).

135. Gillespie, P. J., Khoudoli, G. A., Stewart, G., Swedlow, 
J. R. & Blow, J. J. ELYS/MEL-28 chromatin association 
coordinates nuclear pore complex assembly and 
replication licensing. Curr. Biol. 17, 1657–1662 
(2007).

136. Rasala, B. A., Ramos, C., Harel, A. & Forbes, D. J. 

Capture of AT-rich chromatin by ELYS recruits 
POM121 and NDC1 to initiate nuclear pore assembly. 
Mol. Biol. Cell 19, 3982–3996 (2008).
References 80, 132–134 and 136 report on the 
identification of vertebrate ELYS and its C. elegans 
homologue MEL‑28 as chromatin‑targeting factors 
for the NUP107–160 complex and on their 
function in linking NPC assembly to chromatin.

139. Wiese, C., Goldberg, M. W., Allen, T. D. & Wilson, K. L. 

Nuclear envelope assembly in Xenopus extracts 
visualized by scanning EM reveals a transport-
dependent ‘envelope smoothing’ event. J. Cell Sci. 
110, 1489–1502 (1997).

140. Anderson, D. J. & Hetzer, M. W. Nuclear envelope 
formation by chromatin-mediated reorganization of 
the endoplasmic reticulum. Nature Cell Biol. 9,  
1160–1166 (2007).

141. Anderson, D. J. & Hetzer, M. W. Reshaping of the 
endoplasmic reticulum limits the rate for nuclear 
envelope formation. J. Cell Biol. 182, 911–924 
(2008).
This study, together with reference 140, provides 
evidence that postmitotic NE reformation occurs 
through reshaping of the ER on chromatin.

142. Stavru, F. et al. NDC1: a crucial membrane-integral 

nucleoporin of metazoan nuclear pore complexes. 
J. Cell Biol. 173, 509–519 (2006).

143. Hallberg, E., Wozniak, R. W. & Blobel, G. An integral 
membrane protein of the pore membrane domain of 
the nuclear envelope contains a nucleoporin-like 
region. J. Cell Biol. 122, 513–521 (1993).

144. Liu, Q. et al. Functional association of Sun1 with 

nuclear pore complexes. J. Cell Biol. 178, 785–798 
(2007).

145. Devos, D. et al. Components of coated vesicles and 
nuclear pore complexes share a common molecular 
architecture. PLoS Biol. 2, e380 (2004).

146. Brohawn, S. G., Leksa, N. C., Spear, E. D., 

Rajashankar, K. R. & Schwartz, T. U. Structural 
evidence for common ancestry of the nuclear pore 
complex and vesicle coats. Science 322, 1369–1373 
(2008).

147. Ulbert, S., Platani, M., Boue, S. & Mattaj, I. W. Direct 
membrane protein–DNA interactions required early in 
nuclear envelope assembly. J. Cell Biol. 173,  
469–476 (2006).

148. Gorjanacz, M. et al. Caenorhabditis elegans BAF-1 

and its kinase VRK-1 participate directly in post-
mitotic nuclear envelope assembly. EMBO J. 26, 
132–143 (2007).

149. Dechat, T. et al. LAP2α and BAF transiently localize to 

telomeres and specific regions on chromatin during 
nuclear assembly. J. Cell Sci. 117, 6117–6128 
(2004).

150. Haraguchi, T. et al. Live cell imaging and electron 

microscopy reveal dynamic processes of BAF-directed 
nuclear envelope assembly. J. Cell Sci. 121,  
2540–2554 (2008).

151. Daigle, N. et al. Nuclear pore complexes form 

immobile networks and have a very low turnover in 
live mammalian cells. J. Cell Biol. 154, 71–84  
(2001).

152. Newport, J. W., Wilson, K. L. & Dunphy, W. G. A lamin-
independent pathway for nuclear envelope assembly. 
J. Cell Biol. 111, 2247–2259 (1990).

153. Macaulay, C. & Forbes, D. J. Assembly of the nuclear 
pore: biochemically distinct steps revealed with NEM, 
GTP gamma S, and BAPTA. J. Cell Biol. 132, 5–20 
(1996).

154. Baur, T., Ramadan, K., Schlundt, A., Kartenbeck, J. & 
Meyer, H. H. NSF- and SNARE-mediated membrane 
fusion is required for nuclear envelope formation and 
completion of nuclear pore complex assembly in 
Xenopus laevis egg extracts. J. Cell Sci. 120,  
2895–2903 (2007).

M. W. Age-dependent deterioration of nuclear pore 
complexes causes a loss of nuclear integrity in post-
mitotic cells. Cell 136, 284–295 (2009).
Provides the first evidence that a lack of NPC 
biogenesis in differentiated cells and the 
accumulation of age‑dependent damage in 
nucleoporins lead to a deterioration of the NE 
permeability barrier.

158. Shcheprova, Z., Baldi, S., Frei, S. B., Gonnet, G. & 

Barral, Y. A mechanism for asymmetric segregation of 
age during yeast budding. Nature 454, 728–734 
(2008).

159. Collas, P., Courvalin, J. C. & Poccia, D. Targeting of 

membranes to sea urchin sperm chromatin is mediated 
by a lamin B receptor-like integral membrane protein. 
J. Cell Biol. 135, 1715–1725 (1996).

160. Wagner, N. & Krohne, G. LEM-domain proteins: new 

insights into lamin-interacting proteins. Int. Rev. Cytol. 
261, 1–46 (2007).

161. Rolls, M. M. et al. A visual screen of a GFP-fusion 

library identifies a new type of nuclear envelope 
membrane protein. J. Cell Biol. 146, 29–44 (1999).

162. Schirmer, E. C., Florens, L., Guan, T., Yates, J. R. 3rd & 
Gerace, L. Nuclear membrane proteins with potential 
disease links found by subtractive proteomics. Science 
301, 1380–1382 (2003).

163. Dreger, M., Bengtsson, L., Schoneberg, T., Otto, H. & 
Hucho, F. Nuclear envelope proteomics: novel integral 
membrane proteins of the inner nuclear membrane. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98, 11943–11948 (2001).
164. Fahrenkrog, B. & Aebi, U. The nuclear pore complex: 
nucleocytoplasmic transport and beyond. Nature Rev. 
Mol. Cell Biol. 4, 757–766 (2003).

165. Beck, M., Lucic, V., Forster, F., Baumeister, W. & 

Medalia, O. Snapshots of nuclear pore complexes in 
action captured by cryo-electron tomography. Nature 
449, 611–615 (2007).

166. Schwartz, T. U. Modularity within the architecture of 

the nuclear pore complex. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 15, 
221–226 (2005).

167. De Souza, C. P. & Osmani, S. A. Mitosis, not just open 

or closed. Eukaryot. Cell 6, 1521–1527 (2007).

Acknowledgements
We apologize to all colleagues whose papers could not be 
covered owing to space limitations. We thank W. Antonin, 
P. Meraldi and I. Zemp for critical reading of the manuscript, 
Y. Barral, H. Meyer, I. Sumara and D. Gerlich for discussions 
and Y. Turgay for help with image acquisition. Our work is 
supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation.

DATABASES
UniProtKB: http://www.uniprot.org
Aurora A | BAF | BUB3 | CDK1 | ELYS | GP210 | KID | LAP2α | 
LAP2β | LBR | MAD1 | MAD2 | NDC1 | NimA | NUMA | NUP53 | 
NUP98 | NUP107 | p97 | PLK1 | POM121 | RanBP2 | RanGAP1 | 
RAE1 | RCC1 | TOPOIIα | YOP‑1

FURTHER INFORMATION
Ulrike Kutay’s homepage: http://www.bc.biol.ethz.ch/
people/groups/ulkutay/index

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
See online article: S1 (table)
all liNks are acTive iN The oNliNe pdF

NATuRE REVIEWS | Molecular cell Biology 

 VOluME 10 | MARCH 2009 | 191

© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

