A R T I C L E

Tumor stem cells derived from glioblastomas cultured in
bFGF and EGF more closely mirror the phenotype and genotype
of primary tumors than do serum-cultured cell lines

Jeongwu Lee,1 Svetlana Kotliarova,1,3 Yuri Kotliarov,1,3 Aiguo Li,1,3 Qin Su,1 Nicholas M. Donin,1
Sandra Pastorino,1 Benjamin W. Purow,1 Neil Christopher,1 Wei Zhang,1 John K. Park,2 and Howard A. Fine1,*

1 Neuro-Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke, National Institutes of Health,

Bethesda, Maryland 20892

2 Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

20892

3 These authors contributed equally to this work.
*Correspondence: hﬁne@mail.nih.gov

Summary

The concept of tumor stem cells (TSCs) provides a new paradigm for understanding tumor biology, although it remains un-
clear whether TSCs will prove to be a more robust model than traditional cancer cell lines. We demonstrate marked pheno-
typic and genotypic differences between primary human tumor-derived TSCs and their matched glioma cell lines. Unlike the
matched, traditionally grown tumor cell lines, TSCs derived directly from primary glioblastomas harbor extensive similarities
to normal neural stem cells and recapitulate the genotype, gene expression patterns, and in vivo biology of human glioblas-
tomas. These ﬁndings suggest that TSCs may be a more reliable model than many commonly utilized cancer cell lines for
understanding the biology of primary human tumors.

Introduction

Cancer cell lines have been the historical standard both for ex-
ploring the biology of human tumors and as preclinical models
for screening potential therapeutic agents. It has become in-
creasingly clear, however, that phenotypic characteristics and
the multitude of genetic aberrations found within repeatedly in vi-
tro passaged cancer cell lines often bear little resemblance to
those found within the corresponding primary human tumor
(Deschavanne and Fertil, 1996; Hecht et al., 1995; Pardal et al.,
2003; Romer and Curran, 2005). This not only in part explains
why both in vitro and in vivo cancer cell line-based preclinical
therapeutic screening models have been poorly predictive for
identifying clinically useful therapeutic agents, but may also
have led to some important misinterpretations regarding the rel-
evance of aberrant signaling pathways within cell lines com-
pared to primary tumors. This realization led us on a search for
a more biologically relevant model system for exploring glioma
biology and for the screening of new therapeutic agents.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) and in situ glioma cells share the
characteristics of continuous self-renewal, extensive brain pa-
renchymal migration/inﬁltration, and potential for full or partial

differentiation—properties not found in glioma cell lines (Mors-
head and van der Kooy, 2004; Sanai et al., 2005). These obser-
vations suggest that at least some in situ glioma cells may har-
bor features consistent with tumor stem cells (TSCs) (Pardal
et al., 2003; Phillips et al., 2006; Reya et al., 2001; Sanai et al.,
2005). Brain tumor stem-like cells have been recently
reported; however, besides the morphological similarities and
differentiation capacity of these cells, little else is understood re-
garding the actual similarities between glioma TSCs, normal hu-
man NSCs, and the primary tumors (Galli et al., 2004; Hemmati
et al., 2003; Singh et al., 2003, 2004; Taylor et al., 2005; Yuan
et al., 2004; Zhu et al., 2005). We therefore undertook a series
of studies to readily identify and better characterize glioma
TSCs in an attempt to understand the relationship between
these TSCs, the primary tumor, and traditional glioma cell lines.
One obvious difference in the in vitro propagation of NSCs
compared to the commonly used glioma cell lines is the require-
ment for serum. All established glioma cell lines (like most other
cancer cell lines) are grown in media containing serum, whereas
NSCs are grown in serum-free media, since serum causes irre-
versible differentiation of NSCs (Gage et al., 1995; McKay, 1997;
Reynolds et al., 1992). To explore how growth under these two

S I G N I F I C A N C E

We developed and characterized a model system in which primary human glioblastoma cells are propagated in vitro under conditions
optimal for either normal NSCs or typical glioma cell lines. We demonstrated that TSCs closely mimic the genotype, gene expression
proﬁle, and biology of their parental primary tumors. By contrast, tumor cells grown under standard serum-containing culture condi-
tions result in the loss of TSCs and ultimately lead to the outgrowth of cells that are vastly different both genetically and biologically
from their parental tumors. These observations bring into question the relevance of standard cancer cell lines for studying the biology
of human cancer and for screening new therapeutic agents. TSCs may prove to be a more reliable model system.

CANCER CELL 9, 391–403, MAY 2006 ª2006 ELSEVIER INC. DOI 10.1016/j.ccr.2006.03.030

391

A R T I C L E

Figure 1. In vitro characterization of tumor cells cultured in NBE and serum conditions
A: Microphotographs of NBE-cultured glioblastoma (GBM) cells at early passage (Aa) and late passage (Ab) and serum-cultured GBM cells at early passage
(Ac) and late passage (Ad). Note that the late passage serum cells are morphologically similar to U251 cells, a common glioma cell line (Ae).
B: Proliferation kinetics of NBE-cultured and serum-cultured GBM cells. 0308-NBE cells (blue lines) and 1228-NBE cells (green lines) at all passages, but only late
passage 0308-serum cells (red lines with ﬁlled triangle and ﬁlled circles) and late passage 1228-serum cells (pink lines with open rectangles and open triangles)
proliferated at constant rate. By contrast, early passage 0308-serum cells (red line with diamond markers) and early passage 1228-serum cells (pink line with X
markers) proliferated very slowly initially followed by a plateau phase, before their exponential growth phase.
C and D: Proliferation kinetics of clonally derived cells grown under NBE condition (C) and serum condition (D). Monoclonal populations of 0308 (triangle, n = 3),
1228 (rectangle, n = 3), and polyclonal normal human NSCs (circle, n = 3) initially expanded in NBE conditions (C) or serum conditions (D) were further cultured
in NBE and serum conditions for a month, and cell numbers were counted. Error bars represent standard deviation.

different in vitro conditions affects primary tumor cells, we
prepared single cell suspensions of freshly resected and disso-
ciated glioblastoma (GBM) tissues from patients. These cells
were cultured under conditions optimal for propagation and
nondifferentiation of normal NSCs (‘‘NBE’’ conditions: serum-
free Neurobasal media supplemented with basic FGF and
EGF), or conditions optimal for growth of glioma and most other
cancer cell lines (‘‘serum’’ conditions: DMEM media containing
10% fetal bovine serum). We have established a number of
GBM-derived NBE- and serum-cultured cells from this protocol,
two of which (lines 0308 and 1228) are described in detail here.

Results

In vitro characterization of GBM cells cultured in NBE
and serum conditions
Glioma cells cultured in NBE and serum conditions displayed
profound biological differences in vitro (Figure 1). First, cells cul-

tured in NBE conditions (0308-NBE and 1228-NBE) readily pro-
liferated both as nonadherent, multicellular spheres in uncoated
plates (‘‘neurospheres’’) and as an adherent monolayer in poly-
L-lysine/laminin-coated plates, as is seen with normal NSCs. In
contrast to the NBE cells, cells cultured in serum conditions
(0308-serum and 1228-serum) formed a monolayer that initially
had a highly heterogeneous morphology but within a month
became homogeneous with a morphology reminiscent of ﬁbro-
blasts or epithelial cells (Figure 1A). Although this dramatic mor-
phological change of serum-cultured primary glioma cells has
been routinely observed, it has never been understood. Second,
cells cultured in NBE proliferated at a constant rate regardless of
passage number, whereas cells cultured in serum showed initial
growth followed by a plateau phase, only to eventually prolifer-
ate at a much greater rate in later passages (Figure 1B). To de-
termine whether the differences in the growth kinetics between
0308- and 1228-serum cells were secondary to the different
growth conditions or whether the differences were secondary

392

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

A R T I C L E

to the inadvertent in vitro selection of a clonal population of cells,
we evaluated the proliferative kinetics of cells derived from mul-
tiple different single clones. The cells were initially derived from
either NBE or serum conditions and then transferred to both
NBE and serum conditions (Figures 1C and 1D). Upon the addi-
tion of serum, NBE cells showed a decreased rate of prolifera-
tion initially, followed by late exponential growth, recapitulating
the growth pattern seen in the polyclonal serum cell population
(Figure 1C). By contrast, cellular proliferation of serum cells
nearly ceased following transfer to NBE conditions (Figure 1D).
Thus, it appears that the initial culture of primary tumor cells un-
der serum conditions leads to changes that cannot be subse-
quently reversed following transition to NBE conditions.

A third way in which NBE- versus serum-cultured cells differed
was that NBE-cultured cells but not serum-cultured cells had the
potential for multilineage differentiation and clonogenicity, cen-
tral features of NSCs (Figure 2). Approximately 90% of NBE cells
were positive by immunohistochemical analysis for the NSC
markers Nestin, Sox2, and SSEA-1 (Brazel et al., 2005; Capela
and Temple, 2002; Lendahl et al., 1990; Park et al., 2003). West-
ern blot analysis conﬁrmed abundant expression of these NSC
markers in NBE cells (Figure 2B) (Brazel et al., 2005; Park et al.,
2003; Sakakibara et al., 1996). After removal of growth factors
(bFGF and EGF), or the addition of retinoic acid (RA) and serum,
NBE cells began to lose their NSC markers and developed mor-
phologies and immunohistochemical staining patterns consis-
tent with cells of glial and neuronal
lineages. Unlike normal
NSCs, however, about 40% of cells costained for both glial
(GFAP) and neuronal (TuJ1) markers, suggesting that differenti-
ation pathways in these NBE cells are not entirely normal (Galli
et al., 2004; Hemmati et al., 2003). By contrast, 0308- and
1228-serum cells expressed few or no NSC markers (Figures
2A, 2B, and 2D). Cells were only weakly positive for GFAP and
TuJ1 and did not respond to differentiation cues such as RA
and CNTF (Figure 2D and data not shown). Next, we performed
single cell neurosphere formation assays in order to determine
the clonogenicity of NBE- and serum-cultured cells. 0308-NBE
and 1228-NBE cells had clonogenic frequencies of 23.4%
(62.4%) and 17.4% (63.8%), respectively,
reminiscent of
NSC-derived neurospheres, whereas 0308- and 1228-serum
cells failed to form neurosphere-like cells when plated in NBE
conditions. Finally, a fourth way that NBE- and serum-cultured
glioma cells differed was in their telomerase activities, although
both cells retained telomeres as determined by ﬂuorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) using telomere-speciﬁc probes (Fig-
ure 2E). 0308-NBE and 1228-NBE cells had consistent telome-
rase activity regardless of passage number, whereas telomerase

dition indicates the withdrawal of bFGF and EGF from NBE media. RA con-
dition indicates the addition of all-trans-retinoic acid (2 mM) in N2 media.
Double-positive cells for two antigens were counted positive for each anti-
gen and also represented separately (e.g., TuJ1+/GFAP+; double-positive
cells for both antigens). Error bars represent standard deviation.
E: Preserved telomeres in 0308-NBE and 0308-serum cells (passage 15) by
telomere-PNA-FISH analysis; telomeres were labeled as green dots.
F: Quantitative ELISA for measuring telomerase activities in various cells as
determined by the telomeric repeat ampliﬁcation protocol assay (Roche).
y axis represents absorbance at 450 nm, which is proportional to the telome-
rase activity. When NSCs and NBE cells were cultured in serum conditions for
10 days (marked as diff.), their telomerase activities decreased to very low
levels. The experiments were performed in triplicates, and error bars repre-
sent standard deviation.

Figure 2. Evaluation of stem cell-like characteristics of GBM cells cultured in
NBE and serum conditions
A: Immunohistochemical analysis of NBE and serum GBM cells (passage 10).
The majority of NBE cells cultured under NBE conditions are immunopositive
for Nestin, SSEA-1, and Sox2 (Aa and Ac). When these cells were cultured in
serum condition for 10 days, they lost Nestin expression and became positive
for GFAP and TuJ1 (Ab). About 40% of these cells were positive for both TuJ1
and GFAP (shown as yellow in Ab). Serum cells do not express either Nestin or
Sox2 (Ad). DAPI staining (shown as blue) was performed in Ad to identify
cells.
B: Western blot analysis of various NSC markers in NBE and serum GBM cells.
All cell lysates were obtained from cells at passage 15. b-actin blot was used
as a loading control.
C and D: Differentiation potential of NBE- and serum-cultured GBM cells in
various conditions. Cells (C, 0308-NBE cells p15; D, 0308-serum cells p15)
were cultured in the indicated conditions for 10 days and processed for im-
munohistochemistry, and then immunopositive cells were counted. N2 con-

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

393

A R T I C L E

Figure 3. Phenotypic characterization of tumors
derived from NBE- and late passage serum-
cultured GBM cells
A–C: Representative microphotographs of NBE-
cultured cell-derived intracranial
xenograft
tumor (0308-NBE p20) (A), serum-cultured cell-
derived tumor (0308-serum p35) (B), and tumor
lines (C).
generated from U87MG glioma cell
Note the extensive inﬁltration into the surround-
ing cerebral cortex in A only. Tu indicates central
tumor mass.
D–F:
Inﬁltrative/migratory nature of xenograft
tumors derived from NBE-cultured GBM cells. Nu-
merous NBE GBM cells (stained by brown color)
diffusely inﬁltrated adjacent cortex (D) and mi-
grated along the corpus callosum (CC, blue-
stained by luxol fast blue dye) (E) and olfactory
bulb (F). Inset in F is a hematoxylin/eosin (H/E)-
stained section depicting normal olfactory bulbs.
LV in D indicates lateral ventricle.
G–I: Immunohistochemical staining of NBE cell-
derived tumors by using antibodies for Nestin
(dark brown in G), Sox2 (red/purple in H), and
GFAP (red/purple in I). Scale bar, 100 mm.

activity was lost when these cells were cultured in serum-con-
taining media, consistent with what occurs in normal NSCs
(Haik et al., 2000; Ostenfeld et al., 2000). Likewise, early passage
0308-serum and 1228-serum cells did not have appreciable tel-
omerase activity. Interestingly, however, serum-cultured cells
regained telomerase activity in later passages, coincident with
their late passage exponential growth phase (Yang et al., 2004)
(Figure 2F). Taken together, these data demonstrate that both
0308- and 1228-NBE cells contain many of the self-renewal
and differentiation characteristics of NSCs, whereas serum-
cultured cells do not.

Tumorigenic potential of GBM cells cultured in NBE
or serum conditions
In order to evaluate the tumorigenic potential of the NBE cells
compared to the serum cells, we ﬁrst determined their ability
to grow in soft agar (Table S1 in the Supplemental Data available
with this article online). Cells were seeded into two different soft
agar layers, one prepared with NBE media and the other with se-
rum media, and then colonies were counted 3 weeks later. Both
early and late passage NBE cells consistently formed colonies in
soft agar without serum, but not in the agar with serum, suggest-
ing that the clonal expansion of these cells requires lack of dif-
ferentiation. Conversely, early passage serum cells failed to
form colonies under either soft agar condition. Late passage,
exponentially growing serum cells, however, readily formed
large colonies in serum-containing agar but not in NBE-agar.

To test in vivo tumorigenic potential of NBE and serum cells at
different passages, we stereotactically injected the cells into the
brains of neonatal immunodeﬁcient SCID mice. Two to three
months later, nearly all mice (16/17) injected with 0308-NBE
cells developed tumors, whereas none of the 13 mice injected
with 0308-serum cells developed tumors (Table S2). 0308-
NBE and 1228-NBE cells retain a consistent tumorigenic poten-
tial
independent of passage number (as low as 1000 cells),
whereas serum-cultured cells at early passages are nontumori-

genic. When established NBE cell-derived intracranial xenograft
tumors were dissociated, recultured under NBE conditions, and
then injected back into the brains of new recipient mice, there
was no loss of tumorigenic potential (Table S3). By contrast,
when the same xenograft-derived cells were grown under serum
conditions, all subsequent tumorigenic potential was lost, sug-
gesting that the loss of tumorigenicity of these glioma cells is
due to the serum-culture condition. Interestingly, although early
passage serum-cultured cells did not form tumors, the late pas-
sage, exponentially growing, telomerase-positive 0308-serum
cells began to produce intracranial tumors at an increasing
rate with progressive passage number. By contrast, no tumors
were generated from passage ten 1228-serum cells 6 months
after injection.

Phenotypic characterization of tumors derived from
NBE- and late passage serum-cultured GBM cells
There were signiﬁcant histopathological differences between the
intracranial tumors derived from NBE-cultured cells and those
derived from late passage serum-cultured cells (Figure 3). Intra-
cranial tumors generated by 0308-NBE and 1228-NBE cells
demonstrated extensive inﬁltration into the surrounding cerebral
cortex, a pathognomonic feature of human GBMs (Galli et al.,
2004; Maher et al., 2001; Sanai et al., 2005; Singh et al., 2004).
NBE GBM cells showed a predilection for migrating along white
matter tracts such as the corpus callosum, as is characteristi-
cally seen with GBM cells in the brains of patients (Figures 3A,
3D, and 3E). Additionally, a signiﬁcant number of cells were
seen migrating toward the olfactory bulb (Figure 3F). By stark
contrast, all of the tumors generated from late passage 0308-
serum cells were well delineated with little tumor cell inﬁltration
into the surrounding normal brain, a characteristic phenotypi-
cally identical to the human tumor xenografts generated from
the standard glioma cell lines (e.g., U251, U87MG cells) (Figures
3B and 3C). These data demonstrate that tumors derived from

394

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

A R T I C L E

Figure 4. Global expression proﬁling analysis of NBE- and serum-cultured GBM cells
A: Dendrogram of cluster determined by unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis of 79 in vitro and in vivo xenograft samples. Pearson correlation-based
algorithm was applied on the basis of similarity in the expression pattern over all genes (over 42,000 probe sets). All samples represent independent biological
samples. 1228_S_p8 indicates the cells at passage 8 (p8) cultured in serum condition (S), derived from the patient tumor 1228 (1228). IC and SC indicate xe-
nograft tumors generated by intracranial and subcutaneous injection of the cells, respectively. Detailed descriptions about the samples are provided in the
Supplemental Data (experimental schema in Figure S1). Two main clusters were marked by different colors (blue and red lines). Blue and red bars on the upper
row indicate in vitro samples cultured in NBE and serum conditions, respectively. Color bars on the lower row indicate the origin of the corresponding samples.
0308 and 1228 cells are distinguished by two different tones of light blue. Purple and orange bars represent commonly used glioma cell lines and NSCs, re-
spectively. The above labeling schemes are consistently used in subsequent ﬁgures.
B: Principal component analysis (PCA) of the previous data sets including the parental primary GBMs. Small and large balls indicate in vitro and in vivo xeno-
graft samples, respectively. Colors of balls indicate the origin of samples (see above). Parental patient tumors are marked as balls with red circle. x, y, and z
axes represent three major principal components (PC). Note two distinct clusters; one cluster consists of NBE cells and their derivative xenograft tumors, NSCs,
and parental patient tumors, whereas the other cluster consists of serum cells, ten commonly used glioma cell lines, and their derivative tumors. Detailed de-
scriptions about the samples are provided in Figure S3.
C: Dendrogram of cluster determined by unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis of in vivo xenograft and primary GBM samples. Gray bars indicate patient
GBM samples (except 0308 and 1228 patient tumors). Blue and red lines mark two main clusters, respectively.

NBE cells, but not serum cells, phenocopy the critically impor-
tant histopathological features of the original human GBM tumor.

in order to evaluate the potential effects of in vitro passage num-
ber on gene expression.

Transcriptome analysis of NBE- and serum-cultured
GBM cells
To further understand the differences between NBE- and se-
rum-cultured GBM cells, we generated gene expression proﬁles
of NBE cells, serum cells, their derived xenograft tumors, and
the original GBMs taken directly from the patients (see experi-
mental schema in Figure S1). NBE- and serum-cultured GBM
cells from different passages were also included in the analyses

Unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis of all in vitro and in
vivo xenograft samples (n = 79) revealed two distinct clusters;
one cluster consisted of NBE cells and NSCs, and the other
consisted of serum cells and ten commonly utilized glioma cell
lines (with the one exception of 1228-serum passage 3 cells;
see below) (Figures 4A and 4B). Gene expression proﬁles of
xenograft tumors derived from both 0308- and 1228-NBE cells
were similar to those of NBE cells and NSCs, but distinct from
those of serum-cultured cells and their derivative tumors

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

395

A R T I C L E

(0308-serum-p25-derived tumors), suggesting that the distinct
expression proﬁles of NBE-cultured and serum-cultured cells
reﬂect intrinsic biological differences between the cells rather
than some transient effect of serum on cellular gene expression
(i.e., serum-responsive genes) in the serum-cultured cells.

Since NBE-cultured GBM cells reproduced the histopathology
of human GBMs in situ, we next evaluated whether the global ex-
pression proﬁles of NBE cell-derived tumors resembled those of
primary human tumors (Figure 4C). To this end, we compared the
expression proﬁles of xenograft tumors derived from NBE- and
serum-cultured GBM cells to those of 21 randomly chosen
GBMs, including the parental 0308 and 1228 GBMs. Unsuper-
vised hierarchical cluster analysis revealed that both 0308- and
1228-NBE-derived tumors were closely related to their parental
tumors and other primary GBMs (Figure 4C). Tumors derived
from late passage 0308-serum cells, however, had markedly dif-
ferent proﬁles from their matched NBE-derived tumor xenografts
and from parental 0308 tumors as well as from other primary
GBMs, clustering with xenograft
tumors derived from the
U87MG and U251 traditional glioma cell lines (Figure 4C and
Figure S2).

Passage-dependent gene expression proﬁle
changes in NBE and serum GBM cells
Our in vitro and in vivo ﬁndings demonstrate that the phenotype
of NBE cells was well maintained regardless of passage num-
ber, while that of serum cells was changed dramatically upon
serial passages. Consistent with this, principle component anal-
ysis (PCA) indicated that early passage (p3) 1228-serum cells
were intermediate between the NBE group and the serum
group, whereas later passage 1228-serum cells (p8 and p13)
were tightly clustered with all other traditional glioma cell lines
(Figures 4A and 4B). Thus, gene expression proﬁles of serum-
cultured cells progressively diverge away from those of primary
GBMs and NSCs toward those that resemble established gli-
oma cell lines with increasing passage (Figure 4B). In order to
further analyze gene expression changes in NBE and serum
cells with increasing passage number, we performed PCA and
two-way ANOVA analysis (Figure S3). All 1228-NBE cells, re-
gardless of passage, clustered tightly, and the numbers of
genes differentially expressed between different passages of
cells were small (Table S4). By contrast, approximately 5000
probe sets were differentially regulated in early (p3) versus late
passage 1228-serum cells (p8 and p13), raising the possibility
that these signiﬁcant gene expression changes in serially pas-
saged serum cells may, in part, be responsible for the different
phenotype of late passage serum cells and NBE cells as well
as primary GBMs (i.e., does one progressively lose expression
of GBM-deﬁning genes with serial passage in serum?). To test
this hypothesis, we performed a supervised hierarchical cluster
analysis of the entire data sets by using 2029 probe sets that
were expressed more than 2-fold in 1228-serum p3 cells com-
pared to the later passages (p8 and p13) (Figure 5A). Expression
levels of almost all of these genes were very high in primary
GBMs, but not in the later passage 0308- and 1228-serum cells
or glioma cell
lines. Interestingly, about 75% of these 2029
probe sets were also highly expressed in NSCs and NBE cells
regardless of passage number. Functional annotation of this
gene set by Ingenuity Pathway Knowledge Base predicted
that many of these genes are involved in CNS development,
CNS function, and cell-to-cell signaling (Table S5). On the other

hand, a quarter of the probe sets were represented only in pri-
mary GBMs but not in NBE or serum groups. These probe
sets were mainly immune system-related genes, consistent
with the minor contamination of CD45-positive lymphocytes in
early passage glioma cultures. Conversely, we identiﬁed 945
probe sets that were upregulated in later passage (p8 and
p13) compared to early passage (p3) of 1228-serum cells. Su-
pervised analysis using these probe sets indicated that these
genes are also upregulated in 0308-serum cells and glioma
cell lines, but not in NBE cells, NSCs, and primary GBMs (data
not shown). Taken together, these data support the notion that
serum-cultured cells rapidly lose characteristics of the primary
GBMs upon passage in vitro, whereas NBE-cultured GBM cells
maintain their parental phenotypes.

Analysis of NBE- and serum-speciﬁc genes and their
expression in primary GBMs
We next evaluated the genes that were differentially expressed
between NBE- and serum-cultured cells. As determined by
two-way ANOVA (with cell origin and culture condition as the fac-
tors), 5795 and 6895 probe sets were differentially expressed in
0308- and 1228-NBE cells compared to 0308- and 1228-serum
cells, respectively. Among them, 1864 probe sets were com-
monly upregulated in both 0308- and 1228-NBE cells, and
1444 probe sets were commonly upregulated in serum cells. Su-
pervised hierarchical cluster analysis using these probe sets
revealed that the 1864 NBE-speciﬁc probe sets were highly
expressed in primary GBM tumors as well as NSCs, but not in gli-
oma cell lines (Figure 5B). By contrast, most of 1444 serum-
speciﬁc probe sets were highly expressed in glioma cell lines,
but not in GBM tumors. Functional annotation of the NBE-spe-
ciﬁc probe sets using Ingenuity and gene ontology analysis
tool GOSTAT predicted that a majority of these genes are in-
volved in CNS function and development, consistent with the
previous analysis (Table S6 and data not shown). Representative
gene lists of these probe sets are presented in Table S7. Notably,
numerous stem cell-associated genes were found in the NBE-
speciﬁc sets, but not in serum-speciﬁc sets.

Based on high expression of a number of stem cell-associ-
ated genes in the NBE cells, we performed a stratiﬁed analysis
of all of the in vitro and in vivo NBE and serum cells, as well as
the primary GBMs, using probe sets highly enriched for stem
cell-related genes. The gene set was selected by ﬁrst ﬁnding
the genes that overlapped between three distinct murine NSC-
enriched gene lists reported in three different studies, and
then converting these genes (approximately 200) to their human
orthologs (Fortunel et al., 2003; Ivanova et al., 2002; Ramalho-
Santos et al., 2002). Clustering data showed that these stem
cell-associated genes are very similarly regulated in both NBE
cells and NSCs as well as in primary GBMs in contrast to serum
cells and glioma cell lines (Figure S4 and Table S8).

Taken together, these data demonstrate that NBE cells are re-
markably similar to normal NSCs and that NBE cells and their
derivative tumors properly maintain many biological character-
istics of the parental GBMs and other primary GBMs, whereas
traditionally grown, serum-cultured cancer cell lines do not.

Genotypic characterization of NBE- and serum-cultured
GBM cells
In order to evaluate genomic changes in NBE- and serum-cul-
tured glioma cells in detail, we performed single nucleotide

396

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

A R T I C L E

Figure 5. Supervised hierarchical analyses of NBE- and serum-cultured GBM cells
A: Heatmap of supervised hierarchical cluster analysis using ‘‘passage-dependent gene sets’’ as classiﬁers. See text for the detail. Dendrogram of cluster is
shown on the left of the heatmap. Expression level of a given gene is indicated by red (high) and green (low) in the heatmap. Samples used for generating
‘‘passage-dependent gene sets’’ are marked by colored boxes on the right.
B: Heatmap of supervised hierarchical cluster analysis of ‘‘NBE-speciﬁc’’ and ‘‘serum-speciﬁc’’ probe sets. Samples used for generating these probe sets are
shown in colored boxes on the right of the heatmap.

polymorphism (SNP) analysis as well as spectral karyotyping
(SKY) and Giemsa banding analysis (Figure 6). We identiﬁed
homozygous deletion of the INK4a/ARF locus at chromosome
9, loss of chromosome 10q, trisomy of chromosome 7, and local
ampliﬁcation of EGFR locus in both 0308 and 1228 surgical
samples. These genetic alterations are common genomic fea-
tures in a signiﬁcant percentage of primary GBMs (Vogelstein
and Kinzler, 2004; Wiltshire et al., 2000). The detailed genomic
characteristics of the 0308 and 1228 cells are summarized in
Table S9.

Given the changes in growth rates, morphology, tumorigenic-
ity, and gene expression over time in the serum-cultured cells,
we evaluated serial genomic DNA proﬁles of NBE- and serum-
cultured cells at various passage numbers by SNP analysis (Fig-
ures 6A and 6B). Even after 1 year of maintenance in NBE culture
condition (more than 70 passages so far), both polyclonal and
monoclonal populations of 0308-NBE cells largely maintained
their parental tumor genotype. By sharp contrast, 0308-serum
cells underwent signiﬁcant genomic rearrangements as early
as passage 10 (less than 2 months of culture) represented by
pseudotetraploidy, loss of heterozygosity (LOH), and deletion
of the entire chromosome 4 and chromosome 17 (Figure 6). Dif-
ferent subclones of 0308-serum cells showed other unique
changes, including LOH of the entire chromosome 6 (Figures
6A and 6B). None of these genomic alterations were detected

in the 0308 parental tumor, nor in early passage cells, suggest-
ing that these additional genomic changes occurred during the
in vitro culture (Figures 6A and 6B). Giemsa banding data re-
vealed that over 95% of late passage 0308-serum cells were
pseudotriploid or tetraploid (more than 200 nuclei examined)
with a modal chromosome number of 77 ranging from 63 to
89. By contrast, more than 90% of 0308-NBE cells at passage
40 were near diploid. Similarly, about 70% of 1228-serum cells
at passage 20 were pseudotetraploid, whereas passage 20
1228-NBE cells were near diploid (Figures 6E and 6F).

Intriguingly, LOH in chromosomes 4 and 17 found in most of
the late passage 0308-serum cells corresponds to the chromo-
somal locations of the hCDC4 (Fbxw7) and p53 (TP53) genes,
respectively (Figure 7). Coincident with the onset of increased
proliferation, tumorigenicity, and aneuploidy, late passage 0308-
serum cells were found to ultimately downregulate the remain-
ing wild-type hCDC4 gene, essentially eliminating expression
of hCDC4 protein. HCDC4, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, is reported
to be involved in degradation of aurora kinase A (STK15
[AURKA]) (Mao et al., 2004; Marumoto et al., 2005; Yang et al.,
2004).

Indeed, late passage 0308-serum cells not only lose hCDC4
expression but also have signiﬁcant upregulation of STK15
(Figure 7C). This is of potential importance given the recent de-
scription of hCDC4 as a haploinsufﬁcient tumor suppressor

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

397

A R T I C L E

Figure 6. Genomic analysis of NBE- and serum-cultured GBM cells
A: Heatmap representing loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) areas in 0308-NBE and serum cells at different passages. LOH areas were determined by comparing SNP
allelic calls of genomic DNA from tumor cells to those of peripheral blood DNA from the same patient. The calculation and smoothing were performed using
dChip software. x axis represents chromosomes in numerical order. Chromosome X was omitted, since it is not informative in LOH analysis. Black areas repre-
sent LOH. Blue and red bars on the right of the heatmap represent the cells cultured in NBE and serum conditions, respectively. For clonally derived cells

398

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

A R T I C L E

Figure 7. Genomic alterations of GBM cells cultured in serum condition in vitro
A and B: LOH of chromosome 4 in later passage 0308-serum cells was conﬁrmed by genomic PCR sequencing (A) and allelic-speciﬁc PCR (B). Boxed area in A
indicates genomic sequence of SNP_A-1510430 (hCDC4 locus in chromosome 4). Note the loss of DNA polymorphism in 0308-serum cells (C only instead of C/T
sequences). B: DNAs from serum cells, NBE cells, and blood from the 0308 patients were PCR ampliﬁed by using allelic-speciﬁc primers. C and T represent 30 end
sequences of allelic-speciﬁc primers (sequences shown in Experimental Procedures). Note the absence of DNA ampliﬁcation in serum cells by allelic-speciﬁc
PCR. DNA marker is indicated by M.
C: Western blot analysis of hCDC4 and STK15 in 0308-NBE and serum cells. b-actin Western blot was used as a loading control.
D: LOH of entire chromosome 17 in later passage 0308-serum cells (p10) determined by SNP calls. All SNPs located in chromosome 17 are pseudocolored by
heterozygous calls (AB calls; yellow) and homozygous calls (AA and BB calls; red and blue, respectively). Absence of heterozygous calls indicates the loss of
either maternal or paternal chromosome. Note the complete loss of heterozygous calls (yellow) in serum cells at passage 10.
E: Genomic sequence of the p53 gene in 0308-serum cells. Boxed area indicates genomic DNA sequence difference. DNA from peripheral blood contained
wild-type sequence, whereas parental tumors have both wild-type and mutant sequences. Note the absence of wild-type sequence in serum cells.

In addition,

gene, inactivation of which results in aneuploidy (Mao et al.,
2004; Rajagopalan et al., 2004).
late passage
0308-serum cells lose the entire chromosome 17, which con-
tains the wild-type p53 allele, leaving only the mutant p53 allele
found in both the 0308-NBE cells and the parental tumor (Fig-
ures 7D and 7E). Loss of p53 function has also been associated
with genomic instability (Duensing and Duensing, 2005; Fujiwara
et al., 2005). Thus, the loss of both hCDC4 and p53 function in
0308-serum cells, with their potentially important biological con-
sequences, further demonstrates the signiﬁcant differences be-
tween serum cells and their matched parental tumors.

Discussion

The TSC concept has potentially profound implications both for
basic biological studies and for the development of new thera-

peutic strategies (Dean et al., 2005; Huntly and Gilliland,
2005). However, the true relatedness of previously reported
TSCs to normal stem cells and their exact relevance to our cur-
rent in vitro and in vivo models of cancer, as well as to primary
human tumors in situ, remain unclear (Dontu et al., 2003; Huntly
and Gilliland, 2005; Kim et al., 2005; Pardal et al., 2003; Reya
et al., 2001). Using a model system derived from primary
GBMs, we have demonstrated that NBE-cultured cells derived
from primary GBMs bear
remarkable similarity to normal
NSCs. These similarities include the ability of NBE cells to
form neurospheres in vitro, potential for indeﬁnite self-renewal,
ability for terminal differentiation into glial and neuronal lineages,
the possession of gene expression proﬁles similar to NSCs, and
genetic stability over serial passage in vitro. Nevertheless, NBE
cells also harbor all of the genetic aberrations found within the
primary tumor, have gene expression proﬁles similar to the

(labeled with clone number), passage number was not assigned. The culture time difference between early and late clones is approximately 1 month. Note
that LOH of chromosomes 9 and 10 is evident in all of samples including the parental 0308 patient tumor. NBE-cultured cells maintain parental genotype re-
gardless of passage and clones, whereas most of the late passage serum cells revealed LOH of chromosomes 4 and 17.
B: Genomic ampliﬁcation (red) and deletion (green) areas in 0308-NBE and serum cells at different passages. Copy number values were calculated using
Affymetrix chromosome copy number analysis tool and smoothed by running average over 15 consecutive SNPs. Note the ampliﬁcation of chromosomes
7 and 20 and deletion of chromosomes 9 and 10 in parental tumors. Late passage serum cells revealed signiﬁcant genomic alterations including deletion
of chromosomes 4, 17, and 22.
C–F: Spectral karyotyping (SKY) (C and E) and Giemsa banding analysis (D and F) revealed that 0308-NBE (passage 40) and 1228-NBE cells (passage 20) are
near diploid, whereas 0308-serum cells (passage 15) and 1228-serum cells (passage 20) are predominantly pseudotriploid or tetraploid.

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

399

A R T I C L E

Figure 8. A hypothetical model depicting the relationship between primary patient tumors, TSC cultures, and commonly used glioma cell lines
A: Summary of our ﬁndings in 0308 and 1228 GBM cells.
B: NBE culture conditions maintain the properties of primary tumors by preserving the putative TSC populations (shown as dark blue). Rather than diverting TSCs
away from NSC-like behavior, it appears that the GBM-deﬁning genetic perturbations (e.g., INK4a/ARF deletion, loss of chromosome 10q, EGFR ampliﬁcation;
marked as yellow stars) merely endow oncogenic properties onto a population of cells with inherent stem cell properties (i.e., NSCs). By contrast, the TSC pop-
ulation is quickly lost through differentiation following growth in serum, similar to that seen in normal NSCs. TSC progenies (shown as light blue) are neither clo-
nogenic nor tumorigenic despite the fact that they harbor the same genetic changes (marked as yellow stars) found in the corresponding TSCs and primary
tumor. Continuous cultures of these cells in serum conditions result in the outgrowth of a subpopulation(s) of cells harboring additional genetic and/or epige-
netic changes (marked as black spots) not found in the TSCs or primary GBMs. These late passage serum-grown cells (shown as red) are vastly different both
genetically and biologically compared to the primary tumors from which they are derived, but similar to commonly used glioma cell lines. Vertical green bar
represents the increasing number of passages in vitro.

GBMs they were derived from, and appear to be the principal tu-
morigenic cell type that can recapitulate the overall in vivo phe-
notype of the parental GBM. Therefore, cells fulﬁlling the criteria
of TSCs are maintained in NBE conditions (Reya et al., 2001).

By contrast, cells derived from the same GBM specimens as
the NBE cells, but grown under standard in vitro conditions us-
ing serum-containing media, lose their self-renewing capabil-
ities, have no ability to differentiate, have gene expression pro-
ﬁles that are similar to neither NSCs nor the primary GBMs they
were derived from, and are neither clonogenic nor tumorigenic.
While 0308 serum-cultured cells did ultimately regain tumori-
genic potential in later passages, these late passage cells do
not recapitulate the tumorigenic phenotype of the original tumor
and undergo signiﬁcant de novo genomic alterations. This oc-
currence precisely matches the phenotypic and genotypic pat-
tern found in most of the commonly used glioma cell lines in that
only a small subset of these cell lines are tumorigenic in vivo, and
of those, none demonstrate the tumor invasiveness seen with
the NBE-derived tumors and that characterize human gliomas
(Giannini et al., 2005). Additionally, it has been reported that
most primary gliomas are near diploid, whereas established gli-
oma cell lines are predominantly polyploid (Bigner and Vogel-
stein, 1990; Hecht et al., 1995; Kubota et al., 2001; Wiltshire
et al., 2000). Therefore, we propose that the inherent ‘‘TSC’’
population within primary GBMs is quickly lost in typical glioma
culture conditions, and the cells found following prolonged in vi-
tro passage are the product of an outgrowth of a cell clone(s)
that has undergone profound ‘‘de novo’’ genetic and/or epige-

netic changes (Figure 8). In this context, it is not surprising
that the gene expression proﬁles and the in vitro and in vivo be-
havior of serum-cultured cells appear remarkably similar to
other established glioma cells lines but highly different from their
matched NBE-cultured cells, parental tumors, and other primary
human GBMs (Mehrian Shai et al., 2005).

Several groups have reported that TSC-like cells can be iso-
lated from the established tumor cell lines by culturing these
cells in serum-free media with selected growth factors such as
PDGF, bFGF, and EGF (Kondo et al., 2004; Patrawala et al.,
2005). If a subpopulation of TSCs can persist even after years
of culture in vitro, it would be interesting to understand how
these cells maintain their TSC-like properties under differentia-
tion-inducing conditions. Alternatively, it is possible that cells
with stem-like properties reemerge from some established cell
line populations, through epigenetic reprogramming and/or se-
lection of a subpopulation of cells with genomic instability as
seen in our 0308 serum-cultured cells (Fujiwara et al., 2005;
Kondo and Raff, 2004; Shin et al., 2003). In either case, further
studies evaluating the relatedness of these established cell
line-derived ‘‘stem cell-like’’ cells to their parental tumors and
a thorough phenotypic/genotypic characterization of these cells
would ultimately be required to truly understand how closely
they fulﬁll the criteria of TSCs.

In summary, TSCs derived from primary GBMs bear remark-
able phenotypic similarity to human NSCs and appear to be
the tumorigenic component of at least a subset of human
GBMs. Since TSCs maintain the ability to terminally differentiate,

400

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

agents that induce differentiation may have a therapeutic role in
the treatment of the TSC compartment. Thus, NBE cells may be
an optimal model system for the preclinical screening of such
agents. By contrast, tumor cells grown under standard serum-
containing cell culture conditions result in the loss of TSCs and
ultimately lead to the outgrowth of a population of cells that are
vastly different both genetically and biologically from the primary
tumors from which they were derived. These observations bring
into question the relevance of standard cancer cell
lines for
studying the biology of human cancer.

As we increasingly come to appreciate the signiﬁcant hetero-
geneity within speciﬁc subtypes of solid tumors like GBMs and
as we develop more rationally based, molecularly targeted
drugs, we will move increasingly toward the era of personalized
therapy for individual tumors. Such an individualized therapeutic
approach will require a model system for identifying and under-
standing the basic genotype, gene expression proﬁles, and/or
in vitro and in vivo biological characteristics of unique tumors
from individual patients. The overarching implication of our ﬁnd-
ings is that many traditionally utilized cancer cell lines may be un-
reliable model systems for understanding the biology of primary
human tumors, for screening new therapeutic agents, and ulti-
mately for guiding personalized tumor therapy. TSCs, however,
may prove to be a more reliable model system.

Experimental procedures

Tumor specimens and primary tumor cultures
Following informed consent, tumor samples classiﬁed as GBM based on
World Health Organization (WHO) criteria were obtained from patients under-
going surgical treatment at the National Institutes of Health in accordance
with the appropriate Institutional Review Boards (Kleihues et al., 2002).
Within 1 to 3 hr after surgical removal, tumors were washed and enzymati-
cally dissociated into single cells. Red blood cells were removed by differen-
tial centrifugation. Tumor cells were cultured in either NBE media consisting
of Neurobasal media (Invitrogen), N2 and B27 supplements (0.53 each; Invi-
trogen), human recombinant bFGF and EGF (50 ng/ml each; R&D Systems),
or serum media consisting of DMEM media (Invitrogen) with 10% fetal bovine
serum (Cellgro). For neurosphere culture of NBE cells, uncoated plastic
dishes were used. For adherent culture of NBE cells, the plates were pre-
coated with poly-L-lysine/laminin mixture (Invitrogen).

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry of parafﬁn sections was performed as previously de-
scribed. The following antibodies were used as primary antibodies: GFAP
(DAKO), Sox2, Nestin (R&D Systems), and SSEA-1 (Developmental Studies
Hybridoma Bank). The corpus callosum was stained by luxol fast blue
(Sigma), according to the manufacturer’s recommendation.

Intracranial tumor cell injection into SCID mice
For evaluation of tumorigenicity, cells cultured in either NBE and serum con-
ditions were resuspended in 2 ml of HBSS and injected stereotactically into
neonatal SCID mice. For the analysis of tumor histology, both neonatal and
6- to 8-week-old mice were used. Coordinates for stereotactical injections
into the adult mice were 3 mm distal to the midline, 2 mm anterior to the cor-
onal suture, and 2.5 mm deep from the dura.

FISH analysis and SKY of tumor cells
For cytogenetic studies, cells were arrested at the metaphase by colcemid
(Sigma), incubated in hypotonic buffer, and then ﬁxed in methanol/acetic
acid mixture. For Giemsa banding of chromosomes, more than 100 nuclei
were analyzed for each cell population. Telomere FISH analysis was per-
formed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Dako). EGFR FISH
was performed using centromere 7 and an EGFR probe set (Vysis).

A R T I C L E

RNA expression array and data analysis
Total RNAs were isolated using TRIZOL (Invitrogen) and further puriﬁed using
RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). Samples were processed and hybridized to Affyme-
trix U-133 plus2 GeneChip Arrays according to the Affymetrix GeneChip Ex-
pression Analysis Technical Manual (Affymetrix). Brieﬂy, 6 mg of total RNA was
converted to cDNA with Superscript reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen), using
T7-linked Oligo (dT) primer. Complementary DNA was transcribed in vitro us-
ing the T7 Bioarray High Yield RNA Transcript Labeling Kit (ENZO Diagnostics)
to generate biotinylated cRNA. Puriﬁed cRNA (20 mg) was fragmented and hy-
bridized to GeneChip arrays. All arrays were conﬁrmed to be within accept-
able minimal quality control parameters including the signal intensity ratio
of the 50 and 30 ends of the internal control genes of b-actin and GAPDH
less than 2. The initial gene expression analysis data ﬁles (CEL ﬁles) were gen-
erated using Affymetrix GeneChip Operating Software (GCOS) version 1.1.

The gene expression CEL ﬁles were normalized using dChip invariant
method and PM-MM difference model was used to obtain the expression
values (Li and Wong, 2001). Probe sets with zero variance and only ‘‘absent
calls’’ across all the samples were removed prior to data analysis. The hier-
archical cluster analysis, principal component analysis (PCA), and two-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) were performed using Partek software 6.0 (Par-
tek Inc.). The Pearson correlation with average linkage and Euclidean dis-
tance with average linkage was used for unsupervised hierarchical clustering
and for supervised hierarchical clustering, respectively. For ANOVA, the false
discovery rate of 0.05 and 2-fold change were applied as thresholds to select
the up- or downregulated gene lists.

SNP array and data analysis
Genomic DNA from patient tumor samples and cultured cells was prepared
using the QiaAmp DNA kit (Qiagen). DNA from patients’ blood was prepared
by QiaAmp DNA blood mini kit (Qiagen). Array experiments were performed
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations (Affymetrix). Brieﬂy, 250
ng of genomic DNA was digested with XbaI (New England Biolabs), ligated to
XbaI adaptors, and subsequently ampliﬁed by PCR. Fragmented PCR prod-
ucts were then labeled, denatured, and hybridized to the arrays. After hybrid-
ization, the arrays were stained on the ﬂuidics station 450 and scanned using
a high-resolution microarray scanner 3000.

GeneChip Human Mapping 10K arrays (Affymetrix) covers 11,555 single-
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) loci in the human genome with average res-
olution of one SNP every 210 kb. SNP calls were determined by GDAS version
2.0. Chromosome copy numbers were estimated using Affymetrix GeneChip
Chromosome Copy Number Tool version 1.1.1(Huang et al., 2004).

PCR sequencing and quantitative real-time PCR
Genomic alterations identiﬁed by the SNP analysis were veriﬁed by PCR and
subsequent sequencing. The presence of LOH of chromosome 4 in later pas-
sage 0308-serum cells was conﬁrmed by PCR sequencing of several SNPs
including SNP_A-1510430 and SNP_A-1515580 (Affymetrix). The following
primers were used: 50-AGTCCCTTGAGGCATGTTGG-30 and 50-GTCAACTT
GAGCAAAAAAATCTAGC-30 (for SNP_A-1510430), 50-GATTCATTGTTGTTG
CTAAAAGTG-30 and 50- TGCCTCTCTTCTCTCTTCCC-30 (for SNP_A-1515580).
For allele-speciﬁc PCR for the above SNPs, the following primers were
used: 50-CGCAACAACAATGAATCTCC-30 and 50-CGCAACAACAATGAAT
CTCT-30
(SNP_A-1510430), 50-GAGCCCTTGGCTTCTGATATA-30 and 50-
GAGCCCTTGGCTTCTGATATG-30 (SNP_A-1515580).

Real-time PCR was performed on an ABI Prism 7900 sequence detection
system (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
All samples including no template controls were assayed in triplicates. The
relative amount of targets transcripts was normalized to the number of hu-
man GAPDH transcripts found in the same sample. The human reference
RNA (Qiagen) was used as the calibrator. The relative quantitation of target
gene expression was performed with the standard curve or comparative cy-
cle threshold (CT) method.

Supplemental data
The Supplemental Data include four supplemental ﬁgures and nine supple-
mental tables and can be found with this article online at http://www.
cancercell.org/cgi/content/full/9/5/391/DC1/.

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

401

A R T I C L E

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH,
National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research. We thank Dr. David
Livingston for critical reading of the manuscript. We are grateful to Dr. Eu-
gene Major for providing human fetal neural progenitor cells, Dr. Roscoe
Stanyon and NCI-Frederick cytogenetics core facility for SKY analysis, and
Dr. Alexander Vortmeyer for histological evaluation of tumors.

Received: December 5, 2005
Revised: February 2, 2006
Accepted: March 22, 2006
Published: May 15, 2006

References

Bigner, S.H., and Vogelstein, B. (1990). Cytogenetics and molecular genetics
of malignant gliomas and medulloblastoma. Brain Pathol. 1, 12–18.

Brazel, C.Y., Limke, T.L., Osborne, J.K., Miura, T., Cai, J., Pevny, L., and Rao,
M.S. (2005). Sox2 expression deﬁnes a heterogeneous population of neuro-
sphere-forming cells in the adult murine brain. Aging Cell 4, 197–207.

Capela, A., and Temple, S. (2002). LeX/ssea-1 is expressed by adult mouse
CNS stem cells, identifying them as nonependymal. Neuron 35, 865–875.

Dean, M., Fojo, T., and Bates, S. (2005). Tumour stem cells and drug resis-
tance. Nat. Rev. Cancer 5, 275–284.

Deschavanne, P.J., and Fertil, B. (1996). A review of human cell radiosensi-
tivity in vitro. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 34, 251–266.

Dontu, G., Abdallah, W.M., Foley, J.M., Jackson, K.W., Clarke, M.F., Kawa-
mura, M.J., and Wicha, M.S. (2003). In vitro propagation and transcriptional
proﬁling of human mammary stem/progenitor cells. Genes Dev. 17, 1253–
1270.

Duensing, A., and Duensing, S. (2005). Guilt by association? p53 and the de-
velopment of aneuploidy in cancer. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 331,
694–700.

Fortunel, N.O., Otu, H.H., Ng, H.H., Chen, J., Mu, X., Chevassut, T., Li, X., Jo-
seph, M., Bailey, C., Hatzfeld, J.A., et al. (2003). Comment on ‘‘‘Stemness’:
Transcriptional proﬁling of embryonic and adult stem cells’’ and ‘‘A stem
cell molecular signature.’’ Science 302, 393; author reply 393.

Fujiwara, T., Bandi, M., Nitta, M., Ivanova, E.V., Bronson, R.T., and Pellman,
D. (2005). Cytokinesis failure generating tetraploids promotes tumorigenesis
in p53-null cells. Nature 437, 1043–1047.

Gage, F.H., Ray, J., and Fisher, L.J. (1995). Isolation, characterization, and
use of stem cells from the CNS. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 159–192.

Galli, R., Binda, E., Orfanelli, U., Cipelletti, B., Gritti, A., De Vitis, S., Fiocco, R.,
Foroni, C., Dimeco, F., and Vescovi, A. (2004). Isolation and characterization
of
tumorigenic, stem-like neural precursors from human glioblastoma.
Cancer Res. 64, 7011–7021.

Giannini, C., Sarkaria, J.N., Saito, A., Uhm, J.H., Galanis, E., Carlson, B.L.,
Schroeder, M.A., and James, C.D. (2005). Patient tumor EGFR and PDGFRA
gene ampliﬁcations retained in an invasive intracranial xenograft model of
glioblastoma multiforme. Neuro-oncol. 7, 164–176.

Haik, S., Gauthier, L.R., Granotier, C., Peyrin, J.M., Lages, C.S., Dormont, D.,
and Boussin, F.D. (2000). Fibroblast growth factor 2 up regulates telomerase
activity in neural precursor cells. Oncogene 19, 2957–2966.

Hecht, B.K., Turc-Carel, C., Chatel, M., Grellier, P., Gioanni, J., Attias, R.,
Gaudray, P., and Hecht, F. (1995). Cytogenetics of malignant gliomas: I.
The autosomes with reference to rearrangements. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet.
84, 1–8.

Hemmati, H.D., Nakano, I., Lazareff, J.A., Masterman-Smith, M., Geschwind,
D.H., Bronner-Fraser, M., and Kornblum, H.I. (2003). Cancerous stem cells
can arise from pediatric brain tumors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100,
15178–15183.

Huang, J., Wei, W., Zhang, J., Liu, G., Bignell, G.R., Stratton, M.R., Futreal,
P.A., Wooster, R., Jones, K.W., and Shapero, M.H. (2004). Whole genome
DNA copy number changes identiﬁed by high density oligonucleotide arrays.
Hum. Genomics 1, 287–299.

Huntly, B.J., and Gilliland, D.G. (2005). Leukaemia stem cells and the evolu-
tion of cancer-stem-cell research. Nat. Rev. Cancer 5, 311–321.

Ivanova, N.B., Dimos, J.T., Schaniel, C., Hackney, J.A., Moore, K.A., and
Lemischka,
(2002). A stem cell molecular signature. Science 298,
601–604.

I.R.

Kim, C.F., Jackson, E.L., Woolfenden, A.E., Lawrence, S., Babar, I., Vogel,
S., Crowley, D., Bronson, R.T., and Jacks, T. (2005). Identiﬁcation of bron-
chioalveolar stem cells in normal lung and lung cancer. Cell 121, 823–835.

Kleihues, P., Louis, D.N., Scheithauer, B.W., Rorke, L.B., Reifenberger, G.,
Burger, P.C., and Cavenee, W.K. (2002). The WHO classiﬁcation of tumors
of the nervous system. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 61, 215–225.

Kondo, T., and Raff, M. (2004). Chromatin remodeling and histone modiﬁca-
tion in the conversion of oligodendrocyte precursors to neural stem cells.
Genes Dev. 18, 2963–2972.

Kondo, T., Setoguchi, T., and Taga, T. (2004). Persistence of a small subpop-
ulation of cancer stem-like cells in the C6 glioma cell line. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 101, 781–786.

Kubota, H., Nishizaki, T., Harada, K., Harada, K., Oga, A., Ito, H., Suzuki, M.,
and Sasaki, K. (2001). Identiﬁcation of recurrent chromosomal rearrange-
ments and the unique relationship between low-level ampliﬁcation and trans-
location in glioblastoma. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 31, 125–133.

Lendahl, U., Zimmerman, L.B., and McKay, R.D. (1990). CNS stem cells
express a new class of intermediate ﬁlament protein. Cell 60, 585–595.

Li, C., and Wong, W.H. (2001). Model-based analysis of oligonucleotide
arrays: expression index computation and outlier detection. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 98, 31–36.

Maher, E.A., Furnari, F.B., Bachoo, R.M., Rowitch, D.H., Louis, D.N., Cave-
nee, W.K., and DePinho, R.A. (2001). Malignant glioma: genetics and biology
of a grave matter. Genes Dev. 15, 1311–1333.

Mao, J.H., Perez-Losada, J., Wu, D., Delrosario, R., Tsunematsu, R.,
Nakayama, K.I., Brown, K., Bryson, S., and Balmain, A. (2004). Fbxw7/
Cdc4 is a p53-dependent, haploinsufﬁcient tumour suppressor gene. Nature
432, 775–779.

Marumoto, T., Zhang, D., and Saya, H. (2005). Aurora-A—a guardian of
poles. Nat. Rev. Cancer 5, 42–50.

McKay, R. (1997). Stem cells in the central nervous system. Science 276,
66–71.

Mehrian Shai, R., Reichardt, J.K., Ya-Hsuan, H., Kremen, T.J., Liau, L.M.,
Cloughesy, T.F., Mischel, P.S., and Nelson, S.F. (2005). Robustness of
gene expression proﬁling in glioma specimen samplings and derived cell
lines. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 136, 99–103.

Morshead, C.M., and van der Kooy, D. (2004). Disguising adult neural stem
cells. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 14, 125–131.

Ostenfeld, T., Caldwell, M.A., Prowse, K.R., Linskens, M.H., Jauniaux, E.,
and Svendsen, C.N. (2000). Human neural precursor cells express low levels
of telomerase in vitro and show diminishing cell proliferation with extensive
axonal outgrowth following transplantation. Exp. Neurol. 164, 215–226.

Pardal, R., Clarke, M.F., and Morrison, S.J. (2003). Applying the principles of
stem-cell biology to cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 3, 895–902.

Park, I.K., Qian, D., Kiel, M., Becker, M.W., Pihalja, M., Weissman, I.L.,
Morrison, S.J., and Clarke, M.F. (2003). Bmi-1 is required for maintenance
of adult self-renewing haematopoietic stem cells. Nature 423, 302–305.

Patrawala, L., Calhoun, T., Schneider-Broussard, R., Zhou, J., Claypool, K.,
and Tang, D.G. (2005). Side population is enriched in tumorigenic, stem-like
cancer cells, whereas ABCG2+ and ABCG22 cancer cells are similarly
tumorigenic. Cancer Res. 65, 6207–6219.

Phillips, H.S., Kharbanda, S., Chen, R., Forrest, W.F., Soriano, R.H., Wu,
T.D., Misra, A., Nigro, J.M., Colman, H., Soroceanu, L., et al. (2006). Molec-
ular subclasses of high-grade glioma predict prognosis, delineate a pattern

402

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

A R T I C L E

of disease progression, and resemble stages in neurogenesis. Cancer Cell 9,
157–173.

Rajagopalan, H., Jallepalli, P.V., Rago, C., Velculescu, V.E., Kinzler, K.W.,
Vogelstein, B., and Lengauer, C. (2004). Inactivation of hCDC4 can cause
chromosomal instability. Nature 428, 77–81.

Ramalho-Santos, M., Yoon, S., Matsuzaki, Y., Mulligan, R.C., and Melton,
D.A. (2002). ‘‘Stemness’’: transcriptional proﬁling of embryonic and adult
stem cells. Science 298, 597–600.

Reya, T., Morrison, S.J., Clarke, M.F., and Weissman, I.L. (2001). Stem cells,
cancer, and cancer stem cells. Nature 414, 105–111.

Reynolds, B.A., Tetzlaff, W., and Weiss, S. (1992). A multipotent EGF-
responsive striatal embryonic progenitor cell produces neurons and astro-
cytes. J. Neurosci. 12, 4565–4574.

Romer, J., and Curran, T.
(2005). Targeting medulloblastoma: small-
molecule inhibitors of the Sonic Hedgehog pathway as potential cancer ther-
apeutics. Cancer Res. 65, 4975–4978.

Sakakibara, S., Imai, T., Hamaguchi, K., Okabe, M., Aruga, J., Nakajima,
K., Yasutomi, D., Nagata, T., Kurihara, Y., Uesugi, S., et al.
(1996).
Mouse-Musashi-1, a neural RNA-binding protein highly enriched in the
mammalian CNS stem cell. Dev. Biol. 176, 230–242.

Sanai, N., Alvarez-Buylla, A., and Berger, M.S. (2005). Neural stem cells and
the origin of gliomas. N. Engl. J. Med. 353, 811–822.

Shin, H.J., Baek, K.H., Jeon, A.H., Park, M.T., Lee, S.J., Kang, C.M., Lee,
H.S., Yoo, S.H., Chung, D.H., Sung, Y.C., et al. (2003). Dual roles of human
BubR1, a mitotic checkpoint kinase, in the monitoring of chromosomal insta-
bility. Cancer Cell 4, 483–497.

Singh, S.K., Hawkins, C., Clarke, I.D., Squire, J.A., Bayani, J., Hide, T., Hen-
kelman, R.M., Cusimano, M.D., and Dirks, P.B. (2004). Identiﬁcation of
human brain tumour initiating cells. Nature 432, 396–401.

Taylor, M.D., Poppleton, H., Fuller, C., Su, X., Liu, Y., Jensen, P., Magdaleno,
S., Dalton, J., Calabrese, C., Board, J., et al. (2005). Radial glia cells are can-
didate stem cells of ependymoma. Cancer Cell 8, 323–335.

Vogelstein, B., and Kinzler, K.W. (2004). Cancer genes and the pathways they
control. Nat. Med. 10, 789–799.

Wiltshire, R.N., Rasheed, B.K., Friedman, H.S., Friedman, A.H., and Bigner,
S.H.
(2000). Comparative genetic patterns of glioblastoma multiforme:
potential diagnostic tool for tumor classiﬁcation. Neuro-oncol. 2, 164–173.

Yang, H., Ou, C.C., Feldman, R.I., Nicosia, S.V., Kruk, P.A., and Cheng, J.Q.
(2004). Aurora-A kinase regulates telomerase activity through c-Myc in
human ovarian and breast epithelial cells. Cancer Res. 64, 463–467.

Yuan, X., Curtin, J., Xiong, Y., Liu, G., Waschsmann-Hogiu, S., Farkas, D.L.,
Black, K.L., and Yu, J.S. (2004). Isolation of cancer stem cells from adult
glioblastoma multiforme. Oncogene 23, 9392–9400.

Zhu, Y., Guignard, F., Zhao, D., Liu, L., Burns, D.K., Mason, R.P., Messing, A.,
and Parada, L.F. (2005). Early inactivation of p53 tumor suppressor gene
cooperating with NF1 loss induces malignant astrocytoma. Cancer Cell 8,
119–130.

Accession numbers

Singh, S.K., Clarke, I.D., Terasaki, M., Bonn, V.E., Hawkins, C., Squire, J.,
and Dirks, P.B. (2003). Identiﬁcation of a cancer stem cell in human brain
tumors. Cancer Res. 63, 5821–5828.

The microarray data have been submitted to the Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) database at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/; the accession number
is GSE4536.

CANCER CELL MAY 2006

403

