Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

RESEARCH COMMUNICATION

Dynamic regulation of the Ras
pathway via proteolysis
of the NF1 tumor suppressor
Karen Cichowski,1,4 Sabrina Santiago,2
Melanie Jardim,1 Bryan W. Johnson,1 and
Tyler Jacks2,3
1Genetics Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA; 2Department of Biology, Center
for Cancer Research, and 3Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA

Mutations in the NF1 tumor suppressor underlie the fa-
milial tumor predisposition syndrome neurofibromato-
sis type I. Although its encoded protein, neurofibromin,
functions as a Ras–GTPase activating protein (GAP),
nothing is known about how it is normally regulated or
its precise role in controlling Ras signaling pathways. We
show here that neurofibromin is dynamically regulated
by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Degradation is
rapidly triggered in response to a variety of growth
factors and requires sequences adjacent to the cata-
lytic GAP-related domain of neurofibromin. However,
whereas degradation is rapid, neurofibromin levels are
re-elevated shortly after growth factor treatment. Ac-
cordingly, Nf1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) exhibit an enhanced activation of Ras, prolonged
Ras and ERK activities, and proliferate in response to
subthreshold levels of growth factors. Thus, the dynamic
proteasomal regulation of neurofibromin represents an
important mechanism of controlling both the amplitude
and duration of Ras-mediated signaling. Furthermore,
this previously unrecognized Ras regulatory mechanism
may be exploited therapeutically.

Received October 29, 2002; revised version accepted
December 31, 2002.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a disorder affecting 1
in 3500 individuals (Riccardi 1992). NF1 patients are pre-
disposed to a variety of tumors of the peripheral and
central nervous systems as well as myeloid leukemia,
cognitive deficits, bone deformations, and pigmentation
defects. In addition, Nf1-deficient mice die in utero from
heart defects (Brannan et al. 1994; Jacks et al. 1994).
Thus, neurofibromin appears to regulate the growth and
development of a wide range of cell and tissue types.

Although the NF1 gene was cloned more than 10 years
ago, little is known about how neurofibromin normally

[Keywords: NF1; signal transduction; tumor suppressor; Ras; protea-
some]
4Corresponding author.
E-MAIL kcichowski@rics.bwh.harvard.edu; FAX (617) 732-5123.
Article published online ahead of print. Article and publication date are
at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.1054703.

participates in cell signaling pathways and growth con-
trol (Cawthon et al. 1990; Wallace et al. 1990). Neurofi-
bromin is a 250-kD protein that has sequence similarity
to the catalytic domain of p120RasGAP and stimulates
the hydrolysis of Ras–GTP in vitro (Ballester et al. 1989;
Martin et al. 1990; Xu et al. 1990). Importantly, NF1-
deficient tumors and primary mouse cells exhibit el-
evated levels of Ras–GTP, supporting the notion that
neurofibromin functions to suppress the Ras pathway in
vivo (Basu et al. 1992; DeClue et al. 1992; Kim et al.
1995; Bollag et al. 1996). Nf1-deficient hematopoietic
cells are hypersensitive to specific cytokines, suggesting
that neurofibromin may function downstream of these
receptors (Bollag et al. 1996; Zhang et al. 1998). However,
the precise regulatory mechanisms that couple growth-
factor receptors to neurofibromin and Ras signaling path-
ways remain unclear. Boyer and colleagues reported that
neurofibromin becomes phosphorylated on serine resi-
dues following IgM cross-linking, although the bio-
chemical consequences of this modification are un-
known (Boyer et al. 1994). Also, specific lipids inhibit
neurofibromin GAP activity in vitro, but the importance
of this regulation in vivo has not been determined (Bollag
and McCormick 1991; Han et al. 1991).

Results and Discussion
To explore potential neurofibromin regulatory mecha-
nisms, we examined its expression under various cell
culture conditions. We found that when quiescent
NIH3T3 fibroblasts were treated with serum, neuro-
fibromin rapidly decreased to low or undetectable levels
within 5 min (Fig. 1A). However, within 30 min, neurofi-
bromin levels were re-elevated. Importantly, p120RasGAP
protein levels were unaffected under these conditions.
Western blots probed with three different antineurofi-
bromin antibodies that recognize epitopes thoughout the
protein all demonstrated a rapid reduction in protein lev-
els, indicating that neurofibromin is completely de-
graded in response to serum (Fig. 1B). Serum triggered
neurofibromin degradation in a variety of cell lines, in-
cluding primary human IMR90 cells and a rat
Schwannoma cell line (RT4; Fig. 1C). Notably, Schwann
cells are one of the primary cell types that are pathologi-
cally affected in NF1 patients.

To identify which growth factors induce neurofibro-
min degradation, quiescent cells were treated with lyso-
phosphatidic acid (LPA), platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF; Fig. 1D), or epidermal growth factor (EGF; Fig.
2A). In each case, neurofibromin levels were rapidly re-
duced, indicating that ligands that activate G protein-
coupled receptors or receptor tyrosine kinases can trans-
duce signals leading to neurofibromin degradation. How-
ever, neurofibromin levels were re-elevated more rapidly
in response to PDGF and EGF in comparison with LPA.
Furthermore, degradation was typically less robust in
response to EGF and PDGF versus LPA, suggesting
that these receptor tyrosine kinases may couple less
effectively to this regulatory mechanism. Notably,
p120RasGAP has been shown to bind receptor tyrosine
kinases following their activation and has therefore been
proposed to regulate Ras downstream from these recep-
tors (Donovan et al. 2002). Therefore, it is possible that
p120RasGAP and neurofibromin play primary, but

GENES & DEVELOPMENT 17:449–454 © 2003 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN 0890-9369/03 $5.00; www.genesdev.org

449

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

neurofibromin antibody. A smear characteristic of ubiq-
uitinated protein and break-down products was ob-
served, demonstrating that neurofibromin is ubiquiti-
nated in vivo (Fig. 2B). In addition, full-length baculovi-
rus-expressed neurofibromin was also ubiquitinated
when subjected to a well-characterized in vitro ubiqui-
tination reaction, further demonstrating that it is a di-
rect target of the ubiquitination machinery (Fig. 2C; Dai
et al. 1998).

To identify the region within neurofibromin required
for its degradation, full-length and FLAG-tagged protein
fragments were produced and subjected to the in vitro
ubiquitination and degradation assay (Fig. 3A). In the
presence of proteasome inhibitors, neurofibromin was
ubiquitinated in this in vitro assay and was degraded in
their absence (Fig. 2C; data not shown). Notably, we
found that a fusion protein encompassing the GAP-re-
lated domain and adjacent amino acids (GRD+80) was
also degraded in an ATP-dependent manner in this assay.
However, deletion of the N-terminal 80 amino acids that
lie outside of the GRD resulted in a degradation-resistant
fragment (GRD). Importantly, the epitope tags of all fu-
sion proteins were located at the N termini, eliminating

Cichowski et al.

Figure 1. Neurofibromin is degraded in response to serum and
growth factors. (A) Serum-starved NIH 3T3 cells were exposed
to 10% serum for increasing lengths of time. Cells were lysed
with 1% boiling SDS buffer and Western blots were probed with
antibodies that recognize an epitope located in the C terminus
of neurofibromin (top, NF1GRP-D) and an anti-p120RasGAP
antibody (bottom). The lane labeled c (control) is full-length
neurofibromin produced in baculovirus detected with the same
neurofibromin antibody. (B) NIH 3T3 cells were unstimulated
or stimulated with serum for 5 min as described above, and
Western blots were probed with either an N-terminal NF1 an-
tibody (NF1GRP-N), an antibody that recognizes an internal
epitope (GAP4), or an antibody that recognizes a second, distant
C-terminal epitope (NF1C). The last blot was also reprobed with
the p120RasGAP antibody.
Schwannoma cells (bottom) were stimulated as described in A,
and Western blots were probed with the NF1GRP-D antibody
and the p120RasGAP antibody. (D) Serum, LPA (6 µM), and
PDGF (20 ng/mL) were used to stimulate cells as described in
A–C.

(C)

IMR90 cells (top ) or RT4

not exclusive roles in regulating Ras downstream of re-
ceptor tyrosine kinases and G protein-coupled receptors,
respectively.

Ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis regulates a number of
proteins involved in diverse cellular processes, such as
cell cycle control, differentiation, and the immune re-
sponse (Ciechanover et al. 2000). Degradation via the
ubiquitin pathway involves the covalent attachment of
ubiquitin molecules to a target protein on lysine resi-
dues, followed by its rapid degradation by the 26S pro-
teasome. To determine whether the proteasome was in-
volved in regulating neurofibromin levels, NIH 3T3 cells
were pretreated with the proteasome inhibitors LLnL or
lactacystin prior to growth factor addition. Both agents
inhibited the decrease in neurofibromin induced by LPA,
PDGF, and EGF. The calpain inhibitor II (LLM) and the
lysosomal inhibitor chlorquine did not affect neurofibro-
min levels (data not shown). To determine whether neu-
rofibromin was a direct target of the ubiqitination ma-
chinery, cells were transfected with a plasmid encoding
a His-tagged ubiquitin molecule and were treated with
LLnL (Hofmann et al. 1996). His-tagged proteins were
purified and analyzed by a Western blot probed with a

450

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

Figure 2. Neurofibromin is degraded by the proteasome. (A)
Cells were untreated or pretreated with LLnL or lactacystin
prior to EGF (5 min), PDGF (5 min), or LPA treatment for the
times indicated, and Western blots were probed with the
NF1GRP-D and p120RasGAP antibodies. (B) NIH 3T3 cells
were transfected with a control plasmid or a plasmid encoding
a His-tagged ubiquitin molecule. Twenty-four hours later, cy-
cling cells were treated with LLnL where indicated, and His-
tagged proteins were purified using nickel-coupled agarose
beads. Proteins were eluted, and a Western blot was probed with
the C-terminal neurofbromin antibody. The NF1 control lane
represents protein from a total cell lysate. (C) Baculovirus-ex-
pressed full-length tagged neurofibromin was subjected to an in
vitro ubiquitination reaction or a mock reaction in the presence
of LLnL. A Western blot was probed with the NF1GRP-D anti-
body.

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

any potential differences in protein stability due to the
N-end rule (Baboshina et al. 2001).

To localize critical sequences within this protein frag-
ment further, we produced a fusion protein containing
the analagous Drosophila NF1 (DNF1) sequence, which
exhibits 69% identity to the human protein in this re-
gion (The et al. 1997). Importantly, the Drosophila pro-
tein was similarly degraded in this assay, indicating that
the sequences required for degradation are conserved
among these species. Because the human and Drosophila
fusion proteins exhibited the highest degree of similarity
within the first 20 amino acids, we constructed a dele-
tion mutant that eliminated these residues as well as
various mutants containing internal triple alanine sub-
stitutions of conserved amino acids (Fig. 3B). Impor-
tantly, deletion of the first 20 amino acids resulted in a
degradation-resistant fragment. Furthermore, mutation
of residues 1095–1097 (KYF to AAA) or 1098–1100 (TLF
to AAA) located within this region also inhibited degra-
dation, indicating that these sequences are required for
recognition by the degradation machinery. In addition,
mutation of every serine, threonine, and tyrosine in the
larger domain did not affect stability in this assay, and
endogenous neurofibromin does not become phosphory-
lated following serum treatment (data not shown), sug-
gesting that the protein does not require direct phos-
phorylation prior to degradation. Therefore, neurofibro-
min degradation appears to be unlike that of SCF
substrates, in which phosphorylation of the E3 ubiquitin
ligase-binding site is required for ubiquitination (De-
shaies 1999). Regulation may therefore occur at the level
of the ubiquitin ligase complex and/or associated pro-
teins, as is the case for a variety of ubiquitinated sub-
strates (Ciechanover et al. 2000). This regulation appears
to be independent of Ras activation as exogenous expres-
sion of an activated Ras allele did not induce neurofibro-
min degradation and inhibitors of MEK and PI3-kinase
did not prevent degradation (data not shown). To date,
hundreds of E3 ubiquitin ligases are thought to exist in
humans, each of which is predicted to ubiquitinate a
restricted set of target proteins (Winston et al. 1999;
Freemont 2000). The identification of an evolutionarily
conserved domain within neurofibromin that is required

Figure 3. Sequences adjacent to the GRD are required for neu-
rofibromin degradation. (A) FLAG-tagged fusion proteins encod-
ing the GRD of human neurofibromin or the GRD plus 80 N-
terminal amino acids (GRD+80) were generated by in vitro tran-
scription and translation reactions (IVT) in the presence of 35S-
methionine. Proteins were subjected to a reticulocyte lysate
(RL)-based in vitro degradation reaction in the presence of ATP
or, where indicated, ATP␥, and separated by PAGE. A construct
encoding the Drosophila GRD+80 protein was subjected to the
same reaction (DGRD+80). (B) The GRD+80 construct was trun-
cated to generate a GRD+60 construct that was used in the in
vitro degradation assay. Alternatively, mutations resulting in
triple alanine substitutions [1095–1097 (KYF to AAA) or 1098–
1100 (TLF to AAA)] were introduced in the GRD+80 construct.

Proteasomal regulation of the Ras pathway

Figure 4. Nf1-deficient MEFs exhibit deregulated Ras activity.
(A) Wild-type and Nf1-deficient MEFs were serum starved and
treated with 10% or 1% serum for increasing lengths of time.
Cells were lysed, and Ras–GTP was precipitated with a GST–
Ras-binding domain fusion protein. Western blots were probed
with a pan-isoform-specific Ras antibody. Ras–GTP levels were
quantitated using a densitometer and expressed as percentage of
maximal levels. Total cell lysates from these samples were
probed with the same antibody to ensure equal protein loading.
(B) Total cell lysates were prepared from duplicate samples as
described in A and immunoblots were sequentially probed with
an antineurofibromin antibody or an anti-p120RasGAP anti-
body.

for its recognition by the ubiquitin/proteasome machin-
ery is an important first step toward identifying this
ubiquitin ligase complex.

Because neurofibromin is a Ras–GAP, we next inves-
tigated how this dynamic regulation by the proteasome
affected Ras signaling. When wild-type MEFs were
treated with 10% serum, Ras–GTP levels were elevated
within 5 min and significantly decreased by 30 min after
treatment (Fig. 4A). As shown in Figures 1 and 2, neuro-
fibromin protein levels were inversely related to this pat-
tern of Ras activation, being degraded within 5 min and
re-elevated within 30 min following exposure to 10%
serum. In response to a nonmitogenic dose of serum (1%)
Ras–GTP levels were elevated with roughly similar ki-
netics in wild-type cells, but to much lower levels. No-
tably, in response to 1% serum, neurofibromin degrada-
tion was significantly less robust, suggesting that com-
plete neurofibromin degradation is one of the signals
required for maximal activation of Ras under these con-
ditions (Fig. 4B). In contrast, in Nf1-deficient MEFs, both
high and low concentrations of serum potently induced
Ras activation (Fig. 4A). Furthermore, in both cases, Ras–
GTP levels were sustained as compared with wild-type
cells. These results demonstrate that neurofibromin is
required to appropriately attenuate both the amplitude
and duration of Ras activation. Specifically, our results
suggest that the initial degradation of neurofibromin is
required for full Ras activation, whereas its subsequent
up-regulation is required to terminate this signal. Thus,
in Nf1-deficient cells maximal, sustained Ras activation
can be achieved independently of its regulation by the
proteasome.

To examine how the differential activation of Ras in
wild-type and Nf1-deficient MEFs affected downstream

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

451

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Cichowski et al.

signaling pathways, we examined ERK activity. Whereas
treatment with 10% serum caused a comparable activa-
tion of ERK in both wild-type and Nf1-deficient cells
(Fig. 5A), low concentrations of serum induced a sus-
tained activation of ERK in Nf1-deficient cells only (Fig.
5B). Because the duration of ERK activity has been
shown to be a critical determinant of cellular prolifera-
tion, we also examined the growth properties of wild-
type and Nf1-deficient cells under these conditions (Fig.
5C,D). Notably, in 10% serum there was no difference in
the rate of proliferation between both cell types as de-
termined by the slope of these two growth curves. This
observation was consistent with the identical ERK acti-
vation profiles in response to 10% serum. However, Nf1-
deficient cells were able to proliferate in concentrations
of serum that were nonmitogenic for wild-type cells.
These results also mirrored the data shown in Figure 5A

Figure 5. Nf1-deficient MEFs exhibit deregulated ERK activa-
tion and possess proliferation defects. (A,B) Wild-type (solid
line) and Nf1-deficient (broken line) MEFs were serum starved
and treated with 10% (A) or 1% (B) serum for increasing lengths
of time. ERK activation was measured using kinase assays per-
formed in triplicate and quantitated using a PhosphorImager.
(C) Wild-type and Nf1-deficient MEFS were serum starved and
exposed to 10% serum. Cells from triplicate wells were counted
on day 0 and at 25 and 72 h following serum treatment. (D)
Serum-starved wild-type (white bars) and mutant cells (gray
bars) were treated with 0.1%, 0.5%, or 1% serum. Cells in trip-
licate wells were counted 72 h after serum addition. Fold in-
crease in cell number ratios were calculated as described in
Materials and Methods. (E) Nf1+/+ (white bars), Nf1+/− (light-
gray bars), and Nf1−/− (black bars) MEFs were grown in 1%
serum in triplicate wells for 72 h and analyzed as described in D.
Differences in B, D, and E as described in the text were found to
be statistically significant at or better than ␣ = 0.01 using a two-
tailed T test.

452

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

and B, in which low concentrations of serum induced a
transient activation of ERK in wild-type cells, but elic-
ited a more sustained activation of ERK in Nf1-deficient
cells. Serum hypersensitivity was observed in every mu-
tant cell line examined (>10 mutant and 10 wild-type
lines). Consistent with the observation that neurofibro-
min is regulated at the level of protein expression, we
also found that Nf1+/− cells exhibited an intermediate
increased hypersensitivity to serum, suggesting that a
growth advantage can also occur as a result of haplo-
insufficiency in these cells (Fig. 5E). Thus, our results
provide important insight into the mechanism by which
neurofibromin normally regulates the Ras pathway and
proliferation.

The Ras-family of GTP-binding proteins are critical in
transducing extracellular signals to the nucleus and me-
diate a wide variety of biological responses. Both positive
and negative regulators of Ras activation have been iden-
tified (guanine nucleotide exchange factors and GAP pro-
teins, respectively; Bollag and McCormick 1991; Quil-
liam et al. 1995). However, although the cell signaling
mechanisms leading to the activation of exchange fac-
tors such as Sos have been well characterized (Chardin et
al. 1993), the signals that regulate GAP proteins are less
well known. Previous studies have demonstrated that
the NF1 tumor suppressor gene product, neurofibromin,
possesses Ras–GAP activity (Ballester et al. 1989; Martin
et al. 1990; Xu et al. 1990). This study provides the first
mechanistic insight into how growth factor receptors
regulate this tumor suppressor and utilize it to control
Ras activation and proliferation.

We have shown that at least two classes of receptors,
G protein-coupled receptors and receptor tyrosine ki-
nases, dynamically regulate neurofibromin protein lev-
els via ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation.
Collectively, our data suggest that neurofibromin degra-
dation participates in the initial activation of the Ras
signaling pathway, whereas its rapid re-expression is re-
quired for appropriate attenuation of the pathway. Stud-
ies utilizing Nf1-deficient cells further demonstrate that
neurofibromin is absolutely required for maintaining an
appropriate sensitivity to growth factors and in regulat-
ing the duration of Ras and ERK activities. Neurofibro-
min’s regulation of the Ras–ERK pathway appears to be
critical under conditions in which growth factors are
limiting. In response to saturating levels of growth fac-
tors, additional overriding mechanisms are likely to play
a dominant role in sustaining ERK activation (Cai et al.
1997; Chaudhary et al. 2000; Nadal-Wollbold et al. 2002).
Importantly, the duration of ERK activity has been
shown to be critical in transducing a proliferative re-
sponse in a number of experimental systems, supporting
the notion that the defects observed in Nf1-deficient
cells result from the lack of attenuation of this signal
(Marshall 1995). This subtle growth advantage of NF1-
deficient cells may be particularly relevant in the devel-
opment of the benign lesions that develop in NF1 pa-
tients.

Ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis has been shown to
play a critical role in controlling the cell cycle (Ciecha-
nover et al. 2000). This is achieved by the regulated ac-
cumulation and destruction of both positively acting
components (e.g., cyclins) as well as cell cycle inhibitors
(e.g., p27) in order to prevent premature cell cycle pro-
gression. The NF1 tumor suppressor may provide a simi-
lar function at the onset of the cell cycle by acting as a

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

rheostat for Ras activation. Under mitogenic conditions,
in which neurofibromin is rapidly and efficiently de-
graded, maximal Ras activation is permitted and prolif-
eration ensues. However, in the absence of a threshold
mitogenic signal, neurofibromin is not degraded, and any
Ras activation is immediately dampened. Accordingly,
in NF1-deficient cells a much lower threshold signal is
required for maximal Ras activation and mitogenesis.

Finally, the identification of this regulatory mecha-
nism may also have implications regarding disease treat-
ment. Whereas complete loss of NF1 has been clearly
implicated in the development of some NF1-related tu-
mors (myeloid leukemia, pheochromocytoma), haplo-in-
sufficiency due to a reduced dosage of the NF1 gene (NF1
patients are congenitally heterozygous for an NF1 muta-
tion) is thought to underlie the development of other
symptoms such as cognitive deficits, bone deformities,
and peripheral nerve sheath tumors (Cichowski and
Jacks 2001; Zhu et al. 2002). Thus, the identification of a
pathway responsible for the regulated inactivation of
neurofibromin may have important clinical implica-
tions, in that strategies aimed at blocking its inactiva-
tion and/or up-regulating the protein may prove to be
beneficial therapeutically. These benefits may extend
beyond therapies relevant to NF1 but may also serve as a
potential clinical strategy to attenuate the Ras pathway
in tumors harboring mutations in genes that function
upstream of Ras.

Materials and methods
Cell culture and immunoblots
NIH3T3, IMR90, or RT4 cells were plated in serum-free medium at a
density of 5 × 105 cells/10-cm plate. After 18 h, 10% serum, 6 µM LPA,
20 ng/mL EGF, or 20 ng/mL PDGF was added. Cells were lysed with 1%
SDS boiling lysis buffer and clarified. Lysates were normalized for protein
levels and analyzed by Western blotting with the following antineurofi-
bromin antibodies: NF1GRP-D and NF1GRP-N (Santa Cruz Biotechnol-
ogy), GAP4, an antibody directed toward an alternative spliced region
within the GRD (Huynh et al. 1994), or the NF1C antibody directed
toward an epitope >300 amino acids away from that recognized by
NF1GRP-D (Huynh et al. 1994). Blots were also reprobed with an anti-
p120RasGAP antibody (Transduction Laboratories). When indicated,
cells were pretreated with 50 µM N-Acetyl-leu-leu-norleu-al (LLnL) for
4–8 h, and 20 µm lactacystin for 4–8 h.

Detection of ubiquitinated neurofibromin in vivo
NIH 3T3 cells were transfected with a control plasmid or a plasmid
encoding a His-tagged ubiquitin molecule (pRBG4-his6-myc-Ub).
Twenty-four hours later, cycling cells were treated with LLnL. To enrich
for ubiquitinated neurofibromin, five 10-cm plates per condition were
lysed with RIPA buffer, and His-tagged proteins were purified using
nickel-coupled agarose beads. Proteins were eluted, and a Western blot
was probed with the neurofbromin antibody.

Generation of mutant constructs
All FLAG-tagged GRD constructs were generated by PCR amplification
of the human NF1 cDNA and followed by subcloning into pCMV-TAG
vectors. Point mutants were generated by Quick Change (Stratagene). All
final sequences were verified.

In vitro ubiquitination/degradation assay
For degradation assays, protein fragments encoding the NF1-GRD and
mutants were generated by IVT reactions (Promega) in the presence of
35S-methionine. Radiolabeled proteins were then subjected to a reticu-
locyte lysate (RL)-based in vitro degradation reaction as described previ-
ously and separated by PAGE (Dai et al. 1998). Briefly, 4 µL of the IVT
product was incubated with 16.5 µL of RL in degradation buffer contain-
ing 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 5 mM MgCl2, 1 µM DTT, 5% glycerol, and 1
mg/mL ubiquitin for 90 min at 37°C in the presence of ATP or ATP␥ . In

Proteasomal regulation of the Ras pathway

experiments in which full-length baculovirus neurofibromin was used in
this reaction, a Western blot was probed with the NF1GRP-D antibody.
Ubiquitination assays were carried out in the same way but in the pres-
ence of 50 µM LLnL.

Proliferation studies
MEFs were made quiescent as described previously (Brugarolas et al.
1998), split to a density equivalent to 5 × 105 cells/10-cm plate in tripli-
cate, and then stimulated with serum. After the indicated time, cells
were trypsinized and counted. Where indicated, fold increase in cell
number ratios were calculated by dividing the average cell number of
three plates in serum at 72 h by the average cell number of three plates
in serum-free medium after 18 h (at this point there was little, if any, cell
death). The standard deviation of these data were calculated using the
standard curve method defined by the following formula [(SD1/
Avg1)2 + (SD2/Avg2)2]1/2 × Avgratio. Proliferation studies were performed
in more than 10 cell lines of each genotype and gave similar results.

Ras and ERK activation analysis
MEFs were made quiescent and stimulated as described above. Lysates
were normalized and Ras–GTP was detected using a Ras-activation assay
kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Upstate Biotechnology).
ERK activity was measured by a kinase assay as described previously.
Briefly, cells were stimulated as described above and lysed in RIPA
buffer. Protein levels were normalized, and ERK1 was immunoprecipi-
tated. Kinase assays were performed using 7 µg of myelin basic protein as
a substrate in the presence of 3 µCi [␥-32P]ATP. Incorporation of [32P] was
quantified using a PhosphorImager. All kinase assays were done in trip-
licate.

Acknowledgments
We thank D. Livingston for the pRBG4-his6-myc-Ub; G. Bollag for the
NF1 GRD cDNA and baculovirus-produced full-length neurofibromin; A.
Bernards for the DNF1 cDNA; C. Park, L. Greer, S. Thomas, and mem-
bers of the Jacks and Cichowski laboratories for helpful discussions; E.
Jackson for mouse embryonic fibroblasts; J. Kissel for RT4 cells; C. Bran-
nan and J. Duong for the GAP4 and NF1C antibodies; and M. Bulyk for
statistical analysis. Supported in part by grants from the Department of
the Army, the Medallion Foundation, and the American Cancer Society.
K.C. was supported by a National Neurofibromatosis Foundation Young
Investigator Award and a Research Scholar Grant from the American
Cancer Society. T.J. is an Investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute.

The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by payment
of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “adver-
tisement” in accordance with 18 USC section 1734 solely to indicate this
fact.

References

Baboshina, O.V., Crinelli, R., Siepmann, T.J., and Haas, A.L. 2001. N-end
rule specificity within the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway is not an
affinity effect. J. Biol. Chem. 7: 7.

Ballester, R., Michaeli, T., Ferguson, K., Xu, H.P., McCormick, F., and
Wigler, M. 1989. Genetic analysis of mammalian GAP expressed in
yeast. Cell 59: 681–686.

Basu, T.N., Gutmann, D.H., Fletcher, J.A., Glover, T.W., Collins, F.S.,
and Downward, J. 1992. Aberrant regulation of ras proteins in malig-
nant tumour cells from type 1 neurofibromatosis patients Nature
356: 713–715.

Bollag, G. and McCormick, F. 1991. Differential regulation of rasGAP
and neurofibromatosis gene product activities. Nature 351: 576–579.
Bollag, G., Clapp, D.W., Shih, S., Adler, F., Zhang, Y.Y., Thompson, P.,
Lange, B.J., Freedman, M.H., McCormick, F., Jacks, T., et al. 1996.
Loss of NF1 results in activation of the Ras signaling pathway and
leads to aberrant growth in haematopoietic cells. Nat. Genet. 12:
144–148.

Boyer, M.J., Gutmann, D.H., Collins, F.S., and Bar-Sagi, D. 1994.
Crosslinking of the surface immunoglobulin receptor in B lympho-
cytes induces a redistribution of neurofibromin but not p120-GAP.
Oncogene 9: 349–357.

Brannan, C.I., Perkins, A.S., Vogel, K.S., Ratner, N., Nordlund, M.L.,

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

453

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Riccardi, V.M. 1992. Neurofibromatosis: Phenotype, natural history, and
pathogenesis. The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD
and London, UK.

The, I., Hannigan, G.E., Cowley, G.S., Reginald, S., Zhong, Y., Gusella,
J.F., Hariharan, I.K., and Bernards, A. 1997. Rescue of a Drosophila
NF1 mutant phenotype by protein kinase A. Science 276: 791–794.
Wallace, M.R., Marchuk, D.A., Andersen, L.B., Letcher, R., Odeh, H.M.,
Saulino, A.M., Fountain, J.W., Brereton, A., Nicholson, J., Mitchell,
A.L., et al. 1990. Type 1 neurofibromatosis gene: Identification of a
large transcript disrupted in three NF1 patients. Science 249: 181–
186.

Winston, J.T., Koepp, D.M., Zhu, C., Elledge, S.J., and Harper, J.W. 1999.

A family of mammalian F-box proteins. Curr. Biol. 9: 1180–1182.

Xu, G.F., Lin, B., Tanaka, K., Dunn, D., Wood, D., Gesteland, R., White,
R., Weiss, R., and Tamanoi, F. 1990. The catalytic domain of the
neurofibromatosis type 1 gene product stimulates ras GTPase and
complements ira mutants of S. cerevisiae. Cell 63: 835–841.

Zhang, Y.Y., Vik, T.A., Ryder, J.W., Srour, E.F., Jacks, T., Shannon, K.,
and Clapp, D.W. 1998. Nf1 regulates hematopoietic progenitor cell
growth and ras signaling in response to multiple cytokines. J. Exp.
Med. 187: 1893–1902.

Zhu, Y., Ghosh, P., Charnay, P., Burns, D.K., and Parada, L.F. 2002.
Neurofibromas in NF1: Schwann cell origin and role of tumor envi-
ronment. Science 296: 920–922.

Cichowski et al.

Reid, S.W., Buchberg, A.M., Jenkins, N.A., Parada, L.F., and Cope-
land, N.G. 1994. Targeted disruption of the neurofibromatosis type-1
gene leads to developmental abnormalities in heart and various neu-
ral crest-derived tissues Genes & Dev. 8: 1019–1029.

Brugarolas, J., Bronson, R.T., and Jacks, T. 1998. p21 is a critical CDK2
regulator essential for proliferation control in Rb-deficient cells. J.
Cell. Biol. 141: 503–514.

Cai, H., Smola, U., Wixler, V., Eisenmann-Tappe, I., Diaz-Meco, M.T.,
Moscat, J., Rapp, U., and Cooper, G.M. 1997. Role of diacylglycerol-
regulated protein kinase C isotypes in growth factor activation of the
Raf-1 protein kinase. Mol. Cell. Biol. 17: 732–741.

Cawthon, R.M., Weiss, R., Xu, G.F., Viskochil, D., Culver, M., Stevens,
J., Robertson, M., Dunn, D., Gesteland, R., O’Connell, P., et al. 1990.
A major segment of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene: cDNA se-
quence, genomic structure, and point mutations. Cell 62: 193–201.
Chardin, P., Camonis, J.H., Gale, N.W., van Aelst, L., Schlessinger, J.,
Wigler, M.H., and Bar-Sagi, D. 1993. Human Sos1: A guanine nucleo-
tide exchange factor for Ras that binds to GRB2. Science 260: 1338–
1343.

Chaudhary, A., King, W.G., Mattaliano, M.D., Frost, J.A., Diaz, B., Mor-
rison, D.K., Cobb, M.H., Marshall, M.S., and Brugge, J.S. 2000. Phos-
phatidylinositol 3-kinase regulates Raf1 through Pak phosphoryla-
tion of serine 338. Curr. Biol. 10: 551–554.

Cichowski, K. and Jacks, T. 2001. NF1 tumor suppressor gene function:

Narrowing the GAP. Cell 104: 593–604.

Ciechanover, A., Orian, A., and Schwartz, A.L. 2000. Ubiquitin-mediated
proteolysis: Biological regulation via destruction. BioEssays 22: 442–
451.

Dai, Z., Quackenbush, R.C., Courtney, K.D., Grove, M., Cortez, D., Re-
uther, G.W., and Pendergast, A.M. 1998. Oncogenic Abl and Src ty-
rosine kinases elicit the ubiquitin-dependent degradation of target
proteins through a Ras-independent pathway. Genes & Dev. 12:
1415–1424.

DeClue, J.E., Papageorge, A.G., Fletcher, J.A., Diehl, S.R., Ratner, N.,
Vass, W.C., and Lowy, D.R. 1992. Abnormal regulation of mamma-
lian p21ras contributes to malignant tumor growth in von Reckling-
hausen (type 1) neurofibromatosis. Cell 69: 265–273.

Deshaies, R.J. 1999. SCF and Cullin/Ring H2-based ubiquitin ligases.

Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol. 15: 435–467.

Donovan, S., Shannon, K.M., and Bollag, G. 2002. GTPase activating
proteins: Critical regulators of intracellular signaling. Biochim. Bio-
phys. Acta 1602: 23–45.

Freemont, P.S. 2000. RING for destruction? Curr. Biol. 10: R84–R87.
Han, J.W., McCormick, F., and Macara, I.G. 1991. Regulation of Ras-GAP
and the neurofibromatosis-1 gene product by eicosanoids. Science
252: 576–579.

Hofmann, F., Martelli, F., Livingston, D.M., and Wang, Z. 1996. The
retinoblastoma gene product protects E2F-1 from degradation by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Genes & Dev. 10: 2949–2959.

Huynh, D.P., Nechiporuk, T., and Pulst, S.M. 1994. Differential expres-
sion and tissue distribution of type I and type II neurofibromins dur-
ing mouse fetal development. Dev. Biol. 161: 538–551.

Jacks, T., Shih, T.S., Schmitt, E.M., Bronson, R.T., Bernards, A., and
Weinberg, R.A. 1994. Tumour predisposition in mice heterozygous
for a targeted mutation in Nf1. Nat. Genet. 7: 353–361.

Kim, H.A., Rosenbaum, T., Marchionni, M.A., Ratner, N., and DeClue,
J.E. 1995. Schwann cells from neurofibromin deficient mice exhibit
activation of p21ras, inhibition of cell proliferation and morphologi-
cal changes. Oncogene 11: 325–335.

Marshall, C.J. 1995. Specificity of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling:
Transient versus sustained extracellular signal-regulated kinase acti-
vation. Cell 80: 179–185.

Martin, G.A., Viskochil, D., Bollag, G., McCabe, P.C., Crosier, W.J.,
Haubruck, H., Conroy, L., Clark, R., O’Connell, P., Cawthon, R.M.,
et al. 1990. The GAP-related domain of the neurofibromatosis type 1
gene product interacts with ras p21. Cell 63: 843–849.

Nadal-Wollbold, F., Pawlowski, M., Levy-Toledano, S., Berrou, E., Rosa,
J.P., and Bryckaert, M. 2002. Platelet ERK2 activation by thrombin is
dependent on calcium and conventional protein kinases C but not
Raf-1 or B-Raf. FEBS Lett. 531: 475–482.

Quilliam, L.A., Khosravi-Far, R., Huff, S.Y., and Der, C.J. 1995. Guanine
nucleotide exchange factors: Activators of the Ras superfamily of
proteins. BioEssays 17: 395–404.

454

GENES & DEVELOPMENT

Downloaded from 

genesdev.cshlp.org

 on June 12, 2018 - Published by 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 

Dynamic regulation of the Ras pathway via proteolysis of the NF1
tumor suppressor
  
Karen Cichowski, Sabrina Santiago, Melanie Jardim, et al. 
  
Genes Dev. 
Access the most recent version at doi:

10.1101/gad.1054703
 

2003, 

 17:

References
  
License
  
Email Alerting
Service

This article cites 33 articles, 11 of which can be accessed free at:
http://genesdev.cshlp.org/content/17/4/449.full.html#ref-list-1
 
  

Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top
right corner of the article or 
  

click here.

 

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

