Ezrin-mediated apical integrity is required
for intestinal homeostasis

Jessica B. Casaletto, Ichiko Saotome, Marcello Curto, and Andrea I. McClatchey1

Massachusetts General Hospital Center for Cancer Research and Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129

Edited by Joan S. Brugge, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, and approved June 14, 2011 (received for review March 1, 2011)

Individual cell types are deﬁned by architecturally and functionally
specialized cortical domains. The Ezrin, Radixin, and Moesin (ERM)
proteins play a major role in organizing cortical domains by
assembling membrane protein complexes and linking them to
the cortical actin cytoskeleton. Many studies have focused on the
individual roles of the ERM proteins in stabilizing the membrane–
cytoskeleton interface, controlling the distribution and function of
apical membrane complexes, regulating the small GTPase Rho, or
establishing cell–cell junctions. We previously found that deletion
of the mouse Ezrin gene yields severe defects in apical integrity
throughout the developing intestinal epithelium, resulting in in-
complete villus morphogenesis and neonatal death. However, the
molecular function of Ezrin in building the apical surface of the
intestinal epithelium was not clear. By deleting Ezrin in the adult
mouse intestinal epithelium, we provide evidence that Ezrin per-
forms multiple molecular functions that collaborate to build the
functional apical surface of the intestinal epithelium in vivo. The
loss of Ezrin-mediated apical integrity in the adult intestine yields
severe morphological consequences during intestinal homeostasis,
including defects in cell geometry, extrusion, junctional remodeling,
and spindle orientation. Surprisingly, deletion of Ezrin either before
or after villus morphogenesis yields villus fusion, revealing a previ-
ously unrecognized step in intestinal homeostasis. Our studies in-
dicate that the function of Ezrin in building and maintaining the
apical domain is essential not only for intestinal morphogenesis
but also for homeostasis in the mature intestine.
actomyosin contractility | planar cell polarity | colon | Merlin
The vast array of forms and functions exhibited by different

cell types is made possible by the organization of specialized
domains within the cell cortex. The assembly of such domains
involves the coordination of processes occurring at the plasma
membrane with those in the underlying cytoskeleton. Central to
this coordination is the formation of protein complexes on the
cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane that localize mem-
brane proteins, control their abundance and activity, and link
them to the cortical cytoskeleton, thereby serving both regulatory
and architectural functions.

The ERM proteins (ERMs) can assemble multiprotein com-
plexes at the membrane–cytoskeleton interface and play a key
role in organizing the apical domain of polarized epithelial cells
(1, 2). These proteins harbor a trilobed N-terminal FERM
(Four-point-one-ERM) domain that provides multiple protein-
binding interfaces and mediates plasma membrane association
and a C-terminal domain that can associate directly with F-actin
(3, 4). The FERM domain can bind directly to any of several
transmembrane proteins or to PDZ domain-containing adapters
such as NHERF1 (Na+/H+ exchanger regulatory factor 1),
which,
in turn, can associate with additional transmembrane
proteins (1, 5, 6). Given this structure, the ERMs can potentially
link multiple proteins to the actin cytoskeleton. As such, they are
thought to both stabilize the cortical actin cytoskeleton and
control the assembly, distribution, and activity of certain mem-
brane-associated complexes, although these functions have been
largely studied independently. For example, studies in ﬂies and
cultured mammalian cells reveal a key role for the ERMs in

stabilizing the membrane–cytoskeleton interface during bleb re-
traction, mitotic cell rounding, and the establishment and main-
tenance of apical cell–cell junctions (7–10). Other studies have
documented a role for ERMs in assembling apical membrane
complexes (11–14). Studies in the ﬂy indicate that yet another key
function of the single Drosophila ERM protein, Moesin, is to
negatively regulate the small GTPase Rho1 (15). Therefore, the
ERMs may do at least three things, perhaps simultaneously and
in coordination: (i) stabilize the membrane–cytoskeleton in-
terface, (ii) regulate the formation of apical membrane complexes,
and (iii) control Rho1 (RhoA in mammals, hereafter referred to as
“Rho”) activity.

The specialized apical domains of thousands of individual in-
testinal epithelial cells work together to carry out the absorptive
function of the intestine while providing a strong, ﬂexible net-
work that can withstand and respond to mechanical stress during
constant homeostatic cell movement. This apical brush border
(BB) domain features a dense mat of microvilli that increase the
absorptive surface area of the gut and are anchored in a thick,
contractile cytoskeletal platform known as the terminal web. The
terminal web is integrated with the circumferential apical junc-
tional region (AJR), allowing mechanical coupling among cells
across the epithelium.

Recent studies from our laboratory and others have revealed
a key role for ERM function in building the apical domain of
intestinal epithelial cells in vivo (16–18). Loss of Ezrin, the only
ERM expressed in the mouse intestinal epithelium, or of the
single ERM ortholog (ERM-1) in Caenorhabditis elegans, yields
remarkably similar defects in apical
integrity throughout the
developing intestinal epithelium. In the absence of Ezrin/ERM-
1, intestinal epithelial cells establish apical-basal polarity and
form microvilli, but exhibit defects in the morphology of the
apical domain, particularly in the terminal web and associated
junctions (16, 18). In the developing mouse intestine, this results
in the incomplete expansion of secondary lumina that would
normally segregate individual villi (16). Ezrin-null mice fail to
thrive and do not survive past weaning; whether this is due to
architectural defects in villus morphogenesis, aberrant function
of apical transporters, or both is not known. Moreover, the
molecular function of Ezrin in building the apical surface of
the intestinal epithelium is not clear. By deleting Ezrin in the
adult mouse intestine, we demonstrate that (i) Ezrin performs
multiple molecular functions in vivo and (ii) the function of
Ezrin in building and maintaining the apical domain is essential
not only for morphogenesis but also for homeostasis in the
mature intestine.

Author contributions: J.B.C., I.S., M.C., and A.I.M. designed research; J.B.C., I.S., and M.C.
performed research; J.B.C., I.S., and A.I.M. analyzed data; and J.B.C. and A.I.M. wrote the
paper.

The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: mcclatch@helix.mgh.harvard.
edu.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1103418108/-/DCSupplemental.

11924–11929 | PNAS |

July 19, 2011 | vol. 108 | no. 29

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1103418108

Results
Ezrin Is Required Cell-Autonomously for Apical Morphogenesis in the
Adult Mouse Intestine. Constitutional Ezrin null (Ez−/−) mice die
as neonates with intestinal defects but without other detectable
abnormalities (16). To conﬁrm that the phenotype of Ez−/−
neonates was due to a cell-autonomous requirement for Ezrin in
the intestinal epithelium, we generated Villin(Vil)-Cre;Ezlox/lox
mice in which Ezrin is deleted speciﬁcally in intestinal epithelial
cells during development (19). We found that Vil-Cre;Ezlox/lox
mice are phenotypically identical to Ez−/− mice, exhibiting the
same defects in apical integrity, villus morphogenesis, and neo-
natal death (Fig. S1) (16).
To bypass the neonatal lethality of Ez−/− and Vil-Cre;Ezlox/lox
mice and examine the requirement for Ezrin function in the adult
intestine after villus morphogenesis, we crossed Ezlox/lox mice (16)
to transgenic Vil-Cre-ERT2 mice in which Cre activity can be in-
duced via tamoxifen injection (19). Tamoxifen treatment of adult
Vil-Cre-ERT2;Ezlox/lox mice led to recombination of the Ez allele
and complete loss of Ezrin throughout the colonic and small
intestinal epithelia (Fig. S2). Tamoxifen-treated mice were viable
but exhibited severe defects in apical integrity that were nearly
identical to that seen in Ez−/− or Vil-Cre;Ezlox/lox neonates in
which Ezrin was deleted before villus morphogenesis (Fig. S1)
(16). For example, instead of the highly organized wild-type BB
composed of a compact, cytoskeletal terminal web and uniformly
sized and oriented microvilli (Fig. 1 A and C), deletion of Ezrin in
the adult intestine yielded a distended terminal web and non-
uniform, misoriented microvilli (Fig. 1 B and D and Fig. S3). In
fact, Ez−/− microvilli exhibit a spectrum of morphologies—from
distinct, individual units [i.e., Fig. 1 E and F and D (top)] to a more

A

C

E

F

B

D

2 m

2 m
G

H

1 m

2 m

2 m

2 m

Fig. 1. Apical defects in the adult Ez−/− intestine. (A–D) Transmission EM of
intestinal epithelia from tamoxifen-treated Ezlox/lox (A and C) and Vil-Cre-
ERT2;Ezlox/lox (B and D) mice. Control colonic (A) and small intestinal (C) ep-
ithelia maintain a highly organized BB featuring densely packed, uniform
microvilli with actin rootlets embedded in a compact terminal web. Ez−/−
microvilli in colonic (B) and small intestinal epithelia (D) are nonuniform,
misoriented, and extend from a thickened and disorganized terminal web;
actin rootlets are disorganized or absent. (A and B) 2,900× magniﬁcation. (C
and D) 11,000× magniﬁcation. (E and F) Large blebs of membrane no longer
attached to the cytoskeleton are frequently found throughout the Ez−/−
intestine. (E) 15,000× magniﬁcation. (F) 7,100× magniﬁcation. (G and H)
Phalloidin-stained colonic epithelia reveal the continuous apical band of
actin labeling of the BB of control cells (G); actin is discontinuous in Ez−/−
cells (H). (G and H) 600× magniﬁcation.

“weblike” morphology [i.e., Fig. 1D (bottom)] to a gross herniation
of the entire apical membrane (i.e., Fig. 1 E and F). We interpret
this to reﬂect a requirement for Ezrin in tethering the membrane
to the cortical cytoskeleton at the base of each microvillus and/or
organizing the terminal web from which they protrude. In fact, in
contrast to the continuous apical accumulation of actin in control
epithelia (Fig. 1G), apical actin is often ragged and discontinuous
in the absence of Ezrin (Fig. 1H), further supporting an important
role for Ezrin in stabilizing the membrane–cortical cytoskeleton
in vivo. Notably, these defects were seen throughout the small
intestine and in the colon, which was not examined in our earlier
study (16).

Loss of Ezrin Disrupts the Formation of Apical Membrane Complexes.
Given that Ezrin can bind to membrane-associated receptors and
adapters and is essential for apical membrane integrity, we
expected that apical membrane complexes that rely on Ezrin
would be disrupted in vivo. For example, recent studies indicate
that ﬂy Moesin, Sip1 (the Drosophila ortholog of NHERF1), and
Slik (a kinase necessary for Moesin phosphorylation and acti-
vation in the ﬂy) form an interdependent apical complex (20). A
major advantage of deleting Ezrin in the adult is that, in contrast
to Ez−/− neonates, the adult intestine yields enough tissue for
biochemical analysis. Indeed, biochemical fractionation of BB
components revealed that the levels of Slk (the mammalian
homolog of Slik) are markedly reduced in BBs isolated from the
Ez−/− intestine (Fig. 2A and Fig. S3C). Similarly, NHERF1 fails
to localize apically in the adult Ez−/− intestine, as in the neonate
(16), and is not present in isolated BBs (Fig. 2 A–C). Notably, the
total levels of NHERF1 are also reduced in the Ez−/− intestinal
epithelium, suggesting that NHERF1 stability may depend on its
localization and/or interaction with Ezrin. This is consistent with
the ﬁnding that loss of Moesin decreases the overall abundance
of Sip1 in the ﬂy (20). NHERF1 is known to associate with and
regulate the ion transporters NHE3 and CFTR in the intestine
(21), suggesting that they may be misregulated in the absence of
Ezrin. Misregulation of these transporters in mouse models
causes fat malabsorption (22). Indeed, fecal analysis revealed the
presence of excess fats in feces from Ez−/− intestines (Materials
and Methods). Together these data indicate that Ezrin is required
for the assembly and function of BB membrane complexes
in vivo.

Increased Rho Activity in the Absence of Ezrin. A key function of
Drosophila Moesin is to negatively regulate Rho (15). Moreover,
in cultured mammalian kidney cells, expression of a dominant-

Y
G
O
L
O
I
B

L
L
E
C

A

TCL

BB

B

C

Ezrin
Slk

NHERF1
NHERF1
(longer
exposure)
APN
Crumbs3
Villin
Actin

1

2

3

4

Fig. 2. Loss of Ezrin disrupts the formation of apical membrane complexes.
(A) BBs were isolated from control (lanes 1 and 3) and Ez−/− (lanes 2 and 4)
small intestines. Total cell lysate (TCL) and BB fractions were solubilized in
the presence of 1% SDS. Villin served as a positive control for the BB fraction
and aminopeptidase N (APN), and Crumbs3 served as controls for apical
membrane proteins. Note the speciﬁc loss of NHERF1 and Slk in Ez−/− BBs. (B
and C) NHERF1 is apically concentrated in colonic epithelia from tamoxifen-
treated Ezlox/lox (control, B), but not Vil-Cre-ERT2;Ezlox/lox (Ez−/−, C) mice.

Casaletto et al.

PNAS |

July 19, 2011 | vol. 108 | no. 29 | 11925

negative form of Ezrin increased Rho activity (15). It is not
known, however, whether Rho inhibition is a general property of
mammalian ERMs, as no suitable model for testing this hy-
pothesis in vivo was previously available. Therefore, we measured
Rho activity in control and Ez−/− epithelia. Despite similar total
levels of Rho, levels of active Rho were increased in both Ez−/−
colonic and small intestinal epithelia (Fig. 3A and Fig. S4A). This
was accompanied by an increase in phosphorylation of myosin
light chain 2 (MLC2), a target of Rho and a mediator of acto-
myosin contractility (Fig. 3B and Fig. S4B), and by the altered
distribution of phosphorylated MLC2 (pMLC2). In isolated
control cells, pMLC2 was concentrated at the compact apical
surface with an additional diffuse localization throughout the cell
(Fig. 3C). In contrast, pMLC2 was markedly enriched in the
thickened apical region in Ez−/− cells and exhibited a punctate
distribution throughout the cell (Fig. 3D), reminiscent of the
contractile myosin aggregates seen in Drosophila S2 cells that lack
Moesin (9).

Morphogenetic Consequences of Ezrin Deﬁciency in the Adult
Intestine. We expected that defects in Rho regulation and in
the integrity of the apical domain would affect the dynamic ar-
chitecture of the Ez−/− intestinal epithelium. Indeed, Ez−/− cells
throughout the intestine exhibit a morphology that is distinct
from their wild-type counterparts. Whereas wild-type cells have a
wider apical surface relative to the middle or basal region, Ez−/−
cells are uniformly narrow. This is particularly pronounced in
the colon where wild-type cells exhibit markedly expanded apical
membranes as they execute a 90 degree turn at the transition
from the crypt to the colon surface (Fig. 4A). In contrast, Ez−/−
cells maintain narrow apical surfaces such that nearly twice as
many cells accomplish this transition (Fig. 4 B and C). This is
consistent with the possibility that the apical surface of Ez−/−
cells cannot expand due to excess Rho-mediated actomyosin
contractility. Similar differences were seen at the crypt–villus
junction of the small intestine.

The adult intestinal epithelium is in a constant state of
movement, with newborn cells continuously migrating from the
crypts to villus tips or the colonic surface where they are ex-
truded into the intestinal lumen (23). Rho-dependent actomyo-
sin contractility is known to be critical for epithelial cell extrusion
(24). In fact, excess apical Rho activity has been linked to
a failure of apical extrusion in cultured cells (25). Therefore, we
suspected that there might be a defect in the extrusion of cells

A

GDP

Small
Intestine Colon
C Ez-/-

GTPγS C Ez-/-

Total RhoA
Active RhoA
Loading control

B

C Ez-/- C Ez-/-

Ezrin
pMLC (S19)
Actin

C

D

Increased Rho activity in Ez−/− intestinal epithelial cells. (A–D) Cells
Fig. 3.
from vehicle (C) or tamoxifen-treated (Ez−/−) Vil-Cre-ERT2;Ezlox/lox mice were
analyzed. (A) Cell lysates were incubated with GST-Rhotekin beads. Bound
proteins (active) and total cell lysates (total) were examined. Preincubation
with GDP or GTPγS served as negative and positive controls, respectively. The
amount of beads in each reaction served as a loading control for each pair.
(B) Small intestinal epithelial cell lysates from two pairs of C and Ez−/− mice
reveal increased levels of pMLC in Ez−/− cells. (C and D) Control (C) or Ez−/−
(D) small
intestinal epithelial cells were immunostained with antibodies
against pMLC (Ser19) (red) and DAPI (blue). In Ez−/− cells, pMLC is enriched in
the thickened apical region and present in punctate aggregates (D). (C and
D) 600× magniﬁcation.

A *

*

B

*
*

*****
*
*

C

s
e
c
a

10
8
6
4

p < 0.0001

f
r
u
s
 
l

i

a
c
p
a

 
f

o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

2
0

C

Ez-/-

D

s

l
l

e
c
 
e
v
i
t
i
s
o
p
-
3
e
s
a
p
s
a
c
 
%

 

5
4
3
2
1
0

p < 0.01

C

Ez-/-

E

G

I

F

H

100µm

J

100µm

100µm

100µm

Fig. 4. Morphogenetic consequences of Ezrin loss in the adult intestine. (A–
C) Altered shape of Ez−/− epithelial cells. (A and B) β-Catenin staining in
colonic epithelia from tamoxifen-treated Ezlox/lox (control, A) and Vil-Cre-
ERT2;Ezlox/lox (Ez−/−, B) mice reveals expanded apical surfaces of control cells
as they transition from the crypt to the colonic surface (A) in contrast to the
nearly uniformly narrow Ez−/− cells (B). An asterisk marks the apical surfaces
that compose this transition and provides an example of the quantitation
shown in C. (A and B) 600× magniﬁcation. (C) The number of apical surfaces
per transition in control (C) (4.0 ± 0.6) and Ez−/− (7.6 ± 1.3) mice were de-
termined using two mice of each genotype (P < 0.0001). (D–F) Decreased
extrusion of apoptotic cells in Ez−/− epithelia. Cleaved caspase-3 staining of
control (E) and Ez−/− (F) epithelia reveals a sixfold increase in positive cells at
the colonic surface in the absence of Ezrin (control, 0.64% ± 0.25; Ez−/−, 3.8% ±
0.28; P < 0.01). A minimum of 1,000 epithelial cells per colon were counted
using two mice of each genotype. (G and H) SEM across the luminal surface
of the colon. Apical defects result in a rough, nonuniform appearance of the
Ez−/− colon (H) compared with the smooth, uniform surface of the control
(G). (G and H) 130× magniﬁcation. (I and J) SEM across the luminal surface of
the small intestinal epithelium from control (I) and Ez−/− (J) mice. Single-villus
units cover the control small intestine, whereas Ez−/− intestines contain villus
structures composed of two or more individual villi fused together. (I and J)
250× magniﬁcation.

from Ez−/− intestines. Normally, cells are extruded before visible
signs of apoptosis. Indeed, we found a sixfold increase in the
percentage of cleaved caspase-3–positive cells at the surface of
the Ez−/− colonic epithelium (control = 0.64%; Ez−/−= 3.8%)
(Fig. 4 D–F), suggesting that Ez−/− cells receive the extrusion
signal but are not physically removed in a timely manner (24). The
altered apical morphology of cells at the crypt surface, together
with defects in cell extrusion, yields a prominent difference in
the contour of the colonic surface epithelium as highlighted by
scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The surface of the Ez−/−
colon is studded with donut-shaped accumulations of cells sur-
rounding the mouth of each crypt (Fig. 4H), in contrast to the
smooth, uniform surface of control tissue (Fig. 4G).
It is not surprising that deletion of Ezrin from the adult small
intestine and colon led to apical defects similar to those of Ez−/−
neonates (16). However, the prominent villus fusion phenotype
of Ez−/− and Vil-Cre;Ezlox/lox mice arises in the embryo due to
defects in the earliest stages of villus formation (16); therefore,
we did not anticipate that deletion of Ezrin from the mature

11926 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1103418108

Casaletto et al.

intestine after villus morphogenesis would also lead to the fusion
of villi across the small intestine, a defect that is readily visual-
ized by SEM (Fig. 4J). Instead of individual units of architecture
(Fig. 4I and Fig. S5A), Ez−/− villi formed amalgamated structures
composed of two or more villi that were fused to form a single
architectural unit (Fig. 4J and Fig. S5B). The extent of fusion
between Ez−/− villi increased with time after Ezrin deletion until
the villi were fused along their entire length, arguing that villus
fusion occurs during the continuous repopulation of the villus
with cells from the crypt.

Ezrin Stabilizes the AJR in the Mammalian Intestinal Epithelium. The
remarkably similar phenotypes of Ez−/− neonates and adults
suggest that villus fusion results from the same underlying defect
in development and homeostasis. During development, villus
morphogenesis is driven in part by the de novo formation and
expansion of secondary lumina throughout the stratiﬁed epithe-
lium that originally lines the gut tube, converting it into a co-
lumnar monolayer and driving the segregation of individual villi
(26, 27). A key step in this process is the progressive conversion of
cell junctions into a new apical surface. In the absence of Ezrin,
secondary lumina form but often fail to expand, yielding in-
complete segregation of villi (16). In the adult, the epithelium is
already a columnar monolayer; it is the turnover of this mono-
layer that requires precise and dynamic regulation of cell junc-
tions. The intricate cell rearrangements that occur as cells migrate
from crypt to villus in the adult have not been well-mapped;
however, cells from each crypt contribute to more than one villus,
and some must segregate at the crypt–villus transition. Thus,
villus fusion in the adult likely results from defects in junctional
remodeling during this transition. Indeed, recent studies have
reported roles for the ERMs in stabilizing and remodeling the
AJR in worms, ﬂies, and mammals (10, 16, 18, 28). This would
also be consistent with the well-documented role for Rho in
expanding and stabilizing apical junctions in mammalian cells
(29–31). To determine whether Ezrin stabilizes the intestinal
AJR, we examined the wild-type and Ez−/− AJR morphologically
and biochemically. Transmission electron microscopy revealed
that, instead of the compact AJR that contains parallel, closely
apposed membranes in wild-type epithelia (Fig. 5A), deletion of
Ezrin led to elongated and sinuous junctions that often contained
obvious gaps between points of close apposition (Fig. 5B).

Biochemical fractionation provided additional evidence that
the AJR is altered in the absence of Ezrin. The solubilities of the
core adherens junction (AJ) components E-cadherin, β-catenin,
and α-catenin were dramatically increased in Ez−/− BBs (Fig.
5C). We also found that AJ components were associated with
higher-molecular-weight complexes in the absence of Ezrin.
Sucrose gradient centrifugation of lysates from control and Ez−/−
intestines revealed that AJ components in control cells sedi-
mented mainly in fractions 3–6, although signiﬁcant levels of AJ
proteins were also present in higher-molecular-weight fractions
in Ez−/− cells (Fig. S6). Immunoprecipitation of E-cadherin from
these fractions revealed the association of α-catenin and β-cat-
enin, suggesting that the core AJ complex associates with dif-
ferent proteins in the presence and absence of Ezrin (Fig. 5D).

Altered Spindle Orientation in the Absence of Ezrin. Our biochemical
data ﬁt well with the growing appreciation that the AJR is a dy-
namic and heterogeneous structure (28, 32, 33). For example,
recent studies suggest that the AJR contains cadherin complexes
that are either freely moving or part of actin-associated clusters
that are embedded in a contractile cortical cytoskeleton (34).
Moreover, within the AJR, AJ proteins can exhibit asymmetric
(planar polarized) distributions that drive polarized cell rear-
rangements, perhaps reﬂecting underlying differences in the
distribution and/or composition of cadherin clusters (35–38).

Planar polarity has not been studied in the intestine, but the
fact that cells constitutively migrate from crypt to villus suggests

A

B

C

1% SDS
BB

TCL

0.1% SDS
TCL
BB

Ezrin
E-cadherin

β-catenin

α-catenin

Actin

Control

Ez-/-

Control
Ez-/-

1 2 3 4 5 6

7 8

Input

E-cadherin IP
4 6 8 10 11 4 6 8 10 11

500nm

500nm

D
Fr.

i

n
n
e

t

a
c
-
β

i

n
n
e

t

a
c
-
α

Fig. 5. Defects in the AJR of Ez−/− intestinal epithelia. (A and B) Trans-
mission EM of colonic epithelia from tamoxifen-treated Ezlox/lox (control, A)
and Vil-Cre-ERT2;Ezlox/lox (Ez−/−, B) mice reveals defective AJR architecture in
the absence of Ezrin. (A and B) 11,000× magniﬁcation. (C) Increased solu-
bility of AJ components in the Ez−/− BB. AJ components in the total cell lysate
(TCL) and BB fractions of control (lanes 1, 3, 5, and 7) and Ez−/− (lanes 2, 4, 6,
and 8) small intestinal epithelia were solubilized in the presence of 1% or
0.1% SDS. Note the increased solubility in Ez−/− BBs. The solubilities of the
tight junction proteins ZO-1 and occludin were also increased (Fig. S7). (D)
Co-immunoprecipitation of β-catenin and α-catenin with E-cadherin in the
indicated sucrose gradient fractions (Fig. S6) reveals the presence of higher-
molecular-weight AJ complexes in Ez−/− intestines.

Y
G
O
L
O
I
B

L
L
E
C

that they know their orientation relative to this axis. Given the
essential role of Ezrin in building the apical cortex of intestinal
epithelial cells, together with the altered biochemical properties
of AJ complexes in the absence of Ezrin, we suspected that Ezrin
might be required for planar orientation in the intestinal epi-
thelium. A signature of planar polarity in other tissues is spindle
orientation (39–41). Spindles in transit amplifying cells of the
crypts are known to align parallel to the apical surface, but it is
not clear whether they are planar-polarized (parallel to the
apical surface and speciﬁcally oriented relative to the crypt–villus
axis). Indeed, we found that most spindles in control crypts were
aligned parallel to the apical surface as has been described (42,
43); we also found that they were predominantly oriented along
the crypt–villus axis, indicating that they are planar-polarized
(Fig. 6 A and C and Movie S1). In contrast, spindles in Ez−/−
crypts, although still parallel to the apical surface, exhibited a
near random orientation relative to the crypt–villus axis (Fig. 6
B and C and Movie S2). Confocal imaging and 3D reconstruction
allowed for quantitation of spindle orientation. Thus, whereas
91% of control spindles were aligned within 30 degrees of the
crypt–villus axis, only 67% of spindles in Ez−/− cells were simi-
larly aligned (Fig. 6C). These data suggest that Ezrin-dependent
organization of the apical cortex is required for planar-polarized
spindle orientation in the intestinal epithelium.

Discussion
By bringing together multiple proteins at the membrane and
linking them to the cytoskeleton, the ERMs seem designed to
simultaneously coordinate several activities at the cell cortex.
Studies of the ERMs across species have independently focused
on their roles in stabilizing the membrane–cytoskeleton interface,
regulating the small GTPase Rho, controlling membrane recep-
tors, or stabilizing the AJR. Here, we provide evidence that the
ERMs carry out all of these functions in the same tissue in vivo,
supporting the notion that individual ERM molecules can si-
multaneously coordinate multiple activities. Moreover, we extend

Casaletto et al.

PNAS |

July 19, 2011 | vol. 108 | no. 29 | 11927

A

B

C

100

p < 0.0005

   0-30o
 30-90o
p < 0.05

l

s
e
d
n
p
s
 
%

i

80

60

40

20

0

Control

Ez-/-

Fig. 6. Altered spindle orientation in the absence of Ezrin. (A and B)
Immunostaining with anti-pericentrin antibodies (green), phalloidin (red,
marks the crypt–villus axis), and DAPI (blue) reveals spindle orientation in
small intestinal crypts from tamoxifen-treated Ezlox/lox (control, A) and Vil-
Cre-ERT2;Ezlox/lox (Ez−/−, B) mice. Representative single z-plane images are
presented. Note that both centrosomes are found in a single z-plane in
control crypts (A), whereas the two centrosomes in B are in distinct z-planes
that are 4 μm apart. (C) Quantitation of spindle orientation carried out by
confocal imaging and 3D reconstruction reveals that 91% ± 7.5% (n = 23; P <
0.0005) of spindles in control crypts were aligned within 30° of the crypt–
villus axis, whereas only 67% ± 8.0% (n = 30; P < 0.05) of spindles in Ez−/−
crypts were aligned in this manner (overall P < 0.05).

our previous discovery of the requirement for Ezrin in intestinal
development and show that Ezrin function is also necessary for
intestinal homeostasis in the adult. In fact, the phenotypic con-
sequences of deleting Ezrin before villus morphogenesis (during
development) vs. during villus maintenance (in the adult) are
essentially identical, uncovering a previously unrecognized mor-
phogenetic aspect of intestinal homeostasis. We also provide
evidence that the intestinal epithelium is planar-polarized.

The ability of the ERMs to directly control both local cortical
architecture and receptor distribution/activity renders them piv-
otal in creating cortical domains that deﬁne the functions of
individual cells or tissues. Ezrin coordinates these molecular
functions to build a contractile apical domain that also carries
out the absorptive function of the intestinal epithelium. Con-
versely, the loss of apical integrity due to Ezrin deﬁciency reﬂects
the concomitant loss of multiple molecular functions and pro-
foundly impacts intestinal architecture, function, and homeo-
stasis. On a cellular level, destabilization of the membrane–
cytoskeleton interface and increased Rho-mediated actomyosin
contractility likely cooperate to give rise to a BB that exhibits
misoriented microvilli and is prone to herniation. Microvilli
function to increase the absorptive surface area of the gut and
present transporters to the intestinal lumen. Therefore, these
defects may reﬂect the function of Ezrin both in stabilizing the
membrane–cytoskeleton interface and in presenting and regu-
lating critical transporters. Notably, recent studies indicate that
microvilli can function as dynamic conveyor belts that continu-
ously shed active enzyme-containing vesicles into the intestinal
lumen, highlighting the importance of coordinating mechanically
stable membrane–cytoskeleton attachment with the positioning
and regulation of membrane protein complexes (44).

The intestinal epithelium is the most dynamic tissue in the
adult body, replacing billions of cells every 4–5 d through an
exquisitely choreographed program of cell division, migration,
and extrusion (23). The interconnected BBs of intestinal epi-
thelial cells provide a strong, ﬂexible network that maintains the
integrity of the epithelium while cells are in constant movement
and under continuous mechanical stress. The apical surfaces of
Ez−/− cells across the epithelium are narrow and do not expand

at the crypt surface, consistent with the notion that they are
constrained by excess Rho-mediated actomyosin contractility.
Moreover, the extrusion of apoptotic cells from the colonic epi-
thelium, which is driven by a transient relaxation of Rho-mediated
contractility, is defective in the absence of Ezrin. These defects
highlight the dynamic nature of Rho-mediated contractility that
must govern these processes and suggest that the role of Ezrin in
Rho regulation is also dynamic.

The most profound defect caused by loss of Ezrin in the adult
is the development of fused villi. Surprisingly, this phenotypically
mirrors the consequences of Ezrin deﬁciency in the developing
intestine, a defect attributable to the failed expansion of sec-
ondary lumina that drive villus segregation speciﬁcally during
development. However, careful consideration reveals that both
of these defects may reﬂect failed segregation of cells due to
defective junctional remodeling and are therefore likely to be
directly related. In the adult, crypts signiﬁcantly outnumber villi
(23), and each crypt contributes to several surrounding villi.
Therefore, the process of continuous villus repopulation must
involve the segregation of adjacent cells at some point. In the
Ez−/− intestine, adjacent cells appear unable to segregate and
instead remain in contact as they ascend two different villi,
resulting in villus fusion (Fig. 4J and Fig. S5B). This defect could
be due to defective planar polarization of cell junctions. The
segregation of adjacent cells before migration up separate villi
implies that cell junctions aligned with the crypt–villus axis, but
not those perpendicular to it, are programmed for segregation.
Our observation that spindle orientation is planar-polarized in
the wild-type but not in the Ez−/− intestine, together with mor-
phological and biochemical differences in the AJR in the ab-
sence of Ezrin, support this hypothesis.

The mechanism by which Ezrin stabilizes the AJR may be in-
direct. Studies in Drosophila demonstrated that, through in-
teraction with the membrane-tethered protein Bitesize (Btsz),
Moesin organizes actin in a localized domain that is in turn re-
quired to stabilize E-cadherin (10). In btsz mutants, Moesin lo-
calization to the AJR is decreased and E-cadherin is not
stabilized, as actin ﬁlaments fail to form a stable, continuous
network that deﬁnes the boundary between the apical and junc-
tional domains. Indeed, the elongated and disorganized appear-
ance of cell–cell junctions in Ez−/− intestinal epithelia (Fig. 5B)
could reﬂect the lack of a properly deﬁned apical–junctional
boundary. However, although several mammalian homologs of
Btsz exist, none contain the Moesin-interacting domain (10).

Our data uncover the complex molecular requirements for
Ezrin in building the apical BB and the similarly complex bi-
ological requirements for the apical BB in intestinal epithelial
homeostasis. This model will be valuable for a detailed bio-
chemical interrogation of Ezrin-containing complexes in the in-
testinal epithelium and for deeper analyses of individual aspects
of intestinal homeostasis.

Materials and Methods
SI Materials and Methods provides further details.

Animals and Animal Procedures. Ezlox/lox mice (16) were crossed with tamoxifen-
inducible Vil-Cre-ERT2 transgenic mice provided by Sylvie Robine (Institut
Curie, Paris) (19). Tamoxifen (MP Biomedicals) was solubilized (50 mg/mL in
ethanol) and diluted to 10 mg/mL in corn oil. Mice (12–18 wk of age) were
injected i.p. with 100 μL tamoxifen or vehicle/day for 5 d and killed 4–5
d after cessation of treatment. For fecal analysis, feces were collected for 48
h and submitted to Idexx Laboratories for examination. Animal procedures
were performed according to federal and institutional guidelines and ap-
proved by the Massachusetts General Hospital Subcommittee on Research
Animal Care.

Histochemistry and Immunohistochemistry. Tissues were ﬁxed in formalin.
Sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin or by immunohistochem-
istry using the following antibodies: Neomarkers (Ezrin, 3C12; Moesin, 38/87),
Abcam (NHERF1, ab3452), BD Biosciences (β-catenin, 610154), and Cell Sig-

11928 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1103418108

Casaletto et al.

Y
G
O
L
O
I
B

L
L
E
C

naling (cleaved caspase-3, 9661). HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were
detected using a DAB (3,3′-diaminobenzidine) kit (Vector Laboratories).

Electron Microscopy. For transmission electron microscopy (EM), small in-
testinal tissue was ﬁxed in 4% glutaraldehyde and prepared and imaged
as described (16). Colonic tissue was ﬁxed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde/2.5%
paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer (Electron Microscopy
Sciences), prepared as above, examined on a Tecnai G2 Spirit BioTWIN
electron microscope, and captured as above. For scanning EM, tissues were
ﬁxed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde, postﬁxed in 1% osmium tetroxide (both in
0.1 M phosphate buffer), and dehydrated. Samples were sputter-coated
with 15 nm gold:palladium and examined on a Hitachi S-4800 ﬁeld emission
scanning electron microscope.

Rho Activity Assay. Intestines were ﬂushed with PBS, opened, and placed in
buffer [50 mM Tris·Cl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 5% glycerol, 1%
Triton-X 100, 0.1% SDS, and a protease/phosphatase inhibitor mixture]. Cells
were scraped into buffer, lysed (10 min, ice), cleared (13,000 × g 5 min, 4 °C),
and incubated with GST-Rhotekin-Sepharose (45 min, 4 °C). For controls,
1 mM GDP and 100 μM GTPγS were added to lysates.

BB Isolation. BBs were isolated using the method described by the Tyska
laboratory (44).

Immunoﬂuorescence. Intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) were isolated as above,
washed, and ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Cells were blocked in 10%

goat serum and incubated with anti-pMLC2 antibodies (Cell Signaling;
#3675). Crypts were isolated by incubation of small intestines in 3 mM EDTA/
0.5 mM DTT (90 min, ice) and mechanical fractionation in PBS. Crypts were
washed, ﬁxed in 4% PFA, blocked, permeabilized in 2% BSA/0.1% Triton-X
100, and incubated with anti-pericentrin antibodies (Abcam ab4448).

Sucrose Gradient Centrifugation and Immunoprecipitations. IECs were isolated
as above, lysed in triton lysis buffer [135 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris·Cl (pH 7.4),
1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton-X 100, and a protease/phosphatase
inhibitor mixture], cleared (14,000 × g, 30 min, 4 °C), and resolved on 12 mL
5–30% wt/vol sucrose gradients (28,000 × g, 18 h, 4 °C). For immunopreci-
pitations, anti–E-cadherin antibodies (BD Biosciences; 610182) were in-
cubated with fractions (16 h, 4 °C) and recovered on Protein A-Sepharose (GE
Healthcare) (2 h, 4 °C).

Immunoblotting. IECs and BBs were lysed in RIPA buffer (16) (1 h, ice) or 1%
SDS buffer [10 mM Tris·Cl (pH 7.4), 1% SDS, 50 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4]
(10 min, 100 °C) and cleared (14,000 × g, 30 min, 4 °C). Proteins were
detected using the indicated antibodies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Sylvie Robine for Vil-Cre-ERT2 mice; Ben
Margolis for anti-Crumbs3 antibodies; Bill Fowle and Thomas Diefenbach
for assistance with electron and confocal microscopy; and Kevin Haigis, Silvia
Fre, and Matt Tyska for advice and discussion. This work was supported by
National Institutes of Health Grant R01GM087558 (to A.I.M.) and a Children’s
Tumor Foundation Young Investigator Award (to J.B.C.).

1. McClatchey AI, Fehon RG (2009) Merlin and the ERM proteins: Regulators of receptor

distribution and signaling at the cell cortex. Trends Cell Biol 19:198–206.

2. Fehon RG, McClatchey AI, Bretscher A (2010) Organizing the cell cortex: The role of

ERM proteins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11:276–287.

3. Algrain M, Turunen O, Vaheri A, Louvard D, Arpin M (1993) Ezrin contains cytoskeleton
and membrane binding domains accounting for its proposed role as a membrane-
cytoskeletal linker. J Cell Biol 120:129–139.

4. Pearson MA, Reczek D, Bretscher A, Karplus PA (2000) Structure of the ERM protein
moesin reveals the FERM domain fold masked by an extended actin binding tail
domain. Cell 101:259–270.

5. Reczek D, Berryman M, Bretscher A (1997) Identiﬁcation of EBP50: A PDZ-containing
phosphoprotein that associates with members of the ezrin-radixin-moesin family.
J Cell Biol 139:169–179.

6. Weinman EJ, Hall RA, Friedman PA, Liu-Chen LY, Shenolikar S (2006) The association
of NHERF adaptor proteins with G protein-coupled receptors and receptor tyrosine
kinases. Annu Rev Physiol 68:491–505.

7. Charras GT, Hu CK, Coughlin M, Mitchison TJ (2006) Reassembly of contractile actin

cortex in cell blebs. J Cell Biol 175:477–490.

8. Kunda P, Pelling AE, Liu T, Baum B (2008) Moesin controls cortical rigidity, cell

rounding, and spindle morphogenesis during mitosis. Curr Biol 18:91–101.

9. Carreno S, et al. (2008) Moesin and its activating kinase Slik are required for cortical

stability and microtubule organization in mitotic cells. J Cell Biol 180:739–746.

10. Pilot F, Philippe JM, Lemmers C, Lecuit T (2006) Spatial control of actin organization at

adherens junctions by a synaptotagmin-like protein Btsz. Nature 442:580–584.

11. Yonemura S, et al. (1998) Ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins bind to a positively
charged amino acid cluster in the juxta-membrane cytoplasmic domain of CD44,
CD43, and ICAM-2. J Cell Biol 140:885–895.

12. Stanasila L, Abuin L, Diviani D, Cotecchia S (2006) Ezrin directly interacts with the
alpha1b-adrenergic receptor and plays a role in receptor recycling. J Biol Chem 281:
4354–4363.

13. Rollason R, Korolchuk V, Hamilton C, Jepson M, Banting G (2009) A CD317/tetherin-
RICH2 complex plays a critical role in the organization of the subapical actin cyto-
skeleton in polarized epithelial cells. J Cell Biol 184:721–736.

14. LaLonde DP, Garbett D, Bretscher A (2010) A regulated complex of the scaffolding
proteins PDZK1 and EBP50 with ezrin contribute to microvillar organization. Mol Biol
Cell 21:1519–1529.

15. Speck O, Hughes SC, Noren NK, Kulikauskas RM, Fehon RG (2003) Moesin functions
antagonistically to the Rho pathway to maintain epithelial integrity. Nature 421:83–87.
16. Saotome I, Curto M, McClatchey AI (2004) Ezrin is essential for epithelial organization

and villus morphogenesis in the developing intestine. Dev Cell 6:855–864.

17. Göbel V, Barrett PL, Hall DH, Fleming JT (2004) Lumen morphogenesis in C. elegans

requires the membrane-cytoskeleton linker erm-1. Dev Cell 6:865–873.

18. Van Fürden D, Johnson K, Segbert C, Bossinger O (2004) The C. elegans ezrin-radixin-
moesin protein ERM-1 is necessary for apical junction remodelling and tubulogenesis
in the intestine. Dev Biol 272:262–276.

19. el Marjou F, et al. (2004) Tissue-speciﬁc and inducible Cre-mediated recombination in

the gut epithelium. Genesis 39:186–193.

20. Hughes SC, Formstecher E, Fehon RG (2010) Sip1, the Drosophila orthologue of EBP50/
NHERF1, functions with the sterile 20 family kinase Slik to regulate Moesin activity.
J Cell Sci 123:1099–1107.

21. Lamprecht G, Seidler U (2006) The emerging role of PDZ adapter proteins for regu-
ion transport. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 291:

lation of intestinal
G766–G777.

22. Bijvelds MJ, et al. (2005) Fat absorption in cystic ﬁbrosis mice is impeded by defective
lipolysis and post-lipolytic events. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 288:
G646–G653.

23. Johnson LR (2006) Apoptosis in the gastrointestinal tract. Physiology of the Gastro-

intestinal Tract, ed Johnson LR (Academic Press, New York), Vol 1, pp 345–374.

24. Rosenblatt J, Raff MC, Cramer LP (2001) An epithelial cell destined for apoptosis
signals its neighbors to extrude it by an actin- and myosin-dependent mechanism.
Curr Biol 11:1847–1857.

25. Slattum G, McGee KM, Rosenblatt J (2009) P115 RhoGEF and microtubules decide the

direction apoptotic cells extrude from an epithelium. J Cell Biol 186:693–702.

26. Mathan M, Moxey PC, Trier JS (1976) Morphogenesis of fetal rat duodenal villi. Am

J Anat 146:73–92.

27. Madara JL, Neutra MR, Trier JS (1981) Junctional complexes in fetal rat small intestine

during morphogenesis. Dev Biol 86:170–178.

28. Cavey M, Rauzi M, Lenne PF, Lecuit T (2008) A two-tiered mechanism for stabilization

and immobilization of E-cadherin. Nature 453:751–756.

29. Braga VM, Machesky LM, Hall A, Hotchin NA (1997) The small GTPases Rho and Rac
are required for the establishment of cadherin-dependent cell-cell contacts. J Cell Biol
137:1421–1431.

30. Takaishi K, Sasaki T, Kotani H, Nishioka H, Takai Y (1997) Regulation of cell-cell ad-

hesion by rac and rho small G proteins in MDCK cells. J Cell Biol 139:1047–1059.

31. Yamada S, Nelson WJ (2007) Localized zones of Rho and Rac activities drive initiation

and expansion of epithelial cell-cell adhesion. J Cell Biol 178:517–527.

32. Yamada S, Pokutta S, Drees F, Weis WI, Nelson WJ (2005) Deconstructing the cadherin-

catenin-actin complex. Cell 123:889–901.

33. Weis WI, Nelson WJ (2006) Re-solving the cadherin-catenin-actin conundrum. J Biol

Chem 281:35593–35597.

34. Cavey M, Lecuit T (2009) Molecular bases of cell-cell junctions stability and dynamics.

Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 1:a002998.

35. Bertet C, Sulak L, Lecuit T (2004) Myosin-dependent junction remodelling controls

planar cell intercalation and axis elongation. Nature 429:667–671.

36. Pilot F, Lecuit T (2005) Compartmentalized morphogenesis in epithelia: From cell to

tissue shape. Dev Dyn 232:685–694.

37. Blankenship JT, Backovic ST, Sanny JS, Weitz O, Zallen JA (2006) Multicellular rosette

formation links planar cell polarity to tissue morphogenesis. Dev Cell 11:459–470.

38. Lecuit T, Lenne PF (2007) Cell surface mechanics and the control of cell shape, tissue

patterns and morphogenesis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:633–644.

39. Baena-López LA, Baonza A, García-Bellido A (2005) The orientation of cell divisions

determines the shape of Drosophila organs. Curr Biol 15:1640–1644.

40. Fischer E, et al. (2006) Defective planar cell polarity in polycystic kidney disease. Nat

Genet 38:21–23.

41. Gong Y, Mo C, Fraser SE (2004) Planar cell polarity signalling controls cell division

orientation during zebraﬁsh gastrulation. Nature 430:689–693.

42. Fleming ES, et al. (2007) Planar spindle orientation and asymmetric cytokinesis in the

mouse small intestine. J Histochem Cytochem 55:1173–1180.

43. Quyn AJ, et al. (2010) Spindle orientation bias in gut epithelial stem cell compart-

ments is lost in precancerous tissue. Cell Stem Cell 6:175–181.

44. McConnell RE, Tyska MJ (2007) Myosin-1a powers the sliding of apical membrane

along microvillar actin bundles. J Cell Biol 177:671–681.

Casaletto et al.

PNAS |

July 19, 2011 | vol. 108 | no. 29 | 11929

