930

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

& 2013 USCAP, Inc All rights reserved 0893-3952/13 $32.00

Expression profiling of 519 kinase genes in
matched malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor/plexiform neurofibroma samples is
discriminatory and identifies mitotic
regulators BUB1B, PBK and NEK2 as
overexpressed with transformation
Thomas P Stricker1, Kammi J Henriksen1, James H Tonsgard2, Anthony G Montag1,
Thomas N Krausz1 and Peter Pytel1

1Department of Pathology, University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA and 2Departments of
Pediatrics and Neurology, University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA

About 50% of all malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) arise as neurofibromatosis type 1
associated lesions. In those patients malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors are thought to arise through
malignant transformation of a preexisting plexiform neurofibroma. The molecular changes associated with this
transformation are still poorly understood. We sought to test the hypothesis that dysregulation of expression of
kinases contributes to this malignant transformation. We analyzed expression of all 519 kinase genes in the
human genome using the nanostring nCounter system. Twelve cases of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
arising in a background of preexisting plexiform neurofibroma were included. Both components were separately
sampled. Statistical analysis compared global changes in expression levels as well as changes observed in the
pairwise comparison of samples taken from the same surgical specimen. Immunohistochemical studies were
performed on tissue array slides to confirm expression of selected proteins. The expression pattern of kinase
genes can separate malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors and preexisting plexiform neurofibromas. The
majority of kinase genes is downregulated rather than overexpressed with malignant transformation. The patterns
of expression changes are complex without simple recurring alteration. Pathway analysis demonstrates that
differentially expressed kinases are enriched for kinases involved in the direct regulation of mitosis, and several of
these show increased expression in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Immunohistochemical studies for
the mitotic regulators BUB1B, PBK and NEK2 confirm higher expression levels at the protein level. These results
suggest that the malignant transformation of plexiform neurofibroma is associated with distinct changes in the
expression of kinase genes. The patterns of these changes are complex and heterogeneous. There is no single
unifying alteration. Kinases involved in mitotic regulation are particularly enriched in the pool of differentially
expressed kinases. Some of these are overexpressed and are therefore possible targets for kinase inhibitors.
Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943; doi:10.1038/modpathol.2012.242; published online 1 February 2013

Keywords: kinase genes; malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor; mitotic regulator; plexiform neurofibroma

Most malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
(MPNSTs) arise as soft tissue malignancies. About
half of all malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors

Correspondence: Dr P Pytel, MD, Department of Pathology,
University of Chicago Medical Center, 5841S Maryland Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
E-mail: peter.pytel@uchospitals.edu
Received 26 September 2012; revised 11 December 2012; accepted
11 December 2012; published online 1 February 2013

are thought to be sporadic de-novo tumors. The
other half are neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)
associated and develop through malignant transfor-
mation of a preexisting plexiform neurofibroma.1,2
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors often
show complex karyotypes with losses and gains of
chromosome arms as well as focal amplifications
and deletions.3–6 A number of miRNAs, cell cycle
regulators,
and transcrip-
tion factors have been shown to be differentially

signaling molecules

www.modernpathology.org

expressed between neurofibromas and malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors including CDKN2A,
TP53, RB1, EGFR, CD44, PDGFRB, PDGFRA, HGF,
MET, IGFR1, SOX9, SOX10, miR-34a and miR-21.3,7–14
Neurofibromatosis type 1 patients often have
multiple plexiform neurofibromas. Their risk of
developing a malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor is estimated to be in the range from 3–
13%.1,3,8,15,16 For these neurofibromatosis type 1
patients, this often becomes a life-limiting aspect of
rate of
their condition as the 5-year survival
sheath tumor
malignant peripheral nerve
is
B40%.10,17,18 The biological
factors underlying
this transformation are still poorly understood.3
Which of a patient’s often numerous plexiform
neurofibromas,
transform into a
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor cannot be
predicted.

if any, will

The starting hypothesis of this study is that the
malignant transformation from plexiform neurofi-
broma to malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor is
associated with changes in the expression profile of
kinase genes. A few studies have performed cDNA
microarray analysis to identify expression signa-
tures of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tu-
mor.9,10,12,19 These studies have used frozen tissue
or cell lines derived from tumors. They showed
differences in the gene expression pattern between
neurofibromas and unmatched malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor samples from other patients.
Neurofibromatosis type 1-associated and sporadic
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors could not
be distinguished based on their
expression
profile.10,12

the expression of

In this study, we chose a different approach by
using a new analysis platform, the nCounter system,
to assess
several hundred
genes.20,21 This platform yields good results with
small quantities of RNA isolated from formalin fixed
paraffin
prior
amplification step. This allowed us to look for
differences in gene expression in matched samples
of plexiform neurofibroma and malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor isolated from within the same
surgical specimens.

a

embedded

tissue without

Malignant

tumors are often characterized by
dysregulation of kinases. This dysregulation can
occur because of changes in gene regulation, muta-
tions or altered function. Neurofibromatosis type 1
results from mutations in the neurofibromin 1 gene
that encodes a negative regulator of the Ras/MAP
kinase signaling pathway. We hypothesized that
there may be common global changes in the
expression of kinases that occur with the malignant
transformation of plexiform neurofibromas because
these tumors start off with a shared genetic altera-
tion in neurofibromin 1. Additionally, kinases are a
possible target for novel therapeutics. Identification
of kinases overexpressed in malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors could suggest new treatment
targets.

931

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

Methods

Case Selection

This study was performed with the approval of the
institutional review board at
the University of
Chicago Medical Center. Cases of malignant periph-
eral nerve sheath tumor arising in known neurofi-
bromatosis type 1 patients were identified. The
pathologic slides were reviewed independently by
two pathologists (TK and PP) to identify cases that
included preexisting plexiform neurofibroma in
addition to malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor. A total of 12 cases containing malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor and plexiform neu-
rofibroma within the same surgical specimen were
included in this study (Supplementary table 1).
Representative areas of malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor and plexiform neurofibroma were
marked on the H&E-stained slides. Tissues from
the respective areas were sampled with a 4-mm
diameter biopsy punch allowing for exact sampling
of areas with clearly defined morphologic features.
Different grading schemes are used for malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors. The WHO system
recognizes three grades (WHO II, III, IV). The French
sarcoma system (FNCLCC) allows for the distinction
of three grades on the basis of criteria different from
those used in the WHO system. Others use a two-tier
system distinguishing low-grade and high-grade
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Owing
to these problems with classification, we followed
the approach outlined by Rodriguez et al.22 to
separate these cases into low-grade and high-grade
tumors (Figure 1). Details on the morphologic
features are presented in Supplementary table 1.
Strict criteria were used for
the selection of
neurofibroma areas to ensure that only unambiguous
areas were included. All showed plexiform growth
at
low power. Mitotic activity, significant pleo-
morphism and significant cellularity were all absent
(Figure 1).

RNA Isolation and Ncounter Analysis

Excess paraffin was trimmed from each tissue plug.
Two small pieces were cut off each plug. These were
processed in parallel and independently. Thus, a
total of 48 samples were analyzed—12 malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors in duplicate and the
12 matched plexiform neurofibromas in duplicate.
RNA was purified using standard QIAGEN formalin-
fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) RNeasy kits follow-
ing the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA concentration
was quantified via nanodrop, and RNA quality was
assessed with Agilent Bioanalyzer. As expected, the
RNA was highly degraded, but
the
Bioanalyzer allowed assessment of the mean frag-
ment size.

the use of

The human kinase nCounter (Nanostring Tech-
nologies, Seattle, WA) assay was run according to

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

932

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

Figure 1 Case selection. The gross and histologic (all H&E images, 20 ) findings of representative cases included in the study are
illustrated. (a) Case 11 was a patient with mass lesion that grew in a preexisting plexiform neurofibroma of the sciatic nerve (right end of
the specimen). (b) and (c) show the H&E morphology of the plexiform neurofibroma (b) and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (c)
in the area that was sampled for the analysis with the biopsy punch. Most cases showed features of high-grade malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor with abundant mitotic activity and necrosis (d). Cases 3 and 4 lacked distinct high grade features. They nevertheless
showed unequivocal areas of plexiform neurofibroma (e) and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (f) with several mitotic figures in
the shown image, nuclear enlargement and increased cellularity.

manufacturers protocol. This probe set assays the
expression of all 519 known human kinase genes.
Briefly, the samples were randomized. Then, 100 ng

of total RNA, the reporter codeset and the capture
codeset were mixed and hybridized at 65 1C over-
night using a PCR machine. The nCounter sample

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

preparation station was prepared and run according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. The samples were
then scanned at high resolution (600 fields of view).
Normalization was performed in two separate
steps: (1) Before the hybridization step, alien non-
natural RNA sequences and probes directed to these
were added to the samples at known concentrations.
The readings for these control probes were used to
normalize the data to account for differences in
technical variables like variations in pipetting and
hybridization. For this normalization, the geometric
mean of levels of the control probes across all
samples was calculated. This was then divided by
the levels of the control probes found in individual
samples to calculate a correction factor that the
results of the respective case were multiplied by
(Supplementary Figure 1A and B). (2) The utilized
probe set also contains probes to eight defined
housekeeping genes. These were used to correct for
variations that may result from differences in RNA
quality. The geometric mean for housekeeping genes
within each sample was taken. A correction factor
for the individual samples was then again calculated
by dividing the overall expression of the house-
keeping genes by that of
the specific sample
(Supplementary Figure 1C). Four samples were
clearly outliers in the positive control normalization
and were removed (correction factor 45). Four
samples were clearly outliers in the housekeeping
correction (correction factor 48) and were removed.

Gene Expression Analysis—Combined Sample Set and
Pairwise Comparison

Two different types of statistical analysis were run:
(1) The combined datasets of malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors and plexiform neurofibromas
were compared to look for differentially expressed
genes. For each gene, P-values were calculated by
Wilcoxon rank sum test, and false discovery rates
were estimated by Storey’s q-value method.23 (2)
Pairwise examination of the matched samples from
the same case was performed to look for expression
changes. For pairwise analysis, all samples were
retained and corrected, and empirical Bayes t-tests,
using limma, were performed for each individual,
comparing plexiform neurofibroma with malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor. For each gene, fold
change was extracted from the table.

Analysis of Outside Gene Expression Data Set

Analysis of outside datasets: GEOquery was used to
download GSE14038 into R. Expression levels for 13
plexiform neurofibromas and 6 malignant periph-
eral nerve sheath tumors were extracted from the
dataset.9 To identify differentially expressed genes
between plexiform neurofibromas and malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors, surrogate variables
were extracted with sva. Then, for each gene, we

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

933

a

fixed

linear

constructed
effects model:
yBmþ TumorTypeþ e, where y is the residual
following sva, m is the expected expression level,
TumorType is the effect of tumor type and e is the
residual error. Fixed effect P-values were estimated
by F-test, and false discovery rates were estimated
by Storey’s q-value method.23

Pathway Analysis

RefSeq annotations for the differentially expressed
genes
from both the nanostring dataset and
GSE14038 were uploaded to the Database for
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery
(DAVID) 6.7 beta Bioinformatics Resources.24–26
This web-based bioinformatics platform allows the
identification of functionally related groups of genes
and genes that are part of the same functional
pathway. DAVID contains a collection of pathways,
ontologies terms and other categories. Given the
background gene list (ie the genes assayed), DAVID
can calculate which pathways show enrichment for
differentially expressed genes. For the nanostring
data, the 519 kinases were used as a background
gene set, and DAVID’s Functional Annotation Chart
and Functional Annotation clustering tools were
used, with an ease score¼ 0.1, to calculate fold
enrichment. For GSE14038, all genes present on the
array were used as a background list, and DAVID’s
Functional Annotation Chart
and Functional
Annotation clustering tools were used, with an
ease score¼ 0.1,
to calculate fold enrichment,
p-value
p-value.
Additionally, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis was
used to analyze the data from GSE14038.

Bonferroni

corrected

and

Immunohistochemistry on Tissue Array Slides

Immunohistochemical staining was performed to
validate differences in the expression on the protein
level for selected candidates. Tissue array slides
from a previously reported study were used.7 These
include samples from 34 malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors and 105 neurofibromas including 39
plexiform neurofibromas. The tissue array slides
sample a separate set of tumors different from those
cases used for the RNA expression studies. Each
case was represented by at least two different cores
in separate locations on the array. Commercially
available antibodies against PBK, BUB1B and NEK2
were used (PBK: Cell Signaling, polyclonal rabbit
antibody, cat. # 4942, 1:50; BUB1B: BD Transduction
Laboratories, monoclonal mouse antibody, cat. #
612503, 1:50; NEK2: Abcam, monoclonal mouse
antibody, cat. # ab55550, 1:75). The staining
intensity was scored on a scale of 0–3.7 The
staining of all cores representing a given case was
averaged. Statistical analysis of the staining results
was performed by t-test.

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

934

Results

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

Differentially Expressed Kinase Genes Result in
Distinctive Signatures of Malignant Peripheral Nerve
Sheath Tumors and Plexiform Neurofibromas

Ten of the twelve included malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors were classified as high-grade
and two as low-grade (Figure 1).22 Expression data
for 519 kinases in the human genome was collected
using the nanostring nCounter platform. The paired
neurofibromas and malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors were analyzed in duplicate, and
data was normalized using both positive control
probes as well as housekeeping genes. Unsupervised
clustering
analysis
the normalized expression data
(Figure 2a) of
demonstrate that
the
analyzed kinase genes can separate the malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor samples from the
plexiform neurofibroma samples. Two of the malig-
nant peripheral nerve sheath tumor samples (case 3
and case 4) cluster together with the plexiform
neurofibroma samples. Interestingly, these were the
two malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors that

the expression pattern of

and principal

component

lacked high-grade features on the histopathologic
analysis. The distance matrix (Figure 2b) also
illustrates the same separation of the data set into
two distinct groups—the high-grade malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors and the plexiform
neurofibromas. The two lower grade tumors again
cluster together with the plexiform neurofibromas.

A Distinct Set of Genes is Differentially Expressed
between Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors
and Plexiform Neurofibromas Including Genes
Implicated in Mitotic Regulation

281 genes were differentially expressed in the tumor
samples, 267 of
these were downregulated in
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, 16 were
upregulated (FDR r0.005; Supplementary table 2).
The expression of
these genes shows distinctly
different signatures in the malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors compared with the plexiform
neurofibromas. A heatmap generated using all
samples remaining in this analysis visually illus-
trates how most of these 281 differentially expressed
kinase genes are downregulated in malignant

Figure 2 Distinct clustering of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST, MP) and plexiform neurofibromas (NF, N) in principal
component analysis and distance matrix. (a) The principal component analysis shows that the global expression profile of the samples
distinguishes between malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (shown in blue) and plexiform neurofibromas (shown in red). Two
diagrams showing separation with principal component 1 and 2 as well as principal component 2 and 3 are included. The two outliers
are the two lower grade malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, cases 3 and 4, that cluster together with the plexiform neurofibromas
in this analysis. Duplicates run on the same tissue core often cluster closely together. (b) The distance matrix plot is based on the pairwise
comparison of samples, and groups them together depending on how closely they resemble each other in their gene expression profile.
This analysis is again able to separate malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors from plexiform neurofibromas. The two lower grade
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors again cluster with the plexiform neurofibromas.

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

935

Figure 3 Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST) and plexiform neurofibromas (NF) are characterized by distinctive
expression profiles. Kinases involved in mitotic regulation are differentially expressed. (a) 281 genes were identified as differentially
expressed at statistically significant levels between malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and plexiform neurofibroma samples based
on the Wilcoxon test (with FDR r0.005). This heatmap illustrates the expression of these genes (green: upregulation, red:
downregulation) and shows clear separations of the sample sets into malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors and plexiform
neurofibromas based on the expression level of these 281 genes. The majority of kinase genes are downregulated in malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors rather than overexpressed. (b) Pathway analysis identified kinases involved in mitotic regulation as the most
prominent functional group of differentially expressed genes. This smaller gene set shows similar separation of the samples into
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors and plexiform neurofibromas (green: upregulation, red: downregulation). Again,
downregulation of kinase genes rather than upregulation is the dominant change.

peripheral nerve sheath tumors, not overexpressed
(Figure 3a). However,
there was a small set of
upregulated kinase genes in the malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors. These almost exclusively
included kinases involved in mitotic regulation.
Indeed, pathway analysis using the Database for
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery
(DAVID) identified genes important for the regulation
of mitotic cycle/chromosome segregation as the
biggest
functional group among the differentially
expressed genes. This smaller set of genes provided
similar separation of malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors and plexiform neurofibromas as that
observed for all differentially expressed genes
(Figure 3b). The majority of these genes again showed
downregulation with progression to malignant per-
ipheral nerve sheath tumor. However, several mitosis
checkpoint kinases were upregulated with malignant
transformation, including BUB1, BUB1B, PBK, TTK,
CHEK1 and NEK2. Interestingly, several of these genes
(BUB1, BUB1B, TTK and NEK2) are involved in the
kinetochore checkpoint and are frequently overex-
pressed in many cancers, particularly those with
significant aneuploidy.

Pairwise Comparison Identifies Heterogeneous
Changes in Gene Expression Profiles with Recurring
Patterns

The design of the experiment, using matched pairs
of plexiform neurofibromas and malignant periph-

eral nerve sheath tumors, offered the opportunity to
investigate how each individual
tumor altered
kinase expression with the malignant transforma-
tion from plexiform neurofibroma to malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor.

in at

Fifty-five genes were significantly downregu-
lated (FDR 0.05)
least 10 of 12 samples
(Supplementary table 2) in the pairwise comparison
of plexiform neurofibroma and malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor components obtained from the
same surgical specimen. These include the tumor
suppressor TGFB2R that is strongly downregulated
in all 12 tumor samples. Additionally, several
receptor tyrosine kinases, including ERBB2, ERBB3
and NTRK3, were strongly downregulated in most if
not all tumors. Receptor tyrosine kinases are an
important class of kinases that bind a ligand and
mediate signaling across the cell membrane. Expres-
sion of
tyrosine kinases is frequently
altered in cancers, and many of them represent
potential therapeutic targets. 54 of the 58 receptor
tyrosine kinases in the human genome were ex-
pressed at measurable levels in our data set.
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors showed
downregulation of most receptor tyrosine kinases.
However, a few of these were overexpressed in each
of the samples (Supplementary Figure 2), with each
pair showing a different pattern of upregulation.
Fourteen of these fifty-four receptor tyrosine kinases
were differentially expressed between malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors and plexiform
levels
neurofibromas at

statistically significant

receptor

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

936

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

Figure 4 Most differentially expressed receptor tyrosine kinases are downregulated in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
(MPNST). This diagram illustrates the changes in expression of those 14 receptor tyrosine kinase genes that are differentially expressed at
a statistically significant level between malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and plexiform neurofibroma in the pairwise
comparison. For each of the 12 included malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, the relative fold change in expression compared with
the respective plexiform neurofibroma is plotted (downregulation to the left/light grey, overexpression to the right/dark grey).

when analyzing all samples (Figure 4). The vast
majority of these receptor tyrosine kinases were
strongly downregulated in most samples.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 is defined by mutation
in neurofibromin 1, which encodes a GTPase
activating protein that negatively regulates the Ras
signaling pathway. Thus, we hypothesized that
expression of kinases in the MAP kinase cascade
may be altered in the development of malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor arising from plexi-
form neurofibroma. This analysis showed that most
of the kinases that are part of the MAP kinase
signaling cascade tend to be downregulated in
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors compared
with the preexisting neurofibromas. 15 kinase genes
of
this signaling cascade were differentially ex-
pressed between plexiform neurofibromas and ma-
lignant
at
statistically significant levels in the pairwise com-
parison, when analyzing all samples (Figure 5).
Interestingly, the ERK kinases (MAPK1 and MAPK3)

peripheral

tumors

nerve

sheath

are downregulated in malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors, although still highly expressed.
MAP3K6 and MAP3K8, which are MAP kinase
kinase kinases that signal through the stress-acti-
vated JNK cascade, were also strongly downregu-
lated in most tumors.

Only a small set of kinase genes were identified as
being consistently overexpressed in several samples
(Supplementary table 2). Only 12 genes were
upregulated in at least five samples and showed
downregulation in no more than two of the other
samples. Interestingly this short list includes several
of those kinases that were also found to be over-
expressed in malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors based on the Wilcoxon test (eg PBK, PTK7,
BUB1B, CHEK1 and NEK2).

Analysis of Outside Data Set

We next analyzed another, previously produced
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor ex-

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

937

Figure 5 Most differentially expressed genes encoding components of the MAP kinase signaling cascade are downregulated in malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST). This diagram illustrates the changes in expression of those 15 kinase genes of the MAP kinase
signaling cascade that are differentially expressed at a statistically significant level between malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
and plexiform neurofibroma in the pairwise comparison. For each of the 12 included malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, the
relative fold change in expression compared with the respective plexiform neurofibroma is plotted (downregulation to the left/light grey,
overexpression to the right/dark grey).

pression dataset. In this dataset, we found strong
downregulation of TGFBR2 (data not shown) and
upregulation of BUB1B, BUB1, NEK2 and PBK
(Figure 6a). The expansion of the gene lists from
the microarray allowed deeper analysis of differen-
tial gene expression by Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis and pathways by the Database for Annota-
tion, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DA-
VID).
genes,
particularly those involved in the spindle check-
point, were differentially
expressed between
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and plexi-
form neurofibromas (Figure 7). Moreover, Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis identified several gene mod-
ules involving mitotic checkpoint proteins as
differentially expressed between plexiform neurofi-
broma and malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor.

found that mitotic

Indeed, we

Progression to Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath
Tumor Goes Along with the Increased Expression of
BUB1B, NEK2 and PBK at the Protein Level

Immunohistochemical studies were performed as an
additional validation step to assess the expression of
selected differentially expressed genes at the protein
level. These immunohistochemical studies focused
on kinase implicated in mitotic regulation that we
found to be upregulated in malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors based on the expression data.
They confirmed that malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors showed significantly more expres-
sion of NEK2, PBK and BUB1B compared with
plexiform neurofibromas on a separate and signifi-
cantly larger set of tumors (Figure 6 B through M).
The plexiform neurofibroma samples only exhibited
immunoreactivity for BUB1B, whereas
minimal

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

938

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

the malignant peripheral nerve sheath
many of
tumors showed distinct positivity that varied from
focal to diffuse. There was weak focal expression of
PBK in plexiform neurofibromas whereas the malig-

nant peripheral nerve sheath tumors showed stron-
ger and often more diffuse staining. NEK2 staining
was also minimal in the plexiform neurofibromas.
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors showed

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

variable staining with negative cases, cases showing
cytoplasmic reactivity, cases with mixed nuclear
and cytoplasmic reactivity and a few cases showing
only nuclear immunoreactivity. Different patterns of
immunohistochemical staining with variable nucle-
ar and cytoplasmic labeling have previously been
observed in studies of NEK2 expression.27,28

Discussion

This study provides a unique comparison of gene
expression profiling on matched paired samples of
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and the
underlying plexiform neurofibroma they arise from.
It utilizes a new technique for the expression
profiling. The technical features of the nCounter
platform20,21 made this study feasible, because this
system works with small amounts of RNA extracted
from formalin-fixed paraffin tissue. Extraction of
tissue from paraffin blocks matched to H&E slides
allowed accurate sampling of areas of interest based
on histomorphologic features. The often tight
clustering of the two duplicate samples ran on one
tissue core and the separation of tumors into their
two diagnostic categories argues for the robustness
of
Immunohistochemical
studies for selected markers confirmed the results
of the gene expression analysis at the protein level.
The study design allowed two complimentary
approaches for the data analysis: (1) Identification
of differentially expressed genes based on the
combined dataset and (2) pairwise comparison
of matched plexiform neurofibroma/malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors from the same
surgical specimen.

expression data.

the

The expression signature of kinase genes provides
good separation between malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors and plexiform neurofibromas in the
principal component analysis and the distance
matrix. This finding supports that the malignant
transformation of plexiform neurofibroma to malig-
nant peripheral nerve sheath tumor is associated
with distinct changes in the expression profile of
kinase genes. Most of the differentially expressed
kinase genes show downregulation rather
than

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

939

overexpression. This result mirrors the changes
described by Subramanian et al10 in their study of
cDNA microarray data from frozen tumor samples.
Interestingly, our approach did not clearly separate
the low-grade malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors from the plexiform neurofibromas. There has
not yet been a systematic study of
the gene
expression profile found in low-grade malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Subramanian et al10
also mention that an outlier case of malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor with expression
profile
neuro-
fibroma represented low-grade malignant peri-
pheral nerve sheath tumor. Defining the earliest
molecular alterations of malignant transformation
found in low-grade malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors is therefore still an elusive goal.

indistinguishable

from

Receptor tyrosine kinases are central elements of
cell signaling pathways and potential therapeutic
targets. Overall, the 54-receptor tyrosine kinases
with informative readings show a quite diverse
pattern of altered expression in the plexiform
neurofibroma/malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor sets. In all cases, transformation towards
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors goes
along with upregulation of a few receptor tyrosine
kinases and downregulation of most others. The
pattern of this change is very diverse. EGFR has
previously been described as expressed in malig-
nant peripheral nerve sheath tumors and as a
potential target for treatment.29–31 In this analysis,
EGFR is expressed at significant
levels in most
samples. The
between
preexisting plexiform neurofibroma and malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor shows upregulation of
EGFR expression in four malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors
and downregulation in eight
malignant
tumors.
Expression changes in EGFR were therefore not a
uniform feature of malignant transformation in this
data set. Previous reports have shown expression of
EGFR in subsets of malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors and neurofibromas as well as amplification of
the EGFR locus in some 26–28% of malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors.10,29–32 Gene dosage
reduction and downregulation of ERBB2 and ERBB3

comparison

peripheral

pairwise

nerve

sheath

Figure 6 Additional studies validate differential expression of BUB1B, NEK2 and PBK—outside data set and immunohistochemical
staining. (a) Analysis of previously published gene expression microarray data also shows significantly higher expression of BUB1B,
NEK2 and PBK in those unmatched samples of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and neurofibroma. For all three, the p-value was
Po0.01. Immunohistochemical staining for BUB1B (b–e): Representative images of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors positive
for BUB1B (b and c) are shown as well as a neurofibroma negative for BUB1B (d). (e) The intensity score shows significantly stronger
expression in the malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors compared with all neurofibromas (Po0.001) as well as compared with only
plexiform neurofibromas (Po0.001). Immunohistochemical staining for NEK2 (f, i): Representative images of malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors with positive nuclear staining for NEK2 (f), positive cytoplasmic staining for NEK2 (g) and mixed nuclear/cytoplasmic
staining for NEK 2 are shown (h). (i) The intensity score shows significantly stronger expression in the malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors compared with all neurofibromas (Po0.001), as well as compared with only plexiform neurofibromas (Po0.001).
Immunohistochemical staining for PBK (j–m): Representative images of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors positive for PBK
(j and k) are shown as well as a neurofibroma with positive staining for PBK (l). (m) The intensity score shows significantly stronger
expression in the malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors compared with all neurofibromas (Po0.001) as well as compared to only
plexiform neurofibromas (Po0.001).

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

940

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

Figure 7 Pathway analysis. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) and
neurofibromas (NFs) from GSE14038 demonstrates enrichment for higher expression of genes related the G2-M checkpoint and
chromosomal condensation in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. For example, genes in the expression neighborhood of BUB1B
and CENPF are highly upregulated in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Additionally, many genes in the G2-M checkpoint and
the reactome mitotic prometaphase are upregulated in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

as seen here has previously been reported in
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.29,33

Neurofibromatosis type 1-associated neurofibro-
mas and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
arise in a background of a ‘rasopathy’ with altered
Ras/MAP kinase signaling.3,14,34,35 We therefore
looked for changes occurring with the transforma-
tion from plexiform neurofibroma to malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor in the expression

level of kinases in this signaling cascade. Most
kinases of
this set are again downregulated in
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. ERK
kinases (MAPK1 and MAPK3) are expressed in the
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors but at
comparatively lower
levels compared with the
preexisting plexiform neurofibroma.

The results on expression level changes in the
receptor tyrosine kinases and the Ras/MAP kinase

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

signaling pathway both suggest that the expression
changes in these kinase genes are complex and
diverse. Many of these kinases are expressed in
neurofibromas and malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors. There may be only subtle expression level
changes. The effect of such graded changes on tumor
behavior is difficult
in these complex
networks. The analysis does not identify any single
candidate gene that would act as a simple on–off
switch in the malignant
transformation towards
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor. None of
these kinases shows uniform changes that could make
it a diagnostic marker or a therapeutic target.

to predict

protein

level

was

genomic

confirmed

the malignant

Overall, only relatively few kinases were found to
show significant upregulation with the malignant
transformation towards malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor. The performed pathway analysis
identified kinases implicated in mitotic regulation
as a distinct set of differentially expressed genes
including PBK, BUB1B, NEK2, CHEK1 and BUB1.
Some of these mitotic regulators including NEK2,
PBK and BUB1 were also found to be differentially
expressed in the study by Subramanian et al.10 The
overexpression of BUB1B, PBK and NEK2 in
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors at
the
by
immunohistochemistry. All three of these kinases
have recently been shown to have a role in other
malignancies and are interesting candidates for
genes in the context of
trans-
formation of plexiform neurofibromas:
 BUB1B and BUB1 are part of the spindle assembly
checkpoint that ensures proper segregation of the
chromosomes.36–39 Alterations in BUB1B have
been documented in a number of cancers
including breast cancer,
lung cancer, colon
cancer and gastric cancer.37,38,40–44
In these,
BUB1B overexpression appears associated with
more aggressive behavior, increased proliferative
activity,
chromosomal
and DNA aneuploidy.37,40–43,45,46
instability
Interestingly, aneuploidy and complex karyotype
are common finding in malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors.
 NEK2 is one of several kinases including CDK1/
cyclin B and Aurora A that are associated with the
centrosome during cell cycle progression. NEK2 is
involved in centrosome cycle as well as spindle
assembly.27
centrosome
separation at the onset of mitosis and is involved
in cell division and mitotic regulation.47,48
Overexpression of NEK2 induces premature
centrosome
separation and nuclear defects,
which are indicative of mitotic errors.49 High
levels
found in
seminomas27 and ductal carcinoma of the breast.28
 PBK is overexpressed in some hematopoetic
neoplasms including acute lymphoblastic leuke-
mia, multiple myeloma and Burkitt’s lymphoma
but also in colon cancer, breast cancer and

expression are

complexity,

NEK2

promotes

of NEK2

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

941

cholangiocarcinoma.50–52
to be
involved in cytokinetic function and DNA
damage repair.

is thought

It

In summary,

this study shows that

there are
distinct changes in kinase expression that occur
with malignant transformation from plexiform neu-
rofibroma to malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor. Downregulation of kinases rather than over-
expression appears to be the dominant change of
this malignant
transformation. Changes in MAP
kinase signaling and receptor tyrosine kinases like
EGFR have been suggested as possible additional
biological changes driving malignant transformation
of plexiform neurofibromas
towards malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor beyond the shared
neurofibromin mutation.14
tyrosine
kinases have also been proposed as possible
therapeutic targets.53 The presented data suggests
that this malignant transformation is associated with
rather complex diverse changes and that it does not
rely on a single biological switch. In many cases, the
expression of
these kinase genes shows graded
changes rather than a simple alteration between
on–off states. Regulators of mitotic progression
including PBK, BUB1B and NEK2 stand out as
distinct set of overexpressed genes. These could
represent potential
targets for the treatment of
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

Receptor

Disclosure/conflict of interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References

1 Tonsgard JH. Clinical manifestations and management
of neurofibromatosis type 1. Semin Pediatr Neurol
2006;13:2–7.

2 Tucker T, Wolkenstein P, Revuz J, et al. Association
between benign and malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors in NF1. Neurology 2005;65:205–211.

3 Upadhyaya M. Genetic basis of tumorigenesis in NF1
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Front
Biosci 2011;16:937–951.

4 Mantripragada KK. Diaz de Stahl T, Patridge C, et al.
Genome-wide high-resolution analysis of DNA copy
number alterations in NF1-associated malignant per-
ipheral nerve sheath tumors using 32 K BAC array.
Genes Chromosomes Cancer 2009;48:897–907.

5 Upadhyaya M, Spurlock G, Thomas L, et al. Micro-
array-based copy number analysis of neurofibromato-
sis type-1 (NF1)-associated malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors reveals a role for Rho-GTPase pathway
genes in NF1 tumorigenesis. Hum Mutat 2012;33:
763–776.

6 Bridge RS Jr., Bridge JA, Neff JR, et al. Recurrent
chromosomal imbalances and structurally abnormal
breakpoints within complex karyotypes of malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumour and malignant triton
tumour: a cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic study.
J Clin Pathol 2004;57:1172–1178.

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

942

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

7 Pytel P, Karrison T, Can G, et al. Neoplasms with
schwannian differentiation express transcription fac-
tors known to regulate normal schwann cell develop-
ment. Int J Surg Pathol 2010;18:449–457.

8 Spurlock G, Knight SJ, Thomas N, et al. Molecular
evolution of a neurofibroma to malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor (MPNST)
in an NF1 patient:
correlation between histopathological, clinical and
molecular
findings.
J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
2010;136:1869–1880.

9 Miller SJ,

Jessen WJ, Mehta T, et al.

Integrative
genomic analyses of neurofibromatosis tumours iden-
tify SOX9 as a biomarker and survival gene. EMBO Mol
Med 2009;1:236–248.

10 Subramanian S, Thayanithy V, West RB, et al. Genome-
wide transcriptome analyses reveal p53 inactivation
mediated loss of miR-34a expression in malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumours.
J Pathol 2010;
220:58–70.

11 Yang J, Ylipaa A, Sun Y, et al. Genomic and molecular
characterization of malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor identifies the IGF1R pathway as a primary target
for treatment. Clin Cancer Res 2011;17:7563–7573.

12 Miller SJ, Rangwala F, Williams J, et al. Large-scale
molecular comparison of human schwann cells to
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor cell lines and
tissues. Cancer Res 2006;66:2584–2591.

13 Itani S, Kunisada T, Morimoto Y, et al. MicroRNA-21
correlates with tumorigenesis in malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) via programmed cell
death protein 4 (PDCD4). J Cancer Res Clin Oncol
2012;138:1501–1509.

14 Carroll SL. Molecular mechanisms promoting the
pathogenesis of Schwann cell neoplasms. Acta Neu-
ropathol 2012;123:321–348.

15 King AA, Debaun MR, Riccardi VM, et al. Malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors in neurofibromatosis 1.
Am J Med Genet 2000;93:388–392.

16 Evans DG, Baser ME, McGaughran J, et al. Malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumours in neurofibromatosis
1. J Med Genet 2002;39:311–314.

17 Stucky CC, Johnson KN, Gray RJ, et al. Malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST): the Mayo
Clinic experience. Ann Surg Oncol 2012;19:878–885.
18 Longhi A, Errani C, Magagnoli G, et al. High grade
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors: outcome of
62 patients with localized disease and review of the
literature. J Chemother 2010;22:413–418.

19 Lee PR, Cohen JE, Tendi EA, et al. Transcriptional
profiling in an MPNST-derived cell line and normal
human Schwann cells. Neuron Glia Biol 2004;1:135–147.
20 Geiss GK, Bumgarner RE, Birditt B, et al. Direct multi-
plexed measurement of gene expression with color-
coded probe pairs. Nat Biotechnol 2008;26:317–325.

21 Reis PP, Waldron L, Goswami RS, et al. mRNA transcript
quantification in archival samples using multiplexed,
color-coded probes. BMC Biotechnol 2011;11:46.

22 Rodriguez FJ, Folpe AL, Giannini C, et al. Pathology of
peripheral nerve sheath tumors: diagnostic overview
and update on selected diagnostic problems. Acta
Neuropathol 2012;123:295–319.

23 Storey JD, Tibshirani R. Statistical significance for
genomewide studies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2003;100:9440–9445.

24 Dennis G Jr., Sherman BT, Hosack DA, et al. DAVID:
Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated
Discovery. Genome Biol 2003;4:P3.

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

25 Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic
and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID
bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc 2009;4:44–57.

26 Huang da W, Sherman BT, Zheng X, et al. Extracting
biological meaning
lists with
DAVID. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics 2009;27(Suppl):
13.11.1–13.11.13.

from large

gene

27 Barbagallo F, Paronetto MP, Franco R, et al. Increased
expression and nuclear localization of the centrosomal
kinase Nek2 in human testicular seminomas. J Pathol
2009;217:431–441.

28 Wang S, Li W, Lv S, et al. Abnormal expression
of Nek2 and beta-catenin in breast carcinoma: clin-
icopathological correlations. Histopathology 2011;59:
631–642.

29 Holtkamp N, Malzer E, Zietsch J, et al. EGFR and erbB2
in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors and
implications
for
targeted therapy. Neuro Oncol
2008;10:946–957.

30 Perrone F, Da Riva L, Orsenigo M, et al. PDGFRA,
PDGFRB, EGFR, and downstream signaling activation
in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor. Neuro
Oncol 2009;11:725–736.

31 Keizman D, Issakov J, Meller I, et al. Expression and
significance of EGFR in malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor. J Neurooncol 2009;94:383–388.

32 Perry A, Kunz SN, Fuller CE, et al. Differential NF1,
p16, and EGFR patterns by interphase cytogenetics
(FISH) in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
(MPNST) and morphologically similar spindle cell
neoplasms. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2002;61:702–709.
33 Levy P, Vidaud D, Leroy K, et al. Molecular profiling of
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors associated
with neurofibromatosis type 1, based on large-scale
real-time RT-PCR. Mol Cancer 2004;3:20.

34 Rauen KA, Banerjee A, Bishop WR, et al. Costello and
cardio-facio-cutaneous syndromes: Moving toward
clinical trials in RASopathies. Am J Med Genet C
Semin Med Genet 2011;157:136–146.

35 Kraniak JM, Sun D, Mattingly RR, et al. The role of
neurofibromin in N-Ras mediated AP-1 regulation in
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Mol Cell
Biochem 2010;344:267–276.

36 Logarinho E, Bousbaa H. Kinetochore-microtubule
interactions ‘in check’ by Bub1, Bub3 and BubR1: the
dual task of attaching and signalling. Cell Cycle 2008;
7:1763–1768.

37 Rizzardi C, Torelli L, Barresi E, et al. BUBR1 expression
in oral squamous cell carcinoma and its relationship to
tumor stage and survival. Head Neck 2011;33:727–733.
38 Ando K, Kakeji Y, Kitao H, et al. High expression of
BUBR1 is one of
inducing DNA
aneuploidy and progression in gastric cancer. Cancer
Sci 2010;101:639–645.

the factors for

39 Lee YK, Choi E, Kim MA, et al. BubR1 as a prognostic
marker for recurrence-free survival rates in epithelial
ovarian cancers. Br J Cancer 2009;101:504–510.

40 Du J, Du Q, Zhang Y, et al. Expression of cell-cycle
regulatory proteins BUBR1, MAD2, Aurora A, cyclin A
and cyclin E in invasive ductal breast carcinomas.
Histol Histopathol 2011;26:761–768.

41 Scintu M, Vitale R, Prencipe M, et al. Genomic
instability and increased expression of BUB1B and
MAD2L1 genes in ductal breast carcinoma. Cancer Lett
2007;254:298–307.

42 Yuan B, Xu Y, Woo JH, et al. Increased expression
of mitotic checkpoint genes in breast cancer cells with

Kinase expression in nerve sheath tumors

T Stricker et al

943

chromosomal
405–410.

instability. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:

43 Grabsch H, Takeno S, Parsons WJ, et al. Overexpres-
sion of the mitotic checkpoint genes BUB1, BUBR1,
and BUB3 in gastric cancer—association with tumour
cell proliferation. J Pathol 2003;200:16–22.

44 Shichiri M, Yoshinaga K, Hisatomi H, et al. Genetic
and epigenetic inactivation of mitotic checkpoint
genes hBUB1 and hBUBR1 and their relationship to
survival. Cancer Res 2002;62:13–17.

45 Pinto M, Vieira J, Ribeiro FR, et al. Overexpression of
the mitotic checkpoint genes BUB1 and BUBR1 is
associated with genomic complexity in clear cell
kidney carcinomas. Cell Oncol 2008;30:389–395.

46 Yamamoto Y, Matsuyama H, Chochi Y, et al. Over-
expression of BUBR1 is associated with chromosomal
instability in bladder cancer. Cancer Genet Cytogenet
2007;174:42–47.

47 Fry AM. The Nek2 protein kinase: a novel regulator of

centrosome structure. Oncogene 2002;21:6184–6194.

48 Fletcher L, Cerniglia GJ, Nigg EA, et al. Inhibition of
centrosome separation after DNA damage: a role for
Nek2. Radiat Res 2004;162:128–135.

49 Hayward DG, Newbatt Y, Pickard L, et al. Identifica-
tion by high-throughput screening of viridin analogs as
biochemical and cell-based inhibitors of
the cell
cycle-regulated nek2
J Biomol Screen
2010;15:918–927.

kinase.

50 He F, Yan Q, Fan L, et al. PBK/TOPK in the differential
diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma from hepatocellular
carcinoma and its
in prognosis of
human cholangiocarcinoma. Hum Pathol 2010;41:
415–424.

involvement

51 Zhu F, Zykova TA, Kang BS, et al. Bidirectional signals
transduced by TOPK-ERK interaction increase tumor-
igenesis of HCT116 colorectal cancer cells. Gastro-
enterology 2007;133:219–231.

52 Park JH, Lin ML, Nishidate T, et al. PDZ-binding
kinase/T-LAK cell-originated protein kinase, a putative
cancer/testis antigen with an oncogenic activity in
breast cancer. Cancer Res 2006;66:9186–9195.

53 Torres KE, Liu J, Young E, et al. Expression of
’drugable’
tyrosine kinase receptors in malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumour: potential molecular
therapeutic targets for a chemoresistant cancer. Histo-
pathology 2011;59:156–159.

Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on Modern Pathology website (http://www.nature.com/
modpathol)

Modern Pathology (2013) 26, 930–943

