The Ochsner Journal 12:111–121, 2012
Ó Academic Division of Ochsner Clinic Foundation

Perioperative Management of Neurofibromatosis Type 1

Charles J. Fox, MD,* Samir Tomajian, MD,* Aaron J. Kaye, à Stephanie Russo,*

Jacqueline Volpi Abadie, MD, 1 Alan D. Kaye, PhD, MD§

*Department of Anesthesiology, Tulane University Medical Center, New Orleans, LA

 Department of Anesthesiology, Louisiana State University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA

àStanford University, Palo Alto, CA

§Departments of Anesthesiology and Pharmacology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA

ABSTRACT
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (neurofibromatosis-1), a relatively
common single-gene disorder, is caused by a mutation of the
NF1 gene that results in a loss of activity or in a nonfunctional
neurofibromin protein. Clinical anesthesiologists may find
patients with neurofibromatosis-1 challenging because this
condition may affect most organ systems and result in a wide
variety of presentations and clinical
implications. Current
neurofibromatosis-1 research studies include genotype-
phenotype correlations,
the pathoetiology
behind the different clinical manifestations of neurofibromato-
sis-1, and the search for treatment options for the different
features of
the disorder. Neurofibromatosis-1–associated
complications of the central nervous, respiratory, cardiovas-
cular, musculoskeletal, and gastrointestinal and genitourinary
systems all present various degrees of considerations for
anesthesiologists. Additionally, neurofibromatosis-1 has dra-
matic implications for pregnant women.

investigation of

INTRODUCTION

Neurofibromatosis type 1 is an autosomal domi-
nant neurocutaneous disorder. It is one of the most

Address correspondence to
Charles J. Fox, MD
Department of Anesthesiology
Tulane University Medical Center
1430 Tulane Ave.
New Orleans, LA 70112
Tel: (504) 988-5068
Fax: (504) 988-1743
Email: charles.fox@hcahealthcare.com

Keywords: Anesthesia, cafe´-au-lait macules, NF1 gene,
neurofibromatosis type 1

The authors have no financial or proprietary interest in the subject
matter of this article.

1Dr Abadie is now with the Department of Anesthesiology,
Ochsner Clinic Foundation, New Orleans, LA.

Volume 12, Number 2, Summer 2012

common inherited single-gene disorders, with an
incidence of 1 in 3,500 individuals at birth and
affecting approximately 75,000 people in the United
States.1,2 Initially described in 1882 by Dr Friedrich
Daniel von Recklinghausen and accordingly called
von Recklinghausen disease,1 neurofibromatosis-1
impacts individuals across all ethnic groups and
displays diverse manifestations that can affect multi-
ple organ systems.2 Neurofibromatosis-1 exhibits
complete penetrance, meaning that 100% of patients
with the disorder have some phenotypic expression
during their lifetimes. Neurofibromatosis-1 also dem-
onstrates variable expressivity, meaning that
the
severity of the condition and the clinical manifesta-
tions vary across individuals with the same geno-
type.3 Consequently, the clinical manifestations are
extremely variable and unpredictable among individ-
uals with this disease, even among individuals with
the same genotype. This review addresses the
pathogenesis, diagnosis, clinical manifestations, an-
esthetic implications, and management of neurofibro-
matosis-1. Anesthesiologists must be aware of and
consider each of the multisystemic complications of
the disorder when evaluating and managing patients
for surgical procedures.

PATHOGENESIS

Neurofibromatosis-1 is caused by a heterozygous
mutation in the NF1 gene, which codes for the protein
neurofibromin and results in a loss of
functional
protein. Originally identified by Cawthon et al4 and
Wallace et al5 in 1990, the large NF1 gene is located
on chromosome 17q11.2. This gene comprises 60
exons and spans 350 kb of genomic DNA.6,7 The
protein product of this gene, neurofibromin, is made
up of 2,818 amino acids and is present in various
tissue types although concentrated in nervous tis-
sue.6,8 The NF1 gene regulates the expression or
deregulation of
the protein neurofibromin. Neuro-
fibromin’s function is not completely understood, but
it
is known to be a guanosine triphosphatase–
activating protein that
functions to downregulate
p21-ras (rat sarcoma), a cellular protooncogene that

111

Perioperative Management of Neurofibromatosis Type 1

is an important regulator of cell growth. Therefore,
neurofibromin plays a role in the control of cell
division9 and possesses certain tumor suppression
qualities.1,10

Many types of mutations can result in neurofibro-
matosis-1, including insertions, deletions, base sub-
s t i t u t i o n s , c h r o m o s o m a l
r e a r r a n g e m e n t s ,
translocations, splice mutations, alterations of the 30
untranslated region, and most frequently nonsense or
frameshift mutations.6,11,12 These mutations can
occur in the germline or in the somatic cells of an
individual.13 The NF1 gene has one of the highest
mutation rates of any gene within the human genome,
recorded at approximately 1 per 10,000 alleles per
generation.1 More than 500 different mutations in the
NF1 gene have been identified. Familial mutations
cause approximately half of all neurofibromatosis-1
cases, and the other half stem from new, spontane-
ous mutations.1
Because of

the possibility of new mutations,
neurofibromatosis can be demonstrated in families
with no history of the disease. No difference in the
severity of the disease can be found in patients with
familial mutations versus those with new mutations.11
In a study of NF1 gene mutations, Ars et al14 found
that 85 of 189 unrelated patients (45%) with NF1
mutations have recurrent mutations. This study
proved that similar mutations of
the NF1 gene
spontaneously occur in unrelated patients. Interest-
ingly, sporadic germline mutations tend to occur in
the paternally derived chromosome.13,15 Classifying
these different mutations may provide the source for
the variable symptoms associated with neurofibroma-
tosis and enhance genetic testing for this disease.

The mutation of the NF1 gene results in either a
loss of
function or a nonfunctional neurofibromin
protein that allows for Ras activation and ultimately for
uncontrolled cell proliferation.12 The deficiency of
neurofibromin affects cell types throughout the entire
body, especially the neural crest cells that include
Schwann cells, melanocytes, and endoneurial fibro-
blasts. Additionally, heterozygosity can be lost—a
second-hit mutation to the normal NF1 allele—
resulting in 2 abnormal NF1 genes.10 According to
several studies,
this process seems to be the
mechanism behind the formation of neurofibromas
and cafe´-au-lait macules (CALMs).13 However,
this
mutation is not the cause of all of the features of this
disease; current studies are still trying to elucidate the
exact mechanisms. The actual timing of this acquired
mutation is unknown.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis-1,
developed by the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Consensus Conference in 1987, are based on clinical

findings and require 2 or more of the following: 6 or
more CALMs > 5 mm in prepubertal children or > 15
mm in postpubertal patients, 2 or more of any type of
neurofibroma or 1 plexiform neurofibroma, axillary or
inguinal freckling, 2 or more Lisch nodules of the iris,
a distinct bony lesion, an optic nerve glioma, or a first-
degree relative with neurofibromatosis-1.8,16 The
hallmark features of
the disorder are CALMs and
neurofibromas.

The NIH criteria are highly sensitive and specific in
all age groups except in young children. Because the
clinical manifestations of neurofibromatosis-1 in-
crease with age, many young children do not show
enough features to meet the NIH diagnostic criteria. A
definitive diagnosis can usually be made by age 4.
One study by DeBella et al17 showed that 97% of
children older than 8 met the diagnostic criteria, but
children under 8 years old often do not; therefore,
these criteria may need to be modified for children in
this age group. On the other hand, children with an
affected parent can often be diagnosed within the first
year of
life because these patients only need to
express one feature of neurofibromatosis-1 to be
diagnosed.

In certain cases, genetic testing is necessary for
diagnosis. Examples are a person who does not meet
the clinical criteria but for whom clinicians have a high
clinical suspicion, a young child with a serious tumor
where a diagnosis of neurofibromatosis-1 would
change management, or a case in which other
differential diagnoses must be excluded.6 Because of
the vast number of mutations and the large size of the
gene, genetic testing is complex and a negative test
does not rule out neurofibromatosis-1. Nonetheless,
the causative mutation can be found in 95% of patients
who meet the clinical criteria for the disorder.11

Prenatal genetic testing via amniocentesis or
chorionic villus sampling can be performed; however,
the disease cannot be predicted.6
the severity of
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis by linkage analysis
is a possibility for families with a known NF1 mutation.
This method can select embryos that are unlikely to
carry the NF1 mutation.12

A limitation to NF1 genetic testing is the inability to
make an association between the genotype and the
phenotype of the disease. In other words, identifying
the genotype does not provide clues as to how mild
or severe the disease will be. To date, only 2
genotype-phenotype correlations are known. One
involves multiple microdeletions of
the whole NF1
gene and is associated with severe disease, such as
early-appearing and numerous neurofibromas, se-
vere cognitive abnormalities, abnormal facial features,
and an increased risk of developing malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors.10,13 This correlation

112

The Ochsner Journal

occurs in about 5% of neurofibromatosis-1 patients.
The other known correlation is a 3-base pair in-frame
deletion of exon 17. These patients exhibit CALMs
and Lisch nodules without the presence of tumors.6
The reason this form of neurofibromatosis-1 is milder
may be secondary to the deletion of only a single
amino acid rather than the creation of a truncated
protein.11

Genetic counseling is important because of the
autosomal dominant inheritance for the NF1 mutation,
meaning that only 1 copy of the gene is needed for
the disorder to develop. An NF1-heterozygous indi-
vidual has a 50% chance of passing the disease to his
or her offspring.8 Of note, clinicians and researchers
have not identified any individuals homozygous for
NF1, and mice studies show that homozygous mice
die in utero.13 Because of variable expressivity,
clinicians often diagnose a parent with neurofibroma-
tosis-1 only after the child has been diagnosed. A
parent may have few or no signs of neurofibromato-
sis-1, while the child may exhibit many features of the
disease, or vice versa. The parents of a child
diagnosed with the disorder should be thoroughly
examined for the disease with a complete skin and
ophthalmologic examination. If the parents show no
signs of the disease, then the child’s neurofibroma-
tosis-1 resulted from a new mutation. In such a case,
the chances of the parents having another child with
neurofibromatosis-1 are low but still higher than those
of the general population because of the possibility of
gonadal mosaicism.12

The differential diagnosis of neurofibromatosis-1
includes other diseases that display similar features.
Genetic testing may be required to rule out neurofi-
bromatosis-1. Segmental neurofibromatosis-1 is a
form of the disease in which patients exhibit features
of neurofibromatosis-1 but in a limited anatomic area.
This form of neurofibromatosis-1 is caused either by
chance or by somatic mosaicism (some somatic cells
have the mutation, while others do not). Legius
syndrome, also known as neurofibromatosis-1–like
syndrome,
is an autosomal dominant syndrome
caused by a mutation in the SPRED1 gene and is
characterized by the presence of CALMs, axillary
freckling, and macrocephaly. Patients with Legius
syndrome lack Lisch nodules, neurofibromas, and
central nervous system (CNS) tumors. Familial mul-
tiple cafe´-au-lait spots are an autosomal dominant
disorder in which patients have many CALMs without
any other symptoms. These patients have not proven
to be at risk for the development of neurofibromato-
sis-1.10 Patients with certain homozygous hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer mutations can ex-
press multiple CALMs, axillary freckling, cutaneous
neurofibromas, and gastrointestinal (GI) malignancy.

Fox, CJ

Other differential diagnoses to consider
include
McCune-Albright syndrome, LEOPARD syndrome,
Turcot syndrome, congenital generalized fibromato-
sis, Proteus syndrome, multiple lipomatosis, and
Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome.10-12

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of neurofibromatosis-1
usually appear in a certain order as age increases.
The typical order of appearance of the most common
features is as follows: CALMs, axillary freckling, Lisch
nodules, and neurofibromas. Other features include
generalized hyperpigmentation, tumors, skeletal ab-
normalities, neurologic abnormalities, vasculopathies,
and cardiac abnormalities. We discuss each of these
manifestations below. The pathoetiology of
the
different clinical manifestations of the disease is very
complex. Evidence shows that numerous mechan-
isms and cell-to-cell
interactions are involved, and
different theories are currently being studied.

Cutaneous Findings

CALMs are hyperpigmented, flat, well-demarcated
lesions of the skin that arise during the first year of life
in approximately 95% of neurofibromatosis-1 patients.
These macules increase in both size and number with
age.8 The number of these lesions stabilizes over
time, and the lesions tend to fade in older adults and
the elderly. Patients without neurofibromatosis-1 may
exhibit 3 or fewer of these macules; however, the
presence of 6 or more is highly suggestive of the
disease.11 Current evidence shows the pathoetiology
behind CALMs to be the presence of a mutation in
both copies of the NF1 gene in melanocytes, resulting
in giant melanosomes and increased melanin.18
Freckling, or Crowe sign, usually appears by 4 years
of age and most commonly occurs in the axillary and
inguinal regions but can occur in any intertriginous
region.18 Although 90% of adults will exhibit freckling,
CALMs and freckling do not normally have detrimen-
tal implications. However, some patients are psycho-
logically affected by their appearance.

Generalized hyperpigmentation has been noted in
neurofibromatosis-1 patients but has not been exten-
sively studied. Research on melanocytes from hyper-
pigmented skin shows the presence of only one
mutation in the NF1 gene.10

Ophthalmologic Findings

Lisch nodules are raised hamartomas of the iris
that are sometimes pigmented. These nodules are not
present at birth, but they increase in frequency with
age and are present in more than 90% of neurofibro-
matosis-1 patients at 16 years old. They do not affect

Volume 12, Number 2, Summer 2012

113

Perioperative Management of Neurofibromatosis Type 1

vision. The slit-lamp ophthalmoscopic examination is
the best method for finding these lesions.11

Another ophthalmologic finding, optic glioma, is

discussed below with tumors.

Tumors

The neurofibroma is the most prevalent

tumor
the
associated with neurofibromatosis; however,
actual numbers of
these fibromas vary among
individuals and families.8,19 A neurofibroma is a
benign mass of the peripheral nerve or nerve root
that consists of Schwann cells, fibroblasts, perineurial
cells, and mast cells.20 Neurofibromas can grow
the nerve.21
focally or spread along the length of
These tumors most commonly form in the skin but
can grow anywhere in the peripheral nervous system
and can involve any organ. As stated previously, the
pathoetiology behind the formation of these tumors is
a second-hit mutation to the normal NF1 allele in
Schwann cells. The classification of neurofibromas is
controversial, but generally the classes include
cutaneous, subcutaneous, and plexiform.

The most common type, with a prevalence of
approximately 95%,
is the cutaneous, or dermal,
neurofibroma. This tumor type forms in the dermis
and arises from peripheral nerves.22 These soft,
fleshy, dome-shaped tumors appear around adoles-
cence and increase in both size and number with age,
with a tendency to cluster over the trunk.11 Cutaneous
neurofibromas are often pruritic, painful, and cosmet-
ically unappealing, but no diagnostic evidence indi-
cates that cutaneous neurofibromas undergo a
malignant evolution.8,19 These tumors increase in
size and number during pregnancy, suggesting that
they may be hormone responsive.23 Conversely,
neurofibromas do not seem to increase in size with
the use of hormonal contraception.24

Subcutaneous neurofibromas are firm,

tender
nodules that appear around adolescence/early adult-
hood. The plexiform neurofibroma, present in about
half of neurofibromatosis-1 patients, involves multiple
nerve fascicles rather than just one nerve. Considered
congenital lesions, most of these neurofibromas are
internal and often not visible during infancy. Infants
may exhibit an area of hyperpigmentation or hyper-
trichosis over the spot where a future lesion will
develop. These lesions are usually not suspected
they become symptomatic or disfiguring.12
until
Plexiform neurofibromas can cause complications
such as pain, nerve root and spinal cord compres-
sion, and vertebral erosion.19,22 Both subcutaneous
and plexiform neurofibromas have the potential
to
transform into malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors (MPNSTs).25

Another

finding in neurofibromatosis-1 is the
increased frequency of both benign and malignant
tumors, other than neurofibromas, including MPNSTs,
optic pathway gliomas, other CNS tumors, and non-
CNS tumors. The overall
risk of malignancy in
neurofibromatosis-1 patients is 2.5 to 4 times more
than that of the general population, but this increased
risk applies only to brain and connective tissue
tumors.11,26 The overall risk of cancer at other sites
is not increased.26 Interestingly, the risk of cancer is
higher in female neurofibromatosis-1 patients versus
males.26,27

MPNSTs are the most frequent malignant neo-
plasm found in neurofibromatosis-1 patients. These
aggressive tumors commonly form from the malig-
nant transformation of a plexiform neurofibroma. They
are difficult
to detect and diagnose and often
metastasize quickly to distant sites.6 An 8% to 13%
probability of the formation of MPNSTs exists over the
lifespan of any neurofibromatosis-1 patient, with most
of the high-grade lesions occurring in young adults.12
These tumors often present as persistent pain in a
neurofibroma, new or unexplained neurologic deficits,
hardening of the neurofibroma, or a rapid increase in
fibroma size.6 Neurofibromatosis-1 patients treated
with radiotherapy for an optic glioma seem to have a
risk of developing an MPNST.28 Evidence
higher
conflicts regarding whether patients with large NF1
gene deletions are more susceptible to developing
MPNSTs.29,30

involves the optic chiasm,

The most common CNS manifestation is the optic
pathway glioma,31 present in about 15% of neurofi-
bromatosis-1 children younger than 6 years old. Most
remain asymptomatic, but when symptomatic optic
gliomas occur, they usually present by 3 years of
age.17 These tumors can arise from anywhere in the
optic pathway and may cause visual
field defects,
vision loss, pupillary defects, and proptosis.6 If the
tumor
the child may
present with precocious or possibly delayed puberty.
Symptomatic optic gliomas are usually stable or slow
growing, and some may even spontaneously re-
gress.32 Routine screening for optic glioma includes
annual ophthalmologic examinations; however, if a
child presents with visual symptoms, proptosis, or
abnormal puberty, the patient should undergo mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI). Much controversy
exists over whether to screen asymptomatic neurofi-
bromatosis-1 patients with an MRI to allow for early
detection and possible intervention.33

Other CNS neoplasms commonly found in neu-
rofibromatosis-1 are astrocytomas and brainstem or
cerebellar gliomas. Patients with optic gliomas,
especially those patients who were treated with
risk for
radiotherapy, are at a particularly higher

114

The Ochsner Journal

developing these CNS neoplasms.34 Fortunately,
brain tumors in neurofibromatosis-1 patients tend to
have a more benign course than brain tumors in the
general population.12

Non-CNS tumors that have a higher incidence in
neurofibromatosis-1 patients include rhabdomyosar-
comas, gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs), pheo-
chromocytomas, carcinoid tumors, ganglioneuromas,
and certain myeloid leukemias, especially juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML).35,36 Burgdorf and
Zelger37 reported a 200- to 500-fold increased risk of
JMML in neurofibromatosis-1 patients. Multiple other
studies have suggested that these patients may have
an increased incidence of breast cancer; however,
data conflict.11 For example, a study by Sharif et al38
reported that women with neurofibromatosis-1 have a
3.5-fold increased risk of developing breast cancer.
Another study by Walker et al27 showed that neuro-
fibromatosis-1 patients might have an increased risk
for early-onset breast cancer (women under the age of
50). However, Airewele at al26 reported that even
though the total cancer incidence is higher in patients
with neurofibromatosis-1, the incidence of common
cancers (eg, breast, colon, and prostate cancer) was
not increased. The associations between neurofibro-
matosis-1 and malignant cancers are still being
investigated.

Skeletal Findings

The skeletal abnormalities often seen in neurofi-
bromatosis-1 patients include pseudarthroses, bone
lesions, scoliosis, osteoporosis, short stature, macro-
cephaly, prominent brow and forehead, and pectus
excavatum. The mechanism behind these abnormal-
ities is not well understood, but
the deficiency of
osteoblasts with the increased survival of osteoclasts
may play a role.39 Pseudarthrosis, a false joint, often
forms secondary to impaired bone healing at sites of
bone dysplasia. Long bone pseudarthrosis occurs in
about 5% of neurofibromatosis-1 infants and usually
presents as tibial bowing with subsequent cortical
thinning and fracture, usually by age 2.11,35,40
Neurofibromatosis-1 bone lesions include dysplasia
or cortical thinning of long bones, scalloping of the
vertebrae, and sphenoid wing dysplasia. Scoliosis,
which may occur as a result of osteopenia or bony
dysplasia,39 is found in 10%-25% of neurofibromato-
sis-1 patients and usually becomes apparent during
early childhood/adolescence.8,14 More uncommon,
though significant, kyphoscoliosis is associated with
tumors and a higher than normal neurologic deficit.41
Neurofibromatosis-1 may also lead to a gradual
degradation of the rib cage, producing a flail chest;
however, this is uncommon. Osteopenia and osteo-
porosis are common findings in neurofibromatosis-1

Fox, CJ

patients. The etiology is unknown, and in one small
trial the use of calcium and vitamin D did not seem to
improve bone density.11,12

Neurologic Findings

Neurologic abnormalities include cognitive defi-
cits, specific learning disabilities, attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), seizures, macroceph-
aly, peripheral neuropathy, headaches, and aque-
ductal stenosis.42 Neurofibromatosis-1 patients often
have an intelligence quotient (IQ) about 5 to 10 points
below that of the general population; however, the
incidence of intellectual disability (IQ < 70) is only
slightly higher than that of the general population.
Specific learning disabilities occur in 50%-75% of
patients with the disorder, commonly involving prob-
lems with math and reading, visual spatial construc-
tion, memory, and articulation.8 Additionally, ADHD is
seen in 39% of these patients, and many have poorer
social skills than the general population. Seizure
prevalence is approximately twice as high as that of
the general population.

Macrocephaly, a head circumference greater than
or equal to 2 standard deviations above the mean, is
found in 25%-50% of neurofibromatosis-1 patients
secondary to increased brain volume. This problem
may be associated with the cognitive deficits evident
in patients with the disorder. Peripheral neuropathy as
a result of nerve and spinal root compression can
occur but is more common in patients with neurofi-
bromatosis type 2 (incidence of 3% and 50%,
respectively).11 Patients who experience this form of
neuropathy often have significant pain. Headaches
are another common complaint among neurofibro-
matosis-1 patients. Occasionally, patients may have
aqueductal stenosis and hydrocephalus. On neuro-
imaging via MRI, neurofibromatosis-associated bright
spots, or unidentified bright objects (UBOs), are seen
in 60% of patients. UBOs often occur in the basal
ganglia, cerebellum, brainstem, and subcortical white
matter and are thought to be increased fluid within the
myelin. Data conflict regarding whether the UBOs are
associated with intellectual impairment. Moreover, the
UBOs are not associated with focal neurologic deficits
or mass effect and tend to go away with age.11,12

Vasculopathy

Neurofibromatosis-1–associated vasculopathies
include stenoses, aneurysms, and arteriovenous
malformations involving the aortic, renal, mesenteric,
carotid-vertebral, subclavian-axillary, iliofemoral, intra-
cerebral, and coronary arteries.43,44 Several studies
provide evidence that a neurofibromin deficiency in
the vessel endothelial and smooth muscle cells is the
likely pathogenesis of neurofibromatosis-1–associat-

Volume 12, Number 2, Summer 2012

115

Perioperative Management of Neurofibromatosis Type 1

ed vasculopathy. Lasater et al45 showed that neuro-
fibromin is important for vessel homeostasis through
its regulation of interactions between bone marrow–
derived cells and endothelial and smooth muscle
cells after vessel injury. A deficiency of neurofibromin
in these cells results in poor homeostasis, vascular
inflammation, and cellular proliferation.45 Initially,
researchers believed that
the process involved
Schwann cell proliferation with a secondary fibrosis
forming on the vessel wall46,47; however, more recent
studies have shown that smooth muscle cells actually
proliferate instead of Schwann cells.48

Another proposed mechanism for neurofibromato-
sis-1–associated vasculopathy is that neurofibromin in
the vessel wall may work to suppress smooth muscle
cell proliferation.49-51 Interestingly, the arterial distribu-
tion of neurofibromatosis-1–associated vasculopathy
is similar to the distribution seen in atherosclerosis,
suggesting that blood flow velocity may also contrib-
ute to the development of these lesions.49 Further-
more, analysis of peripheral blood from patients with
neurofibromatosis-1 has revealed increased levels of
inflammatory cells and cytokines, which previously
had been linked to the development of atherosclerosis
and, therefore, may contribute to the vasculopathy.45
The vasculopathy affects both the cerebrovascular
and the cardiovascular systems.43 Stenoses in the
brain can result in the formation of small telangiectatic
vessels around the areas of occlusion, known as
moyamoya. These occlusions can result in sympto-
matic ischemic disease and possibly predispose
patients with these occlusions to stroke.

Hypertension is another common cardiovascular
finding that may present at any age.43 The most
common etiology is essential hypertension; however,
young neurofibromatosis-1 patients with hypertension
are most likely hypertensive secondary to renal artery
stenosis. Other causes of hypertension include pheo-
chromocytoma and coarctation of the aorta.2,12,52

Cardiac Findings

The increased incidence of heart defects has long
been debated.44,53,54 Neurofibromin has been found
to be vital in the development of the heart in mice.
Mouse embryos with a homozygous mutation of the
NF1 gene die early in gestation from heart defects.8 In
2002, an echocardiography study of 48 neurofibro-
matosis-1 patients showed the presence of a cardiac
abnormality in 13 of the 48 subjects (27%).54 The
abnormalities included atrial septal defects, atrial
septal aneurysms, pulmonary stenosis, coarctation
of the aorta, mitral valve prolapse, mitral regurgitation,
aortic regurgitation, and hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy. The investigators recommended that regular
cardiovascular examinations, including echocardiog-

raphy, be performed in all neurofibromatosis-1 pa-
tients.54 Proposed mechanisms for the presence of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and outflow obstruction
in association with neurofibromatosis-1 include neu-
rofibroma formation in the heart or septal hypertrophy
secondary to abnormal catecholamine metabolism in
these patients. Conversely, these 2 conditions may
coexist because of a common hereditary defect in
tissue.42,55 The association between
neural crest
neurofibromatosis-1 and cardiomyopathy is still de-
bated.

MULTISYSTEMIC COMPLICATIONS AND
CONSIDERATIONS OF ANESTHESIA

Neurofibromatosis-1 has the potential for serious
medical problems involving every major anatomical
system. A breakdown in symptom presentation and
associated complications follows, arranged in accor-
dance with the involved anatomical system. Compli-
cations that may pose a threat during surgery and
anesthesia are also discussed.

Central Nervous System

Neurofibromatosis-1 has multiple effects on the
CNS, as discussed above. Tumors within the CNS
often necessitate brain or spinal neurosurgery. The
anesthetic considerations for this type of surgery are
similar to those for standard neural surgery. Tumors
of the brainstem may result in central hypoventilation
syndrome that often requires prolonged weaning from
mechanical ventilation.42 Neurofibromatosis-1–asso-
ciated vasculopathy can involve the carotid and
intracerebral arteries, resulting in stenoses and/or
aneurysms of these vessels that can be problematic
during surgery and anesthesia. Perioperatively, anes-
thesiologists must maintain careful control of arterial
pressure in case of vasculopathy that imposes a risk
for aneurysm rupture and stroke.42 The literature
reports a case of fatal neurogenic pulmonary edema
in a child undergoing spinal surgery.56 This case
highlights the importance of careful, preemptive
management of neurofibromatosis-1 patients during
surgery. Anesthesiologists must consider the higher
incidence of epilepsy and the possibility of an
undiagnosed brain tumor and of severe hemorrhage
during the removal of a plexiform neurofibroma.
Additionally, a postoperative neurologic examination
is warranted to ensure that the patient has returned to
his or her preexisting neurologic status.

Respiratory System

Neurofibromas can be present

in the tongue,
larynx, trachea, or bronchi and can result in blockage
of
the airway and interference with intubation, as
reported in several cases.57,58 Patients may present

116

The Ochsner Journal

with a coarse voice, difficulty swallowing, or deviated
trachea. These tumors impose substantial risk and
complicate anesthetic management during surgery. A
successful and uneventful endotracheal neurofibroma
removal reported by Chen et al58 combined mild
anesthesia and fiberoptic bronchoscopy to assist with
endotracheal intubation. Another successful intratra-
cheal mass removal used rapid induction intuba-
tion.57 Both case reports of endotracheal
tumor
removal discuss having an extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation system on standby in case of any
complications during the procedure. Additionally,
the use of a tube 0.5 to 1 cm smaller than normal
should be considered to help bypass the mass.57,58
Neurofibromas can also pose a challenge to the
anesthesiologist when they occur in the nasal, sinus,
or maxillofacial cavities.40 Another complication in-
volving the respiratory system is the possibility of
chest wall deformities secondary to scoliosis and
kyphoscoliosis that can cause a reduction in lung
volume and breathing capacity and may ultimately
lead to respiratory compromise or failure.6,59 In the
past, parenchymal lung disease and neurofibromato-
sis-1 were linked in theory, but this association is now
believed to be caused by multiple confounders and
has since been discarded.60,61 For patients with
neurofibromatosis-1,
the preoperative evaluation
should include pulmonary function testing, examina-
tion via indirect laryngoscopy, and computed tomog-
raphy (CT) or MRI to investigate for any respiratory
complications and to plan the proper anesthetic
technique.42

Cardiovascular System

Cardiovascular complications include hyperten-
sion, vasculopathy, cardiomyopathy, heart defects (all
discussed above), and superior vena cava obstruc-
tion. Mediastinal neurofibromas have been well
documented as causing superior vena cava com-
pression. El Oakley and Grotte40 reported the case of
a 21-year-old female patient with a familial history of
neurofibromatosis-1 and progressive shortness of
breath while at rest. Chest x-ray revealed a medias-
tinal mass that was causing superior vena cava and
tracheal compression. A biopsy determined that the
mass was a neurofibroma.40 From an anesthesia
perspective, vena cava compression may decrease
preload to the heart and cause severe hypotension
during surgery. Also, such patients may not respond
to fluid resuscitation as quickly as patients without
obstructions. If obstruction is suspected, it may be
prudent to obtain a preoperative CT scan or chest x-
ray to determine the site and extent of the obstruction
and to plan accordingly with proper induction agents
and volume.

Fox, CJ

Both pheochromocytomas and carcinoid tumors
can cause detrimental changes in blood pressure.
The administration of beta-blockers for blood pres-
sure control can precipitate a hypertensive crisis and
death if a pheochromocytoma is present.42 To be best
prepared for possible cardiovascular complications in
a neurofibromatosis-1 patient, preoperative recom-
mendations include careful questioning about cardio-
vascular disease, reviewing prior echocardiography
reports, performing blood pressure measurements to
screen for hypertension, and cautiously using neph-
rotoxic drugs only if absolutely necessary. During
surgery, anesthesiologists must pay close attention to
the heart rhythm and blood pressure and maintain a
high index of suspicion for the possibility of pheo-
chromocytoma and carcinoid tumors.

Musculoskeletal System

As discussed previously,

the musculoskeletal
complications of neurofibromatosis-1 include pseud-
arthroses, bone lesions, scoliosis, kyphoscoliosis, and
osteoporosis. The presence of scoliosis, kyphoscolio-
sis, or spinal cord tumors can make the use of spinal or
epidural anesthesia challenging for an anesthesiolo-
gist.42 In neurofibromatosis-1 patients, spinal cord
neurofibromas should be ruled out by CT or MRI
before epidural or spinal procedures are performed.62

Gastrointestinal and Genitourinary Systems

Tumors are the main GI manifestation of neurofi-
bromatosis-1 and most commonly include neurofi-
bromas, MPNSTs, ganglioneuromas, GISTs,
pheochromocytomas, and carcinoid tumors.63 GI
tumors may present with abdominal pain, abnormal
gut motility, hematemesis, or melena. These tumors
can result in certain complications, such as obstruc-
tion, perforation, hemorrhage, and hypertension. In
neurofibromatosis-1 patients, it is very important to
thoroughly explore the abdominal cavity to detect any
undiagnosed GI tumors. Early diagnosis and treat-
ment of
these tumors prevent complications and
possible death from malignancy.

Neurofibromas may share a common neuroendo-
crine origin with carcinoid tumors and pheochromo-
cytomas. These 3 types of
tumors can occur
together.64 The manifestations of both pheochromo-
cytomas and carcinoid tumors are hazardous in
surgical settings, as seen in the general population.
Surgical removal of pheochromocytomas can result in
hypertensive crisis, cardiac arrhythmias, and multior-
gan dysfunction. The management of these patients
is via administration of an alpha-antagonist (phenoxy-
benzamine) days before surgery with the addition of a
beta-blocker
the
Intraoperative processes should
alpha-antagonist.

(propranol) after the initiation of

Volume 12, Number 2, Summer 2012

117

Perioperative Management of Neurofibromatosis Type 1

include continuous monitoring of
intraarterial pres-
sure and heart rhythm, as well as adequate volume
restoration to prevent postoperative hypotension.65,66
Intraoperative complications of carcinoid tumor re-
moval
include potentially fatal hypotension, cardiac
arrhythmias, and bronchoconstriction. Successful
anesthetic management involves the use of preoper-
ative and intraoperative octreotide.67-69 Neurofibro-
matosis-1 patients with either of these tumor types
should undergo duodenal
imaging to exclude the
presence of a coexisting tumor.42

Neurofibromas in the retroperitoneal and pelvic
regions may cause ureteric or urethral obstruction
and result in hydronephrosis. These tumors may pose
difficulty for catheterization.

Pregnancy

Pregnancy in patients with neurofibromatosis-1
can result in multiple complications. During pregnan-
cy, hypertension may be exacerbated, neurofibromas
may increase in size, and large pelvic or genital
neurofibromas may cause preterm labor or compli-
cate delivery.12,42 A study by Segal et al70 showed a
significantly higher rate of intrauterine growth restric-
tion, stillbirths, and the need for cesarean sections in
pregnant women with neurofibromatosis-1. Addition-
ally, the increase in neurofibroma size may cause an
increase in intracranial pressure. According to Dou-
nas et al,62 the presence of
increased intracranial
pressure and spinal neurofibromas should be evalu-
ated using CT or MRI before spinal or epidural
anesthesia despite the radiation risk to the fetus.
Regarding anesthetic management during labor and
delivery,
the
possibility of increased intracranial pressure, spinal
abnormalities, and spinal tumors that can complicate
regional anesthesia.42

the anesthesiologist must consider

Medications Used During Anesthesia

In the past, patients with neurofibromatosis-1 were
to be more sensitive to neuromuscular
thought
blocking agents, but research has disproven this
theory.42,71 Even so, anesthesiologists should use
these drugs with caution and monitor neuromuscular
transmission throughout surgery because of the risk
of renal impairment from renal artery stenosis in these
patients. Beta-blockers should also be used with
caution in these patients because of the possibility of
an undiagnosed pheochromocytoma.

MANAGEMENT

Upon initial diagnosis, physicians should obtain a
thorough history and physical examination to estab-
lish disease extent. The important components of the
history are personal and family medical history,

developmental assessment, and school performance.
The important aspects of the physical examination are
ophthalmologic, skin, skeletal, cardiovascular, and
neurologic assessments. Examinations should also
include the parents and siblings of newly diagnosed
patients. Routine MRI at
the time of diagnosis is
controversial. The MRI may be helpful in diagnosing
neurofibromatosis-1 and in finding brain lesions
earlier; however, such diagnoses often do not change
clinical management. Also, brain lesions can develop
at any time throughout life, so a negative MRI does
not exclude future complications. Regardless,
if a
patient has neurologic symptoms or symptoms that
are indicative of an optic glioma, MRI is necessary.

The treatment of neurofibromatosis-1 focuses on
symptom management. Pigmentary changes can be
treated with several methods, such as avoiding the
sun, applying sunscreen, wearing cover-up clothing,
and possibly using topical vitamin D3 and laser
therapy.10 Disfiguring and symptomatic cutaneous
neurofibromas can be surgically removed. Treatment
for the plexiform type of neurofibroma is unclear, and
studies are limited. Surgical resection is extremely
complicated because of
the tumor’s invasiveness,
vascularity, and proximity to the nerve. These tumors
can usually only be partially resected and usually
recur. One study on the treatment of
testicular
seminomas showed that carboplatin might be bene-
ficial in reducing the plexiform tumor’s size.72 How-
ever, one must consider the high risk of secondary
malignancy in patients with neurofibromatosis-1.
Ongoing clinical trials are testing tipifarnib, imatinib,
sirolimus, antiangiogenic agents, and other drugs for
treatment of these tumors.10,11 A list of the current
trials can be found at www.clinicaltrials.gov.

Possible approaches to optic gliomas include no
for nonprogressive, asymptomatic optic
treatment
gliomas or chemotherapy if the gliomas are progres-
sive and symptomatic.

The best

treatment of MPNSTs is complete
excision. Adjuvant radiation and chemotherapy have
unclear success rates. Neurofibromatosis-1 patients
with MPNSTs have a 5-year survival rate of approx-
imately 21%.19 Radiotherapy is problematic in pa-
tients with neurofibromatosis-1 because it can result
in the development of MPNSTs, brain tumors, and
moyamoya.12 Bracing or surgery can be used to treat
scoliosis. In regard to the impaired cognitive function,
one study has reported improved cognitive function in
a neurofibromatosis-1 mouse model through the use
of lovastatin.32 Lovastatin functions not only as a 3-
hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase in-
hibitor, but also as an inhibitor of Ras.10 Current trials
are using statins to help improve cognitive functioning
in humans with neurofibromatosis-1. Medications may

118

The Ochsner Journal

treat coexisting ADHD, depression, or anxiety. The
management of hypertension in these patients in-
volves removing the cause. Modalities include the use
of medications for essential hypertension, percutane-
ous angioplasty or bypass surgery for renal artery
stenosis, and tumor removal
for pheochromocyto-
mas. Corrective surgeries for renal artery stenosis in
patients with neurofibromatosis-1 have demonstrated
mixed results; however, percutaneous angioplasty
has shown promise in reducing symptoms.42,73

Specialists should follow patients with neurofibro-
matosis-1 regularly to monitor the skin, eyes, CNS,
skeletal system, and cardiovascular system. All
patients with the disease should have an annual
physical examination with blood pressure readings.
Children and adolescents should also have annual
growth assessments, including height, weight, and
head circumference plotted on a growth chart; annual
ophthalmologic evaluations; and annual developmen-
tal assessments. Ophthalmologic examinations
should be performed annually until age 8, biannually
until age 18, and less frequently in adulthood.
Patients with neurofibromatosis-1 have no limitations
on physical activity unless required secondary to
skeletal complications.12,74 The life expectancy of
these patients appears to be shortened by about 15
years. The most common causes of death are from
MPNSTs, CNS tumors, and vasculopathy.12,75

In recent years, a better understanding of

the
genetics involved with this complicated disorder has
provided hope for better treatments in the future.
Mapping the mutations is a way to understand the
disease and drive researchers to examine the
mutations, locate the regions within the chromosome
where they are most
likely to be found, and find
treatments to suppress or reverse these mutations.2

CONCLUSIONS

Neurofibromatosis-1 is not only a neurocutaneous
disorder but also a multisystemic disorder with
multifaceted implications throughout nearly every
organ system in the human body. Patients with the
disease require follow-up and management by mul-
tiple disciplines throughout the course of their lives.
The study of neurofibromatosis-1 is ongoing. Current
research is focusing on genotype-phenotype correla-
tions, investigation of the pathoetiology behind the
various clinical manifestations of the disease, and the
search for treatment options for the different features
of neurofibromatosis. Furthermore, new cancer and
other systemic associations are continuously being
found. Neurofibromatosis-1 has proven to be a very
intriguing syndrome about which an
complex yet
immense amount of
information remains undiscov-
ered.

Fox, CJ

Anesthesiologists must perform a thorough pre-
operative evaluation of every patient and have a well-
formed and comprehensive anesthetic plan to be
prepared for any complications that may occur.
However, in patients with neurofibromatosis-1, anes-
thesiologists face additional complications and obsta-
cles that
they must consider when devising an
anesthetic plan. Neurofibromatosis-1–associated
complications of
the central nervous, respiratory,
cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and GI and genito-
urinary systems all present various degrees of consid-
erations for the anesthesiologist. The disease also has
dramatic implications for pregnant women. Addition-
ally, certain drugs must be used with caution. The
anesthesiologist must consider the possibility of each
of the multisystemic complications when evaluating
and managing the patient for surgical procedures.

REFERENCES
1. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.

Neurofibromatosis Fact Sheet. May 2011. http://www.ninds.nih.
gov/disorders/neurofibromatosis/detail_neurofibromatosis.htm.
Accessed 16 March 2012.

2. Mulvihill JJ, Parry DM, Sherman JL, Pikus A, Kaiser-Kupfer MI,

Eldridge R. NIH conference. Neurofibromatosis 1
(Recklinghausen disease) and neurofibromatosis 2 (bilateral
acoustic neurofibromatosis). An update. Ann Intern Med. 1990
Jul 1;113(1):39-52.

3. Nussbaum R, McInnes R, Willard HF. Thompson & Thompson
Genetics in Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 2007:
119-120, 292-293.

4. Cawthon RM, O’Connell P, Buchberg AM, et al. Identification and

characterization of transcripts from the neurofibromatosis 1
region: the sequence and genomic structure of EVI2 and mapping
of other transcripts. Genomics. 1990 Aug;7(4):555-565.

5. Wallace MR, Marchuk DA, Andersen LB, et al. Type 1

6.

neurofibromatosis gene: identification of a large transcript
disrupted in three NF1 patients. Science. 1990 Jul 13;249(4965):
181-186. Erratum in: Science. 1990 Dec 21;250(4988):1749.
Friedman JM. Neurofibromatosis 1. GeneReviews, NCBI
Bookshelf. June 2, 2009. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK1109/#nfl.genetic_Counseling. Accessed 2 October 2010.
Feldkamp MM, Angelov L, Guha A. Neurofibromatosis type 1
peripheral nerve tumors: aberrant activation of the Ras pathway.
Surg Neurol. 1999 Feb;51(2):211-218.
Ferner RE. Neurofibromatosis 1 and neurofibromatosis 2: a twenty
first century perspective. Lancet Neurol. 2007 Apr;6(4):340-351.
9. Passarge E. Color Atlas of Genetics. Stuttgart, Germany: Georg

7.

8.

Thieme Publishers; 2007:338-339.

10. Boyd KP, Korf BR, Theos A. Neurofibromatosis type 1. J Am Acad

Dermatol. 2009 Jul;61(1):1-14; quiz 15-16.

11. Plon SE, Blazo M. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (von Recklinghausen’s
disease). UpToDate. Waltham, MA: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2011.
http://www.uptodate.com. Accessed 8 March 2012.
12. Jett K, Friedman JM. Clinical and genetic aspects of

neurofibromatosis 1. Genet Med. 2010 Jan;12(1):1-11.
13. Jouhilahti EM, Peltonen S, Heape AM, Peltonen J. The

pathoetiology of neurofibromatosis 1. Am J Pathol. 2011 May;
178(5):1932-1939. Epub 2011 Mar 31.

Volume 12, Number 2, Summer 2012

119

Perioperative Management of Neurofibromatosis Type 1

14. Ars E, Kruyer H, Morell M, et al. Recurrent mutations in the NF1

33. Listernick R, Ferner RE, Liu GT, Gutmann DH. Optic pathway

gene are common among neurofibromatosis type 1 patients. J
Med Genet. 2003 Jun;40(6):e82.

15. Stephens K, Kayes L, Riccardi VM, Rising M, Sybert VP, Pagon
RA. Preferential mutation of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene in
paternally derived chromosomes. Hum Genet. 1992 Jan;88(3):
279-282.

16. Neurofibromatosis. Conference statement. National Institutes of
Health Consensus Development Conference. Arch Neurol. 1988
May;45(5):575-578.

17. DeBella K, Szudek J, Friedman JM. Use of the National Institutes
of Health criteria for diagnosis of neurofibromatosis 1 in children.
Pediatrics. 2000 Mar;105(3 Pt 1):608-614.

18. De Schepper S, Maertens O, Callens T, Naeyaert JM, Lambert J,
Messiaen L. Somatic mutation analysis in NF1 cafe´ au lait spots
reveals two NF1 hits in the melanocytes. J Invest Dermatol. 2008
Apr;128(4):1050-1053. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

19. Le LQ, Shipman T, Burns DK, Parada LF. Cell of origin and

microenvironment contribution for NF1-associated dermal
neurofibromas. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 May 8;4(5):453-463.

20. Kumar V, Cotran RS, Robbins SL, eds. Basic Pathology.

Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders; 1997:189-190.

21. Ling BC, Wu J, Miller SJ, et al. Role for the epidermal growth

factor receptor in neurofibromatosis-related peripheral nerve
tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell. 2005 Jan;7(1):65-75.

22. Carroll SL, Ratner N. How does the Schwann cell lineage form

tumors in NF1? Glia. 2008 Nov 1;56(14):1590-1605.

23. Gutmann DH. Recent insights into neurofibromatosis type 1: clear

genetic progress. Arch Neurol. 1998 Jun;55(6):778-780.

24. Lammert M, Friedman JM, Roth HJ, et al. Vitamin D deficiency
associated with number of neurofibromas in neurofibromatosis 1.
J Med Genet. 2006 Oct;43(10):810-813. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

25. Tucker T, Wolkenstein P, Revuz J, Zeller J, Friedman JM.

Association between benign and malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors in NF1. Neurology. 2005 Jul 26;65(2):205-211.

26. Airewele GE, Sigurdson AJ, Wiley KJ, et al. Neoplasms in

neurofibromatosis 1 are related to gender but not to family history
of cancer. Genet Epidemiol. 2001 Jan;20(1):75-86.

27. Walker L, Thompson D, Easton D, et al. A prospective study of

neurofibromatosis type 1 cancer incidence in the UK. Br J
Cancer. 2006 Jul 17;95(2):233-238. Epub 2006 Jun 20.
28. Kleinerman RA. Radiation-sensitive genetically susceptible

pediatric sub-populations. Pediatr Radiol. 2009 Feb;39 Suppl 1:
S27-S31. Epub 2008 Dec 16.

29. Kluwe L, Friedrich RE, Peiper M, Friedman J, Mautner VF.

Constitutional NF1 mutations in neurofibromatosis 1 patients with
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Hum Mutat. 2003 Nov;
22(5):420.

30. Upadhyaya M, Spurlock G, Majounie E, et al. The heterogeneous

nature of germline mutations in NF1 patients with malignant
peripheral serve sheath tumours (MPNSTs). Hum Mutat. 2006
Jul;27(7):716.

gliomas in neurofibromatosis-1: controversies and
recommendations. Ann Neurol. 2007 Mar;61(3):189-198.

34. Friedman JM, Birch P. An association between optic glioma and
other tumours of the central nervous system in neurofibromatosis
type 1. Neuropediatrics. 1997 Apr;28(2):131-132.

35. Seif AE. Pediatric leukemia predisposition syndromes: clues to

understanding leukemogenesis. Cancer Genet. 2011 May;204(5):
227-244.

36. Andersson J, Sihto H, Meis-Kindblom JM, Joensuu H, Nupponen
N, Kindblom LG. NF1-associated gastrointestinal stromal tumors
have unique clinical, phenotypic, and genotypic characteristics.
Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 Sep;29(9):1170-1176.

37. Burgdorf WH, Zelger B. JXG, NF1, and JMML: alphabet soup or a
clinical issue? Pediatr Dermatol. 2004 Mar-Apr;21(2):174-176.

38. Sharif S, Moran A, Huson SM, et al. Women with

neurofibromatosis 1 are at a moderately increased risk of
developing breast cancer and should be considered for early
screening. J Med Genet. 2007 Aug;44(8):481-484. Epub 2007
Mar 16.

39. Schindeler A, Little DG. Recent insights into bone development,
homeostasis, and repair in type 1 neurofibromatosis (NF1). Bone.
2008 Apr;42(4):616-622. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

40. el Oakley R, Grotte GJ. Progressive tracheal and superior vena

caval compression caused by benign neurofibromatosis. Thorax.
1994 Apr;49(4):380-381.

41. Tewari P, Pandey CK, Tyagi I. Retropharyngeal neurofibroma

presenting with severe kypho-scoliosis: respiratory obstruction in
postoperative period. Can J Anaesth. 2001 Apr;48(4):422-423.
42. Hirsch NP, Murphy A, Radcliffe JJ. Neurofibromatosis: clinical
presentations and anaesthetic implications. Br J Anaesth. 2001
Apr;86(4):555-564.

43. Friedman JM, Arbiser J, Epstein JA, et al. Cardiovascular disease

in neurofibromatosis 1: report of the NF1 Cardiovascular Task
Force. Genet Med. 2002 May-Jun;4(3):105-111.

44. Oderich GS, Sullivan TM, Bower TC, et al. Vascular abnormalities

in patients with neurofibromatosis syndrome type I: clinical
spectrum, management, and results. J Vasc Surg. 2007 Sep;
46(3):475-484. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

45. Lasater EA, Li F, Bessler WK, et al. Genetic and cellular evidence

of vascular inflammation in neurofibromin-deficient mice and
humans. J Clin Invest. 2010 Mar 1;120(3):859-870. Epub 2010
Feb 15.

46. Rubinstein LJ. The malformative central nervous system lesions

in the central and peripheral forms of neurofibromatosis. A
neuropathological study of 22 cases. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1986;
486:14-29.

47. Salyer WR, Salyer DC. The vascular lesions of neurofibromatosis.

Angiology. 1974 Sep;25(8):510-519.

48. Ahlgren-Beckendorf JA, Maggio WW, Chen F, Kent TA.

Neurofibromatosis 1 mRNA expression in blood vessels.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Dec 15;197(2):1019-
1024.

31. Spiro SG. Lung tumours. In: Brewis RAL, Gibson GJ, Geddes DM,

49. Hamilton SJ, Friedman JM. Insights into the pathogenesis of

eds. Respiratory Medicine. London, UK: Balliere Tindall; 1990:
874.

32. Li W, Cui Y, Kushner SA, et al. The HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor
lovastatin reverses the learning and attention deficits in a mouse
model of neurofibromatosis type 1. Curr Biol. 2005 Nov 8;
15(21):1961-1967.

neurofibromatosis 1 vasculopathy. Clin Genet. 2000 Nov;58(5):
341-344.

50. Norton KK, Xu J, Gutmann DH. Expression of the

neurofibromatosis I gene product, neurofibromin, in blood vessel
endothelial cells and smooth muscle. Neurobiol Dis. 1995 Feb;
2(1):13-21.

120

The Ochsner Journal

Fox, CJ

51. Riccardi VM. Histogenesis control genes and neurofibromatosis

64. Wheeler MH, Curley IR, Williams ED. The association of

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2000 Jul;159(7):475-476.

52. Walther MM, Herring J, Enquist E, Keiser HR, Linehan WM. von

Recklinghausen’s disease and pheochromocytomas. J Urol.
1999 Nov;162(5):1582-1586.

53. Lin AE, Garver KL. Cardiac abnormalities in neurofibromatosis.

Neurofibromatosis. 1988;1(3):146-151.

54. Tedesco MA, Di Salvo G, Natale F, et al. The heart in

neurofibromatosis type 1: an echocardiographic study. Am Heart
J. 2002 May;143(5):883-888.

55. Fitzpatrick AP, Emanuel RW. Familial neurofibromatosis and

hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Br Heart J. 1988 Sep;60(3):247-
251.

56. Van Aken H, Scherer R, Lawin P. A rare intra-operative

complication in a child with Von Recklinghausen’s
neurofibromatosis. Anaesthesia. 1982 Aug;37(8):827-829.

57. Dodge TL, Mahaffey JE, Thomas JD. The anesthetic management
of a patient with an obstructing intratracheal mass: a case report.
Anesth Analg. 1977 Mar-Apr;56(2):295-298.

58. Chen PT, Chang WK, Hsu WH, Sung CS, Chan KH, Tsai SK.

Anesthetic management of a patient undergoing segmental
resection of trachea with an endotracheal neurofibroma and
nearly total occlusion of trachea. Acta Anaesthesiol Taiwan. 2004
Dec;42(4):233-236.

59. Riccardi VM, Eichner JE. Neurofibromatosis: Phenotype, Natural

History and Pathogenesis. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press; 1986.

60. Ryu JH, Parambil JG, McGrann PS, Aughenbaugh GL. Lack of

evidence for an association between neurofibromatosis and
pulmonary fibrosis. Chest. 2005 Oct;128(4):2381-2386.

61. Webb WR, Goodman PC. Fibrosing alveolitis in patients with

neurofibromatosis. Radiology. 1977 Feb;122(2):289-293.
62. Dounas M, Mercier FJ, Lhuissier C, Benhamou D. Epidural

analgesia for labour in a parturient with neurofibromatosis. Can J
Anaesth. 1995 May;42(5 Pt 1):420-422; discussion 422-424.

63. Basile U, Cavallaro G, Polistena A, et al. Gastrointestinal and
retroperitoneal manifestations of type 1 neurofibromatosis. J
Gastrointest Surg. 2010 Jan;14(1):186-194.

neurofibromatosis, pheochromocytoma, and somatostatin-rich
duodenal carcinoid tumor. Surgery. 1986 Dec;100(6):1163-
1169.

65. Eisenhofer G, Bornstein SR. Surgery: risks of hemodynamic

instability in pheochromocytoma. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2010 Jun;
6(6):301-302.

66. Young WF, Kaplan NM, Kebebew E. Treatment of

pheochromocytoma in adults. UpToDate. Waltham, MA: Wolters
Kluwer Health; 2012. http://www.uptodate.com. Accessed 8
March 2012.

67. Claure RE, Drover DD, Haddow GR, Esquivel CO, Angst MS.

Orthotopic liver transplantation for carcinoid tumour metastatic to
the liver: anesthetic management. Can J Anaesth. 2000 Apr;
47(4):334-337.

68. Dierdorf SF. Carcinoid tumor and carcinoid syndrome. Curr Opin

Anaesthesiol. 2003 Jun;16(3):343-347.

69. Goldfinger SE, Strosberg JR. Treatment of the carcinoid

syndrome. UpToDate. Waltham, MA: Wolters Kluwer Health;
2012. http://www.uptodate.com. Accessed 8 March 2012.
70. Segal D, Holcberg G, Sapir O, Sheiner E, Mazor M, Katz M.

Neurofibromatosis in pregnancy. Maternal and perinatal outcome.
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 1999 May;84(1):59-61.

71. Richardson MG, Setty GK, Rawoof SA. Responses to

nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockers and succinylcholine in
von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis. Anesth Analg. 1996 Feb;
82(2):382-385.

72. Hummel T, Anyane-Yeboa A, Mo J, Towbin A, Weiss B.

Response of NF1-related plexiform neurofibroma to high-dose
carboplatin. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2011 Mar;56(3):488-490.
Epub 2010 Nov 11.

73. Malav IC, Kothari SS. Renal artery stenosis due to

neurofibromatosis. Ann Pediatr Cardiol. 2009 Jul;2(2):167-169.

74. Hersh JH; American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on

Genetics. Health supervision for children with neurofibromatosis.
Pediatrics. 2008 Mar;121(3):633-642.

75. Rasmussen SA, Yang Q, Friedman JM. Mortality in

neurofibromatosis 1: an analysis using U.S. death certificates.
Am J Hum Genet. 2001 May;68(5):1110-1118. Epub 2001 Mar
28.

This article meets the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education and the American Board of
Medical Specialties Maintenance of Certification competencies for Patient Care and Medical Knowledge.

Volume 12, Number 2, Summer 2012

121

