THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOL. 287, NO. 42, pp. 35065–35077, October 12, 2012
© 2012 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc. Published in the U.S.A.

Inhibition of Transmitter Release and Attenuation of
Anti-retroviral-associated and Tibial Nerve Injury-related
Painful Peripheral Neuropathy by Novel Synthetic Ca2ⴙ
Channel Peptides*

Received for publication, May 7, 2012, and in revised form, August 8, 2012 Published, JBC Papers in Press, August 13, 2012, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M112.378695
Sarah M. Wilson‡1, Brian S. Schmutzler§2, Joel M. Brittain‡3, Erik T. Dustrude‡1, Matthew S. Ripsch¶,
Jessica J. Pellman§, Tae-Sung Yeum¶, Joyce H. Hurley‡储, Cynthia M. Hingtgen‡§**, Fletcher A. White‡¶,
and Rajesh Khanna‡§储‡‡4
From the Departments of §Pharmacology and Toxicology and ‡Program in Medical Neurosciences, Stark Neurosciences Research
Institute, and the Departments of ¶Anesthesia, 储Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and **Neurology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202 and ‡‡Sophia Therapeutics LLC, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202

Background: N-type Ca2⫹ channels (CaV2.2) are clinically validated targets for chronic pain.
Results: Two peptides from CaV2.2 and CaV1.2 perturb binding to a regulatory protein, CRMP2, inhibit calcium influx, and
attenuate mechanical hyperalgesia in a rodent model of drug-induced chronic pain.
Conclusion: Ca2⫹ channel peptides block drug- and nerve injury-induced chronic pain.
Significance: Ca2⫹ channel peptide therapeutics can be useful in mitigating chronic pain.

N-type Ca2ⴙ channels (CaV2.2) are a nidus for neurotrans-
mitterreleaseandnociceptivetransmission.However,theuseof
CaV2.2 blockers in pain therapeutics is limited by side effects
resulting from inhibition of the physiological functions of
CaV2.2 within the CNS. We identified an anti-nociceptive pep-
tide (Brittain, J. M., Duarte, D. B., Wilson, S. M., Zhu, W., Bal-
lard, C., Johnson, P. L., Liu, N., Xiong, W., Ripsch, M. S., Wang,
Y., Fehrenbacher, J. C., Fitz, S. D., Khanna, M., Park, C. K.,
Schmutzler, B. S., Cheon, B. M., Due, M. R., Brustovetsky, T.,
Ashpole, N. M., Hudmon, A., Meroueh, S. O., Hingtgen, C. M.,
Brustovetsky, N., Ji, R. R., Hurley, J. H., Jin, X., Shekhar, A., Xu,
X. M., Oxford, G. S., Vasko, M. R., White, F. A., and Khanna, R.
(2011) Suppression of inflammatory and neuropathic pain by
uncoupling CRMP2 from the presynaptic Ca2ⴙ channel com-
plex. Nat. Med. 17, 822–829) derived from the axonal collapsin
response mediator protein 2 (CRMP2), a protein known to bind
and enhance CaV2.2 activity. Using a peptide tiling array, we

* This work was supported, in whole or in part, by National Institutes of Health
(NIH), NCRR, Project Development Team Grant RR025761 in support of the
Indiana Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute (to R. K); NIH, NINDS,
Grant NS049136-06 (to F. A. W.); and NIH, NIDA, Grant DA026040-04 (to
F. A. W.). This work was also supported by a Clinical and Translational Sci-
ences Award from the Indiana State Department of Health Spinal Cord and
Brain Injury Fund (A70-9-079138 to R. K.), American Heart Association
National Scientist Development Grant SDG5280023 (to R. K.), Department
of Defense Congressionally Directed Military Medical Research and Devel-
opment Program Neurofibromatosis New Investigator Award NF1000099
(to R. K.), a Ralph W. and Grace M. Showalter Foundation grant (to R. K.),
Indiana University Biomedical Committee Research Support Funds Grant
2286501 (to R. K), a Research Inventions and Scientific Commercialization
grant (to R. K.) from the Indiana Clinical and Translational Sciences Insti-
tute, and the Elwert Award in Medicine (to R. K.).

1 Supported in part by a Paul and Carole Stark Fellowship.
2 Supported by a Young Investigator’s Award from the Children’s Tumor

Foundation.

3 Supported by a Larry Kays Medical Neuroscience Fellowship.
4 A co-founder of Sophia Therapeutics, LLC. To whom correspondence should
be addressed: 950 W. Walnut St., R2 Rm. 478, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202.
Tel.: 317-278-6531; Fax: 317-278-5849; E-mail: khanna5@iu.edu.

“L1”)

identified novel peptides within the first intracellular loop
(CaV2.2(388–402),
and the distal C terminus
(CaV1.2(2014–2028) “Ct-dis”) that bound CRMP2. Microscale
thermophoresis demonstrated micromolar and nanomolar
binding affinities between recombinant CRMP2 and synthetic
L1 and Ct-dis peptides, respectively. Co-immunoprecipitation
experiments showed that CRMP2 association with CaV2.2 was
inhibited by L1 and Ct-dis peptides. L1 and Ct-dis, rendered
cell-penetrant by fusion with the protein transduction domain
of the human immunodeficiency virus TAT protein, were tested
in in vitro and in vivo experiments. Depolarization-induced cal-
ciuminfluxindorsalrootganglion(DRG)neuronswasinhibited
by both peptides. Ct-dis, but not L1, peptide inhibited depolar-
ization-stimulated release of the neuropeptide transmitter cal-
citonin gene-related peptide in mouse DRG neurons. Similar
results were obtained in DRGs from mice with a heterozygous
mutation of Nf1 linked to neurofibromatosis type 1. Ct-dis pep-
tide, administered intraperitoneally, exhibited antinociception
in a zalcitabine (2ⴕ-3ⴕ-dideoxycytidine) model of AIDS therapy-
induced and tibial nerve injury-related peripheral neuropathy.
This study suggests that CaV peptides, by perturbing interac-
tions with the neuromodulator CRMP2, contribute to suppres-
sion of neuronal hypersensitivity and nociception.

The N-type voltage-gated calcium channel (CaV2.2)5 has
recently gained immense popularity as one of the key factors in

5 The abbreviations used are: CaV2.2, N-type voltage-gated Ca2⫹ channel;
CaV2.1, P/Q-type voltage-gated Ca2⫹ channel; CaV1.2, L-type voltage-
gated Ca2⫹ channel; CaV2.3, R-type voltage-gated Ca2⫹ channel; CGRP,
calcitonin gene-related peptide; iCGRP, immunoreactive CGRP; CRMP2,
collapsin response mediator protein 2; Ct-dis, distal end of the C terminus;
ddC, 2⬘,3⬘-dideoxycytidine; DRG, dorsal root ganglion; L1, first intracellular
loop; MST, microscale thermophoresis, PWT, paw withdrawal threshold;
TAT, transactivator of transcription; TNI, tibial nerve injury; aa, amino
acid(s); CAD, catecholamine A-differentiated.

OCTOBER 12, 2012 • VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 35065

were purchased as follows: anti-CRMP2 polyclonal antibody,
anti-syntaxin monoclonal antibody, mouse anti-FLAG M2
monoclonal antibody (all from Sigma), anti-CaV1.2 monoclo-
nal antibody (University of California Davis Neuromab, Davis,
CA), and anti-CaV2.2 polyclonal antibody (Origene Technolo-
gies, Inc., Rockville, MD). The CRMP2-His-pET28B cDNA was
provided by Dr. Rihe Liu (University of North Carolina), and
the CRMP2–3xFLAG construct was provided by Dr. Akihiro
Kurimasa (Tottori University, Tottori, Japan).

Synthesis and Blotting of SPOT Membranes—SPOTs blots
(16) encompassing the first intracellular loops and distal third
of the C termini of N-, P/Q-, R-, and L-type calcium channels
were synthesized, using standard 9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl
(Fmoc) chemistry, in 30 ⫻ 20 spot arrays using a Multipep
peptide synthesizer adapted for SPOT synthesis (Intavis AG,
Cologne, Germany). Membranes were blocked for at least 1 h in
Tris-buffered saline containing 0.5% Tween 20 (TBST) with 5%
skim milk powder before incubation for 1 h with a purified rat
brain synaptosome fraction at room temperature with gentle
shaking. Following a series of brief washes in TBST, the blot was
probed overnight with a polyclonal CRMP2 antibody at 4 °C.
The following day, blots were washed three times for 10 min
each time in TBST, incubated in secondary antibody (horserad-
ish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit; 1:10,000) for 45
min at room temperature, and washed for 30 min in TBST three
more times for 10 min each time before visualizing SPOTs by
exposing the membranes to enhanced chemiluminescence
reagent.

Construction of Glutathione S-Transferase (GST) Fusion
Proteins—Oligonucleotides for the distal third of the C termi-
nus of CaV1.2 (nucleotides 5961–6695 of rat sequence, Gen-
BankTM accession number NM_012517) were purchased from
Sigma. This Ct-dis region was amplified from cDNA prepared
from post-natal day 1 rat brain and cloned into the BamHI/
MfeI-cut pGex-3x-Glu vector. The distal portion of the C ter-
mini of CaV2.3 (␣1E, GI:14578562) containing nucleotides
6251–6892 was cloned into pGex-3x-Glu vector. The channel
fragment was amplified by PCR from rat brain cDNA and
inserted using the restriction enzymes BglII/EcoRI. The final
product was verified by DNA sequencing and expressed in
BL21(DE3)pLysE cells (Bioline, Taunton, MA). Expression of
GST-Glu fusion proteins was performed as described previ-
ously (10, 11). Construction of the CaV2.2 Ct-dis-pGex-3x-Glu
vector has been described previously (10).

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

the ascending pain pathway (see reviews by Zamponi et al. (1)
and Snutch (2)). As such, regulation of CaV2.2 expression and
function is posited to have a major impact on the presentation
of multiple pain states. Indeed, inhibition of CaV2.2 by syn-
thetic conopeptides provides analgesic relief in a variety of plat-
forms (3–6). However, given the importance of CaV2.2 integ-
rity in peripheral and central synapses, directly targeting
channel function is complicated by a myriad of adverse side
effects (7–9). Targeting protein-protein interactions that regu-
late CaV2.2 may provide analgesic benefits similar to those pro-
vided by direct inhibition, while avoiding complications associ-
ated with channel block. We recently demonstrated that the
interaction between CaV2.2 and collapsin response mediator
protein 2 (CRMP2) (10), a positive regulator of channel surface
expression, could be disrupted by a 15-aa peptide derived from
the C terminus of CRMP2 (TAT CBD3). Interfering with this
interaction efficiently reduced pain behaviors associated with a
variety of rodent models of chronic neuropathic/inflammatory
pain (11–13). Despite achieving similar levels of analgesic relief,
TAT CBD3 treatment did not result in the adverse side effects
observed with direct channel inhibition. Here we demonstrate
similar effects of targeting the reciprocal interface of the inter-
action using peptides derived from channel domains demon-
strated to coordinate CRMP2 binding.

The use of calcium channel peptides as decoys to disrupt
binding of regulatory proteins has previously been demon-
strated using the II-III cytoplasmic loop (14) and the ␣interac-
tion domain of CaV2.2 (15). Intracellular injection of a peptide
consisting of the II-III loop, containing the synprint interaction
site, prevented association of CaV2.2 with the synaptic core
complex, reducing synaptic transmission (15). Peptides con-
taining the ␣interaction domain of CaV2.2 prevented G-pro-
tein-mediated inhibition of channel function by disrupting
binding of the G␤␥subunit to the channel (14). The success of
these studies in altering channel function and neurotransmitter
release validates the use of such peptides as both research tools
and potential therapeutics. In this study, we demonstrate that
15 amino acid peptides derived from the I-II cytoplasmic loop
(L1) and the distal C terminus (Ct-dis) of CaV2.2 and CaV1.2,
respectively, effectively disrupt
the interaction between
CRMP2 and CaV2.2, reducing calcium influx. Importantly, sys-
temic administration of Ct-dis peptide transiently reversed
mechanical hypersensitivity associated with HIV retroviral
treatment-induced painful peripheral neuropathy and a model
of neuropathic pain involving tibial nerve injury.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Materials—TAT control (YGRKKRRQRRRWEAKEMLY-
FEALVIE; TAT sequence denoted in underlined text), a ran-
dom sequence with no homology to any known sequence; TAT
L1 (YGRKKRRQRRRYLEWIFKAEEVMLAE), and TAT Ct-dis
(YGRKKRRQRRRNSSFPSIHCSSSWSEE) were synthesized
and HPLC-purified by Antagene Inc. (Sunnyvale, CA). An
N-terminal fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated ver-
sion of TAT Ct-dis was purchased from Genscript (Piscataway,
NJ). All chemicals, unless noted were purchased from Sigma.
Lipofectamine 2000 was purchased from Invitrogen. Fura-
2/AM was obtained from Teflabs (Austin, TX). Antibodies

Purification of CRMP2-His and CaV1.2 Ct-dis- and CaV2.2
Ct-dis-GST Fusion Proteins—GST fusion proteins were puri-
fied from BL21 (DE3) Escherichia coli bacterial
lysates as
described previously (10, 11), whereas CRMP2-His protein was
purified as before (17) with the following modifications (see Fig.
3A). Expression of CRMP2-His was induced with 1 mM isopro-
pyl-␤-D-thiogalactopyranoside. For purification,
following
overnight growth at 16 °C, transformed bacteria were pelleted
at 5,000 ⫻ g for 20 min at 4 °C and lysed in His lysis buffer (50
mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl) using an M-110L Microflu-
idizer fluid processor (Microfluidics Corp., Newton, MA). The
lysate was then clarified by spinning at 30,000 ⫻ g for 45 min at
4 °C before being filtered through a 0.45-␮m syringe filter. The
filtered supernatant was loaded onto a TalonTM metal affinity

35066 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42 • OCTOBER 12, 2012

resin (Clontech, Mountain View, CA) column pre-equilibrated
with His wash buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10
mM imidazole). The column was washed with 2⫻ column vol-
umes of His wash buffer, and His proteins were eluted with His
elution buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM
imidazole). Elution fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE,
and fractions containing CRMP2 were combined. The com-
bined elution fractions were then dialyzed against protein stor-
age buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, and 20 mM
CaCl2). Purified protein concentration was determined from
densitometric scans of protein bands resolved on a SDS-poly-
acrylamide gel stained by colloidal Coomassie Blue (Pierce)
against a bovine serum albumin standard curve. Additionally,
protein identity was verified by immunoblotting (data not
shown).

Microscale Thermophoresis (MST) Binding Analyses—MST,
the directed movement of molecules in optically generated
microscopic temperature gradients, permits an immobiliza-
tion-free fluorescence methodology for the analysis of interac-
tion of biomolecules (18, 19). This thermophoretic movement
is determined by the entropy of the hydration shell around mol-
ecules. The microscopic temperature gradient is generated by
an infrared laser. In a typical MST experiment, the concentra-
tion of the labeled molecule is kept constant while the concen-
tration of the unlabeled interaction partner is varied. A con-
stant concentration of dye NT647-labeled CRMP2 (labeled
protein concentration of 20 ␮M) was incubated for 10 min at
room temperature in the dark with different concentrations of
L1 or Ct-dis peptides (up to 5000 nM) in 20 mM Tris, 150 mM
NaCl, 0.01 mM EDTA with 0.01% Tween 20. Immediately after-
ward, 3–5 ␮l of the samples were loaded into standard glass
capillaries (Monolith NT Capillaries, NanoTemper), and the
thermophoresis analysis was performed on a NanoTemper
Monolith NT.115 instrument (40% LED, 40% IR laser power).
The MST curves were fitted with a Hill method using Origin
version 8.5 software to obtain Kd values for binding between
CRMP2 and peptides.
Catecholamine A-differentiated (CAD) Cell Culture—CAD

cells were cultured exactly as described (20, 21).

Transfection of CAD Cells—CAD cells were transfected using
polyethyleneimine (PEI) as previously described (22). Briefly,
cells were transfected at ⬃60% confluence using an experimen-
tally optimized ratio of DNA/PEI. DNA and PEI were mixed
and allowed to incubate for 5 min at room temperature prior to
the addition to cells.

Generation of CAD Cell, Rat Brain, and Dorsal Root Ganglion
(DRG) Lysates, Immunoprecipitation, and Immunoblotting—
CAD cells were lysed 2 days following transfection using a mod-
ified radioimmune precipitation assay buffer (50 mM Tris-HC1,
pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.5% sodium deoxy-
cholate, and 1 mM EDTA supplemented with fresh protease
inhibitors) with gentle agitation at 4 °C for 10 min. Samples
were then clarified by centrifugation at 10,000 ⫻ g for 20 min.
The supernatant was saved and used for subsequent immuno-
precipitations and immunoblotting as described previously (10,
11, 23).

To assess if CaV peptides can interfere with the association
between CRMP2 and calcium channels, lysate from ⬃40–60

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

ganglia from adult rats, devoid of nerve roots, were lysed in
modified radioimmune precipitation assay buffer and subjected
to immunoprecipitation with anti-CaV2.2 antibody in the
absence or presence of control peptide, TAT L1, and TAT Ct-
dis peptides (10 ␮M each added 30 min prior to the addition of
antibody). Post-natal day 2 rat brains were homogenized in
radioimmune precipitation assay buffer (without detergents)
by sonication and then clarified by centrifugation to remove
insoluble material.
Immunoblotting was performed as
described (11, 24, 25).

Primary DRG Neuronal Cultures—Isolation of sensory neu-
rons from 1–2-month-old wild type C57BL/6J and Nf1⫹/⫺
C57BL/6J littermates (26) was performed exactly as described
previously (11, 27, 28), whereas DRGs from adult rats were pre-
pared as per Brittain et al. (11). All animals were housed and
bred and had free access to food and water in the Indiana Uni-
versity Laboratory Animal Research Center and were used in
procedures approved by the Animal Use and Care Committee
of the Indiana University School of Medicine. All animals were
genotyped prior to use in experiments.

Calcium Imaging—DRG neurons were loaded at 37 °C with
2.6 ␮M Fura-2/AM (Kd ⫽ 25 ␮M, ␭ex 340, 380 nm/␭em 512 nm)
to follow changes in [Ca2⫹]c in a standard bath solution con-
taining 139 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 0.8 mM MgCl2, 1.8 mM CaCl2,
10 mM NaHEPES, pH 7.4, 5 mM glucose. Fluorescence imaging
was performed with an inverted microscope, Nikon Eclipse
TE2000-U, using a Nikon Super Fluor ⫻20 objective, 0.75
numerical aperture and a Photometrics cooled CCD camera
CoolSNAPHQ (Roper Scientific, Tucson, AZ) controlled by
MetaFluor version 6.3 software (Molecular Devices, Downing-
town, PA). The excitation light was delivered by a Lambda-LS
system (Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA). The excitation filters
(340 ⫾ 5 and 380 ⫾ 7 nm) were controlled by a Lambda 10-2
optical filter change (Sutter Instruments). Fluorescence was
recorded through a 505-nm dichroic mirror at 535 ⫾ 25 nm. To
minimize photobleaching and phototoxicity, the images were
taken every 15 s during the time course of the experiment using
the minimal exposure time that provided acceptable image
quality. The changes in [Ca2⫹]c were monitored by following a
ratio of F340/F380, calculated after subtracting the background
from both channels.
Stimulated Release of Immunoreactive Calcitonin Gene-re-
lated Peptide (iCGRP)—Measurement of stimulus-evoked
release and content of iCGRP from isolated sensory neurons
was accomplished as described previously (11, 24, 27). After
5–7 days in culture, medium was removed, and the basal or
resting release of iCGRP was measured from cells incubated for
10 min in HEPES buffer consisting of 25 mM HEPES, 135 mM
NaCl, 3.5 mM KCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 3.3 mM dextrose,
and 0.1% (w/v) bovine serum albumin, pH 7.4, and maintained
at 37 °C. The cells were incubated in HEPES buffer containing
stimulus (50 mM KCl) for 10 min and then incubated again with
HEPES buffer with 3.5 mM KCl to re-establish resting release
levels. The amount of iCGRP released in each incubation was
measured by a radioimmunoassay. The minimum amount of
iCGRP detected by the radioimmunoassay is 5 fmol with a 95%
confidence interval (29). After the release protocol, the remain-
ing peptide content in each well was determined by exposing

OCTOBER 12, 2012 • VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 35067

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

the cells to 2 N acetic acid for 10 min. Aliquots of acid solution
were diluted in HEPES, and iCGRP levels were determined by
radioimmunoassay. The release of iCGRP during the 10-min
incubation period is expressed as a percentage of the total con-
tent. A minimum of three different preparations were used for
each condition.

2⬘,3⬘-Dideoxycytidine (ddC) Model of Painful Peripheral
Neuropathy—Mechanical hypersensitivity was established by a
single injection (50 mg/kg) of the antiretroviral drug ddC
(Sigma) given intraperitoneally in 150–200-g Sprague-Dawley
female rats. A single administration of ddC produced a signifi-
cant bilateral decrease in paw withdrawal threshold to von Frey
hair stimulation from postinjection day 3 through 21, the last
day of testing.

The von Frey test was performed on six positions spaced
across the glabrous side of the hind paw; two distinct locations
for the distribution of each nerve branch (saphenous, tibial, and
sural) exactly as described previously to determine paw with-
drawal threshold (PWT) to tactile stimuli (11, 30). Base-line
threshold measurements were performed for 3 successive days
prior to intraperitoneal injection of ddC. Stimuli were applied
randomly to left and right hind paws to determine the stimulus
intensity threshold stiffness required to elicit a paw withdrawal
response. The incidence of foot withdrawal was expressed as a
percentage of six applications of each filament as a function of
force. A Hill equation was fitted to the function (Origin version
6.0, Microcal Software) relating the percentage of indentations
eliciting a withdrawal to the force of indentation. From this
equation, the threshold force was obtained and defined as the
force corresponding to a 50% withdrawal rate. A threshold that
exhibits at least a ⫺20 millinewton difference from the base-
line threshold of testing in a given animal is representative of
neuropathic pain (11, 31).

Tibial Nerve Injury (TNI) Model of Peripheral Neuropathy—
This procedure was completed as described previously (32).
Under isoflurane (2%) anesthesia, the skin on the lateral surface
of the thigh was incised, and a section was made directly
through the biceps femoris muscle, exposing the sciatic nerve
and its three terminal branches: the sural, common peroneal,
and tibial nerves. The surgical procedure comprised an axo-
tomy and ligation of the tibial nerve, leaving the common per-
oneal and sural nerves intact. The tibial nerve was tightly ligated
with 5.0 silk and sectioned distal to the ligation, removing 2–4
mm of the distal nerve stump. An effort was made to avoid
contact with or stretching of the intact common peroneal and
sural nerves. Muscle and skin were closed in two layers. Sham
controls involved exposure of the sciatic nerve and its branches
without any lesion.

Assessment of Distribution of FITC-conjugated Ct-dis in Tis-
sue Sections of Naive and ddC-treated Rats—Adult female
Sprague-Dawley rats were euthanized with CO2 and transcar-
dially perfused with saline followed by 4% paraformaldehyde.
Lumbar ganglia 5 and 6 from behaviorally tested ddC-treated
rats (n ⫽ 2) were immediately removed and postfixed for 4 h.
Additional lumbar DRGs were removed from naive, behavior-
ally tested rats (n ⫽ 2). Sagittal sections of the DRG were serially
cut at 14 ␮m onto SuperFrost Plus microscope slides (Fisher)
and counterstained with Hoescht nuclear stain (1:1000; Sigma).

At least 6 sections/DRG were obtained for analysis. Tissue was
processed such that DRG sections on each slide were at inter-
vals of 80 ␮m. Images of DRG were taken with an intensified
CCD camera (Photometrics CoolSnap HQ2) coupled to a
Nikon microscope (Nikon Eclipse Ti) using Nikon Elements
software (Nikon Instruments Inc., Melville, NY). Tissue sec-
tions were illuminated with a Lambda DG-4 175-watt xenon
lamp (Sutter Instruments), and images were captured using the
same exposure for all tissue. Raw images are presented without
any manipulation.

Statistical Analyses—Differences between means were com-
pared by either paired or unpaired two-tailed Student’s t tests.
Transmitter release measurements, represented as a percent-
age of the total content of iCGRP, are expressed as the means ⫾
S.E. All differences in iCGRP release and total content were
compared with analyses of variance (ANOVAs) and Dunnett’s
post hoc analysis or Student’s t tests, as indicated. Behavioral
threshold values were statistically analyzed for each foot sepa-
rately, and the significance of differences between the average
of at least two preinjection tests and the mean was obtained for
each postinjection test. In all tests, base-line data were obtained
for the ddC-treated and sham-treated groups before drug or
vehicle administration. Within each treatment group, postad-
ministration means were compared with the base-line values by
repeated measures ANOVAs followed by post hoc pairwise
comparisons (Student-Newman-Keuls method). A p value of
⬍0.05 was used to indicate statistical significance between
treatment and non-treatment groups.

RESULTS

Identification of CRMP2 Binding Peptides within CaV—We
recently identified CRMP2 as a novel binding partner of CaV2.2
(10). A short peptide derived from CRMP2 (CBD3) could dis-
rupt the CaV2.2-CRMP2 interaction, leading to a physiologi-
cally relevant decrease in Ca2⫹ current and neurotransmitter
release and, in turn, suppression of persistent inflammatory and
neuropathic hypersensitivity (11). Molecular mapping revealed
direct binding between CRMP2 and two intracellular regions
on CaV2.2, the first intracellular loop (L1; aa 356–483; Fig. 1A)
and the distal third of the C terminus (Ct-dis; aa 2119–2336; see
Fig. 2A) (10). Here, we asked whether short peptides from the
L1 or Ct-dis regions of the channel could disrupt the interaction
and affect Ca2⫹ signaling, transmitter release, and behavioral
hypersensitivity. In order to identify shorter regions within
these large L1 (⬃128 aa) and Ct-dis (⬃217 aa) regions that
coordinated binding to CRMP2, we created a peptide array
harboring 15-mer peptides, with an overlap of 10 aa, from
the L1 and Ct-dis regions of CaV2.2. Because of significant
(⬃60%) homology of this region to CaV2.1 (P/Q-type),
CaV2.3 (R-type), and CaV1.2 (L-type), the L1 regions of
these channels were also tiled. Although multiple sequence
alignment revealed lesser (⬍30%) homology between Ct-dis
regions of these channels, these regions were also tiled for
completion. These spots, along with spots harboring pep-
tides against GST (negative control) were then probed in a
far Western manner with a CRMP2 antibody (Fig. 1B).
Quantification of the intensity of the CRMP2 immunoreac-
tivity on the spots identified several L1 and Ct-dis peptides

35068 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42 • OCTOBER 12, 2012

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

FIGURE 2. Identification of C terminus CaV peptides that bind CRMP2. A,
schematic representation of the topological organization of the Ca2⫹ chan-
nel. The distal third of the C terminus (Ct-dis) is highlighted in brown. The
amino acids (CaV1.2 rat sequence) used for the tiling array are indicated. B,
matrix representation of normalized fluorescent intensity of CRMP2 binding
to immobilized 15-mer L1 peptides of N (CaV2.2)-, P/Q (CaV2.1)-, R(CaV2.3)-,
and L (CaV1.2)-type calcium channels. Cyan rectangles represent spots with-
out any peptides. C, amino acid alignment of the Ct-dis peptide (24th peptide
indicated by an arrow in B or purple in C) from CaV1.2 that exhibited the
highest binding to CRMP2. The italicized numbers refer to amino acid residues
in CaV1.2. The amino acid residues (accession numbers provided in Fig. 1) for
the other sequences are as follows: CaV2.2, aa 2194 –2216; CaV2.1, aa 2248 –
2267; and CaV2.3, aa 2151–2177.

responding regions in the other three Ca2⫹ channel isoforms
around this peptide displayed relatively high binding to
CRMP2.

Biophysical Characterization of CRMP2 Binding to L1 and
Ct-dis Peptides—Using in vitro binding assays, we had previ-
ously demonstrated that both full-length L1 and the Ct-dis
fragments bind CRMP2; Ct-dis bound CRMP2 ⬃75-fold
tighter than L1 (10). Here, we asked if short 15-mer peptides
from these regions, L1(388–402) and Ct-dis(2014–2028),
bound to CRMP2 using a new technique called MST (18, 33).
Using an infrared laser, precise microscopic temperature gra-
dients are generated within thin glass capillaries filled with a
fluorescently labeled protein sample in a buffer, and the atom-
istic movement of molecules along these temperature gradients
is monitored in the presence of increasing concentrations of an
unlabeled binding partner (Fig. 3B). Changes in fluorescence
intensity in the capillaries are used to calculate binding affinity
between biomolecules. MST measurements were made on
NT647-labeled CRMP2 in the presence of increasing amounts
of L1 or Ct-dis peptides. As the concentration of the peptides
increased, they bound to CRMP2 thermodiffusing out of the
heated infrared spot, resulting in a decrease in the MST signal
and providing a readout of the binding between the CRMP2 and
the peptides (Fig. 3, C and D). We fitted the binding curves with
the Hill method to obtain Kd values for binding between
CRMP2 and peptides. L1 peptide bound to CRMP2 with a Kd of
3.12 ⫾ 0.31 ␮M, whereas the Ct-dis peptide bound to CRMP2
with a Kd of 0.64 ⫾ 0.10 ␮M (Fig. 3, E and F). Additional exper-

FIGURE 1. Identification of first intracellular loop CaV2.2 peptides that
bind CRMP2. A, schematic representation of the topological organization of
the Ca2⫹ channel. The first intracellular loop (L1) is highlighted in green. The
amino acids (CaV2.2 rat sequence) used for the tiling array are indicated. B,
image of CRMP2 bound to an immobilized 15-mer peptide array of the L1
region of CaV2.2. C, matrix representation of normalized fluorescent intensity
of CRMP2 binding to immobilized 15-mer L1 peptides of N (CaV2.2)-, P/Q
(CaV2.1)-, R (CaV2.3)-, and L (CaV1.2)-type calcium channels. The matrix was
generated with Matrix2png software (61). Cyan rectangles represent spots
without any peptides. D, amino acid alignment of the L1 peptide (ninth pep-
tide indicated by arrow in C or purple in D) from CaV2.2 that exhibited the
highest CRMP2 binding. Asterisks indicate residues that are fully conserved
between the channel subtypes. The italicized numbers refer to amino acid
residues in CaV2.2 (GenBankTM accession number NM_147141.1, translated
from messenger RNA). The amino acid residues and accession numbers for
the other sequences are as follows: CaV2.1, aa 392– 410 (GenBankTM number
NM_012918.2); CaV2.3, aa 381–399 (GenBankTM number NM_019294.2); and
CaV1.2, aa 465– 483 (GenBankTM number NM_012517.2). E, superposition of
the CaV1.2 (purple) and CaV2.2 (green) I-II linker fragments (62). The location
of the CaV L1 peptide is indicated in orange. The ␣ interaction domain is
denoted by the bracket.

from all four Ca2⫹ channel isoforms (Figs. 1, B and C, and
2C). For L1 peptides, CRMP2 binding clustered around the
ninth spot harboring a sequence that was relatively well con-
served across the four Ca2⫹ channel isoforms (Fig. 1, D and
E). In contrast, Ct-dis peptides bound CRMP2 at various
spots spread throughout the sequence of the four Ca2⫹ chan-
nel isoforms (Fig. 2B). However, despite little homology
between the 24th Ct-dis peptide (aa 2014–2028 of L-type;
Fig. 2C) and the other three Ca2⫹ channel isoforms, the cor-

OCTOBER 12, 2012 • VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 35069

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

FIGURE 3. CRMP2 binding to L1 and Ct-dis peptides in solution measured by MST. A, grayscale image of Coomassie-stained gel of CRMP2-His purification.
CRMP2-His (in the vector pET28B-CRMP2-His) was purified as described under “Experimental Procedures.” In addition to the elution fractions, the flow-through
from loading of the lysate along with one of the wash fractions was loaded on the SDS-PAGE. The fractions with the highest concentration of CRMP2-His
(fractions 2–5), as determined by a visual comparison with intensity of bands of the BenchMarkTM protein ladder (Invitrogen), were pooled and then dialyzed
into an imidazole-free buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 100 mM M NaCl, 20 mM CaCl2). The final dialyzed protein was quantified by SDS-PAGE by comparison with
a bovine serum albumin protein standard curve. The final concentration of CRMP2-His was found to be ⬃33 ␮M, and aliquots were flash-frozen on dry ice and
stored at ⫺80 °C. That the purified protein was indeed CRMP2 was verified by Western blot analyses with two different CRMP2 antibodies (Sigma and
Immunobiological Laboratories (Minneapolis, MN)) and further in a functional assay in which it was found to enhance tubulin polymerization. B, MST assay
principle. A standard capillary containing NT647-labeled CRMP2 is locally heated by a IR laser (IR on). CRMP2 diffuses away from the heated spot, causing a local
depletion and drop in fluorescence. Peptide binding changes the thermophoretic properties of CRMP2, resulting in a decreased thermodiffusion. C and D, MST
time traces of 10 –13 different peptide concentrations (ranging from 0 to 5 ␮M). Thermodiffusion is reduced with increasing peptide concentrations. MST was
performed in order to determine the dissociation constant of L1 (E) and Ct-dis (F) to fluorescently labeled CRMP2. 10 ␮M NT-647-labeled CRMP2 was mixed with
increasing peptide concentrations. The normalized fluorescence is plotted for different concentrations of L1 and Ct-dis peptides. A Kd of 3.12 ⫾ 0.31 ␮M (L1) and
0.64 ⫾ 0.10 ␮M (Ct-dis) was determined for the interaction to CRMP2. A representative range of data points obtained from at least two measurements is shown.

iments using isothermal titration calorimetry revealed a similar
5–7-fold difference in binding affinities between L1 and Ct-dis
binding to CRMP2 (results not shown). These results demon-
strate that 15-mer peptides derived from CaV indeed bind
CRMP2.

L1 and Ct-dis Peptides Block Interaction between CaV2.2 and
CRMP2—Immunoprecipitation from rat dorsal root ganglia
with CaV2.2 antibody in the presence of L1 or Ct-dis (10 ␮M)
peptides reduced the amount of CRMP2 but not the prototyp-

ical CaV2.2-binding protein, syntaxin (34), that was recovered
(Fig. 4). These results suggest that L1 and Ct-dis peptides are
sufficient to uncouple the interaction between CaV2.2 and
CRMP2.

Although the Ct-dis peptide was able to bind and inhibit the
interaction between CaV2.2 and CRMP2 (Figs. 2–4), it is
derived from the L-type (i.e. CaV1.2) channel raising the possi-
bility that this Ca2⫹ channel isoform may bind to CRMP2. To
test this possibility, we transfected a neuronal CAD cell line that

35070 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42 • OCTOBER 12, 2012

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

FIGURE 5. CRMP2 exists in a biochemical complex with CaV1.2 and
CaV2.3. A, CAD cells were transfected with cDNAs encoding Nipsnap-1-,
Nipsnap-2-, or CRMP2–3xFLAG. We recently reported a novel role of
Nipsnap2 in transcriptional regulation via L-type Ca2⫹ channels (22). Lysates
from these cells were immunoprecipitated (IP w/) with an anti-FLAG antibody.
CaV1.2 was detected in CAD lysates expressing CRMP2 (top right blot) but not
Nipsnap1 or -2, as reported previously (22). CAD cells express endogenous
CaV1.2 (input lanes, top left blot). All FLAG-tagged constructs expressed
detectable levels of the fusion protein (input lanes, bottom left blot). B, pull-
downs with recombinant CaV1.2- or CaV2.3-Ct-dis-GST-Glu proteins captured
CRMP2 protein from post-natal day 2 rat brain lysates (two replicates shown).
The input lane was loaded with 3% of the starting material used for the pull-
downs, and the adjacent lane contained the protein marker used to deter-
mine approximate protein size. Control pull-downs with GST were negative
for CRMP2. The blot probed for CRMP2 was subsequently stained for total
protein using Amido Black as displayed in the lower blot. Molecular mass
markers are indicated in kDa. Representative blots from 2–3 experiments are
shown. WB, Western blot.

We further demonstrated that disrupting the CaV2.2-CRMP2
interaction with the CBD3 peptide suppressed evoked CGRP
release in sensory neurons in culture as well as spinal cord slices
(11), highlighting the importance of this interaction for trans-
mitter release. Here, we asked if peptides derived from the
reciprocal interface (i.e. the channel itself) could affect release.
The KCl-stimulated release of CGRP was measured from sen-
sory neurons exposed to TAT control, TAT L1, or TAT Ct-dis
peptides, at 10 ␮M, included in the 10 min prior to and through-
out the high K⫹ exposures (total peptide exposure of 30 min).
The levels of basal or resting release of iCGRP were not signif-
icantly different between the groups: 1.53 ⫾ 0.10% total peptide
content/10 min (n ⫽ 12 wells) in untreated control neurons,
1.58 ⫾ 0.17% total peptide content/10 min (n ⫽ 12 wells) in
TAT control peptide-treated neurons, 1.04 ⫾ 0.09 total peptide
content/10 min (n ⫽ 12 wells) in TAT L1 peptide-treated neu-
rons, and 0.92 ⫾ 0.09% total peptide content/10 min (n ⫽ 16
wells) in TAT control peptide-treated neurons (Fig. 7A). A
10-min stimulation with 50 mM KCl evoked a robust increase
(⬃12–14-fold over basal) in iCGRP release in untreated, TAT
control-treated, and TAT L1-treated neurons. In contrast, neu-
rons exposed to TAT Ct-dis peptide had significantly (⬃70%)
less iCGRP release compared with TAT control (one-way
ANOVA; Fig. 7A). The decrease in KCl-stimulated iCGRP

FIGURE 4. CaV2.2 L1 and Ct-dis peptides prevent association of CaV2.2
and CRMP2. Immunoprecipitation (IP) with CaV2.2 antibody in the presence
of control (ctrl), TAT L1 (L1), or TAT Ct-dis (Ct-dis) peptides reduced the
amount of CRMP2 (top) but not syntaxin (bottom) that could be captured
from rat DRGs. Peptides (10 ␮M each) were added for 30 min prior to the
addition of the antibodies. A representative blot from three separate experi-
ments is shown. Similar results were obtained in experiments with rat brain
lysates.

endogenously expresses L-type channels (Fig. 5A, top left blot)
with FLAG-tagged CRMP2 and tested if the proteins could
form a complex. Precipitation of CRMP2 (with a FLAG anti-
body) from lysates of these cells co-precipitated CaV1.2 (Fig.
5A, top right blot). As negative controls, lysates immunopre-
cipitated with FLAG antibody from cells expressing FLAG-
tagged Nipsnap1/2 proteins, which we had previously shown to
regulate but not associate with CaV1.2 (22), did not capture
CaV1.2.

To examine if the Ct-dis region of CaV1.2 interacts with
CRMP2, we cloned and purified bacterially expressed GST
fusion CaV1.2 and CaV2.3 Ct-dis and incubated them with
post-natal day 2 rat brain lysates. Then in vitro complexes were
recovered with glutathione-Sepharose beads, washed exten-
sively, and immunoblotted with CRMP2. Both CaV1.2 and
CaV2.3 Ct-dis proteins bound to CRMP2 (Fig. 5B). GST protein
alone did not recover CRMP2 (Fig. 5B). CaV2.2 Ct-dis also
bound to CRMP2 (data not shown) as reported previously (10).
Collectively, these biochemical results demonstrate that Ct-dis
peptide is capable of binding CRMP2 and inhibiting the inter-
action between CaV2.2 and CRMP2.

L1 and Ct-dis Peptides Affect K⫹-stimulated Ca2⫹ Influx—Our
previous results demonstrated that uncoupling the CaV2.2-
CRMP2 interaction with a peptide derived from CRMP2
resulted in reduction of depolarization-induced Ca2⫹ influx in
sensory neurons (11). Here, we asked whether interfering with
the CaV2.2-CRMP2 complex with a peptide derived from the
opposite interface can achieve the same result. Calcium imag-
ing experiments performed with Fura-2/AM on adult rat DRG
neurons showed that stimulation with high K⫹ (46.5 mM) pro-
duced a transient increase of [Ca2⫹]c in response to plasma
membrane depolarization (Fig. 6, A–C). Peak calcium influx
was recorded within 20 s of stimulation (Fig. 6, A–C). DRGs
incubated for 20 min with L1 or Ct-dis peptides showed a con-
centration-dependent decrease in K⫹-stimulated [Ca2⫹]c
influx (Fig. 6D). At 30 ␮M, peptide-mediated inhibition of
[Ca2⫹]c influx was much more pronounced for Ct-dis than L1,
with a control TAT peptide having no effect (Fig. 6D). These
results show that L1 and Ct-dis peptides affect Ca2⫹ influx.

Ct-dis but Not L1 Peptide Affects K⫹-evoked Transmitter
Release from Isolated Sensory Neurons—We previously demon-
strated that CRMP2 expression levels could affect release of the
neuropeptide transmitter CGRP from sensory neurons (24).

OCTOBER 12, 2012 • VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 35071

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

FIGURE 7. CaV peptides affect Kⴙ-stimulated transmitter release in DRG
neurons. Adult mouse DRG neurons were maintained in culture for 5–7 days
prior to the release experiments. A, bar graph of iCGRP release expressed as
mean percentage of total iCGRP content of cells in each well ⫾ S.E. (error bars)
(n ⫽ 12–16 wells/condition). Neuropeptide release was measured from cells
treated with successive incubations of normal HEPES buffer containing 3.5
mM KCl (basal; B), HEPES buffer containing 50 mM KCl (S), and HEPES buffer
containing 3.5 mM KCl, again. The peptides were included in the 10 min prior
to and throughout the high K⫹ exposures (total peptide exposure of 30 min).
*, statistically significant differences in iCGRP release between TAT Ct-dis and
all other groups using an ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test (p ⬍ 0.05). In all
cases, release stimulated by high extracellular K⫹ was significantly higher
than basal release. B, the total content of iCGRP measured at the end of the
release experiment. There were no significant differences in iCGRP content
between the conditions tested.

tion of DRGs with 30 ␮M TAT Ct-dis or TAT L1 (n ⫽ 12 wells
each), a concentration at which both peptides attenuated cal-
cium influx (Fig. 6D), did not provide further impairment of
iCGRP release (data not shown).

We also tested if the CaV peptides could affect the release of
CGRP in sensory neurons isolated from Nf⫹/⫺ mice, which we
have previously shown to have increased N-type calcium cur-
rents as well as enhanced transmitter release of glutamate (28)
and CGRP (27). Neurofibromin, the protein whose deficiency
leads to neurofibromatosis type 1, is a binding partner of
CRMP2 (35), and it is not known if disrupting the CRMP2-
CaV2.2 interaction could affect CGRP release in these neurons.
KCl-stimulated release of CGRP was measured from sensory
neurons exposed to 10 ␮M TAT-conjugated peptides, as indi-
cated for wild type neurons. The levels of basal or resting release
of iCGRP were not significantly different between the groups
(Fig. 8A). A 10-min stimulation with 50 mM KCl evoked a
robust increase (⬃8–10-fold over basal) in iCGRP release in
untreated and TAT control-treated neurons. In contrast, neu-

FIGURE 6. CaV peptides affect Kⴙ-stimulated Ca2ⴙ influx in DRG neurons.
Shown are differential interference contrast (DIC) (A) and pseudocolored fluo-
rescent images of a field of DRG neurons visualized for Fura-2/AM, before (B)
and after stimulation with KCl (Hi K⫹) (C). Ca2⫹ imaging was performed on
adult rat DRG neurons using the ratiometric Ca2⫹-sensitive dye Fura-2/AM.
Following a 1-min base-line measurement, neurons were stimulated with
46.5 mM KCl for 30 – 40 s to induce Ca2⫹ influx. Arrowhead indicates the Ca2⫹
influx in a sensory neuron. D, bar graph shows the peak fluorescence
response (adjusted for background) of DRGs incubated for 20 min with 30 ␮M
TAT alone or 3, 10, or 30 ␮M TaT L1 or TAT Ct-dis peptides compared with
untreated DRGs. Values represent the average ⫾ S.E. (error bars) from three
separate imaging experiments, with the number of cells per condition indi-
cated in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance compared with
untreated cells (p ⬍ 0.05, one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s post hoc
test).

release observed in TAT Ct-dis-treated neurons was not caused
by a decrease in the total cellular content of iCGRP because
there was no significant difference in neuropeptide content in
any of the four conditions (Fig. 7A, n ⫽ 12–16 wells). Incuba-

35072 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42 • OCTOBER 12, 2012

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

FIGURE 9. CaV1.2 Ct-dis peptide affects ddC-induced mechanical hyper-
sensitivity. PWTs (in millinewtons; mN) were measured in ddC-treated
rodents before and after intraperitoneal (i.p.) administration of the indicated
peptides. PWT in rodents subjected to a single injection of ddC was signifi-
cantly reduced when compared with pre-ddC thresholds (n ⫽ 6; black bar).
After the induction of neuropathic pain behavior using ddC, TAT Ct-dis (4 or
20 mg/kg body weight) was administered, and bilateral pain behavior was
assessed using the von Frey filament test. Behavior was tested at 30, 60, 90,
and 120 min. Following administration of TAT Ct-dis, bilateral paw withdrawal
thresholds increased to pre-ddC levels (ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test;
*, p ⬍ 0.05). Error bars, S.E.

7 days after a single injection of ddC. TAT Ct-dis produced a
time-dependent increase in PWT when administered intra-
peritoneally (Fig. 9). Almost complete reversal of tactile hyper-
sensitivity was observed at the ⬃4-mg/kg dose of TAT Ct-dis
1 h after intraperitoneal injection. Two hours after injection,
peptide-induced reversal of hypersensitivity had diminished to
prepeptide levels, which may be accounted for by degradation
and biodistribution of the peptide. A scramble control peptide
(10 mg/kg) or saline controls did not elicit any change in PWT
at any time tested following intraperitoneal injection of ddC-
injected rats (data not shown). At a higher dose (20 mg/kg),
TAT Ct-dis ameliorated pain behavior to a similar level, yet the
time scale was slightly altered. Although both doses provided
near reversal of pain behaviors at 1 h postinjection, the
20-mg/kg dose was also analgesic at 30 and 90 min postinjec-
tion (Fig. 9). The efficacy of TAT Ct-dis was also tested in the
TNI model of neuropathic pain. Unlike in the ddC model, injec-
tion of 4 mg/kg did not alter tactile hypersensitivity. However,
injection of 20 mg/kg was analgesic at 30 and 60 min postinjec-
tion and peaked at 90 min, when complete reversal of pain
behavior was observed (Fig. 10). Pain behaviors returned to
preinjection levels 120 min following treatment.

To address the transient effect in the AIDS drug-induced
painful peripheral neuropathy, FITC-labeled TAT Ct-dis was
injected (20 mg/kg) into naı¨ve and ddC-injured animals.
Uptake into the DRG was observed 30 and 60 min postinjection
in both naı¨ve and ddC animals (Fig. 11). Similar to what was
previously observed with other TAT peptides, uptake appeared
relatively restricted to the soma of the DRG (11, 23) because
neither nerve fibers in the peripheral nervous system nor other
organs, such as the liver, exhibit any uptake (data not shown).
Although the extent of DRG labeling was similar at 30 and 60
min, labeling intensity appeared higher in DRG derived from
ddC-injured rodents at both time points.

FIGURE 8. CaV peptides affect Kⴙ-stimulated transmitter release in DRG
neurons from Nf1ⴙ/ⴚ mice. Adult Nf1⫹/⫺ mice DRG neurons were main-
tained in culture for 5–7 days prior to the release experiments. A, bar graph of
iCGRP release expressed as mean percentage of total iCGRP content of cells in
each well ⫾ S.E. (error bars) (n ⫽ 12 wells/condition). Neuropeptide release
was measured from cells exactly as described in the legend to Fig. 7. *, statis-
tically significant differences in iCGRP release between TAT Ct-dis or TAT
CBD3 and TAT control using an ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test (p ⬍
0.05). B, total content of iCGRP measured at the end of the release experiment.
There were no significant differences in iCGRP content between the condi-
tions tested. Error bars, S.E.
rons exposed to TAT Ct-dis peptide had significantly (⬃70%)
less iCGRP release compared with TAT control (one-way
ANOVA; Fig. 8A). The CRMP2 peptide CBD3 also inhibited
CGRP release by ⬃78% compared with TAT control neurons
(Fig. 8A). The decrease in KCl-stimulated iCGRP release
observed in TAT Ct-dis- or TAT CBD3-treated neurons was
not caused by a decrease in the total cellular content of iCGRP
because there was no significant difference in neuropeptide
content in any of the four conditions (Fig. 7A, n ⫽ 12–16 wells).
The KCl-stimulated increase in iCGRP occurred largely via
N-type Ca2⫹ channels because 500 nM ␻-CTX inhibited iCGRP
release by ⬃50% compared with untreated neurons (data not
shown). Collectively, these results indicate that disrupting
CRMP2-CaV2.2 interactions impact release of the neuropep-
tide transmitter iCGRP in sensory neurons.

Ct-dis Peptide Attenuates AIDS Therapy- and TNI-induced
Painful Peripheral Neuropathy—Because the L1 peptide did
not affect CGRP (Figs. 7 and 8) or glutamate release (data not
shown), we focused on the Ct-dis peptide in this set of experi-
ments. We next examined the effects of the Ct-dis on chronic
nociceptive behavior in an animal model of AIDS therapy-in-
duced painful neuropathy (11, 13, 31). Nucleoside reverse tran-
scriptase inhibitors, commonly used for AIDS treatment, pro-
duce side effects including painful neuropathies. The ability of
peptides to reverse tactile hypersensitivity was evaluated in rats

OCTOBER 12, 2012 • VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 35073

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

FIGURE 10. CaV1.2 Ct-dis peptide affects TNI-induced mechanical hyper-
sensitivity. PWTs (in millinewtons; mN) were measured in TNI rodents before
and after intraperitoneal administration of the indicated peptides. PWT in TNI
rodents was significantly reduced when compared with pre-TNI thresholds
(n ⫽ 6; black bar). Following intraperitoneal (i.p.) administration of TAT Ct-dis
(4 or 20 mg/kg body weight), PWT returned to pre-TNI levels for at least 90
min (ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test; *, p ⬍ 0.05). Error bars, S.E.

DISCUSSION

Our findings demonstrate that synthetic peptides derived
from the voltage-gated Ca2⫹ channel can be employed as
decoys to interrupt binding of regulatory proteins. These chan-
nel regions are known to coordinate interactions between the
channel and many other regulatory proteins. The I-II cytoplas-
mic loop contains interaction sites for CaV␤ proteins (36) as
well as G␤␥subunits (37), whereas the C terminus also contains
interaction sites for CaV␤and G␤␥subunits (38) as well as the
calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase (39, 40).
Importantly, the 15-aa peptides we report here do not overlap
with the binding sites for calmodulin or the G␤␥subunits (41,
42). However, there is partial overlap of the L1 peptide with the
C-terminal portion of the ␣ interaction domain, which is
responsible for binding CaV␤. Here, molecular mapping
revealed two distinct regions with direct binding to CRMP2.
Two short (15-amino acid) peptides from these regions that
exhibited the highest degree of CRMP2-binding were selected.
Although both peptides bound CRMP2 with fair affinity, Ct-dis
exhibited tighter binding compared with L1. Both Ct-dis and L1
sufficiently interrupted the interaction between CRMP2 and
CaV2.2. Uncoupling of the CaV2.2-CRMP2 complex by these
peptides resulted in an overall decrease in calcium influx.

Interestingly, TAT Ct-dis reduced release of the neuropep-
tide CGRP from isolated sensory neurons, whereas TAT L1 did
not. The ⬃5-fold lower binding affinity of TAT L1 versus TAT
Ct-dis to CRMP2 coupled with the ostensibly higher reduction
on calcium influx may explain the lack of effect of TAT L1 on
release. Thus, a smaller reduction in Ca2⫹ influx effected by
TAT L1 may not translate into a meaningful change in release
despite the non-linear relationship between calcium influx and
neurotransmitter release (43). This is also consistent with a
recent study by Bucci et al. (14), who demonstrated an ⬃37%
inhibition in excitatory postsynaptic potential amplitude
recorded in synaptically coupled superior cervical ganglion
neurons using a relatively high (1 mM) concentration of a

slightly overlapping (6 of 15 aa) ␣interaction domain peptide
from L1 of CaV2.2. Because it was effective at reducing CGRP
release, TAT Ct-dis was chosen for assessment of analgesic
properties in an animal model of AIDS therapy-induced
peripheral neuropathy. Systemic administration of TAT Ct-dis
led to a transient reversal of pain behavior. Unfortunately, the
mechanisms for clearance, elimination, and metabolism of
TAT-conjugated peptides are not well understood (44).
Although these processes may depend largely on the protein
cargo (45), total clearance of the TAT motif has been observed
2 h after a bolus tail vein injection (46). Such rapidity of metab-
olism and clearance may account for the transience of the
behavioral effect of TAT Ct-dis. Additionally, intracellular deg-
radation may play an important role. Bioactivity of a TAT-con-
jugated peptide of similar length (17 aa) was demonstrated to
peak around 60 min and rapidly declined shortly thereafter
(47). This transience is also consistent with what we observed
here and previously (11–13) in animal models of peripheral
neuropathy with similar sized peptides.

Injection of a FITC-labeled TAT Ct-dis led to uptake within
the DRG of both injured and naı¨ve animals. Although labeling
appeared similar at both 30 and 60 min postinjection, uptake
into the DRG was increased in injured animals compared with
naive DRGs. It is possible that the antiretroviral drug, ddC, may
lead to greater permeability of the vascular bed of the DRG due
to changes in endothelial cell fenestrations (48), allowing
increased penetration of the TAT-conjugated peptide. Alterna-
tively, increased transduction of TAT peptides has been dem-
onstrated following application of a low voltage pulse (47).
Because ddC-induced peripheral neuropathy leads to hyperex-
citability within the DRG (49), increased activity may allow for
increased uptake of TAT Ct-dis.

The efficacy of targeting VGCC regulation in alleviating pain
behavior validates the importance of calcium channels in pain
signaling. Highly expressed on nociceptive fibers and within the
dorsal horn of the spinal cord, CaV2.2 plays a fundamental role
in relaying pain signals from the periphery. Alternative splice
variants found on small diameter nociceptive neurons are asso-
ciated with increased thermal and mechanical hyperalgesia (50,
51). CaV2.2 is believed to be responsible for increased neu-
rotransmitter release commonly associated with chronic and
neuropathic pain conditions (1, 2, 52, 53). Consistent with the
role of CaV2.2 in pain signaling, genetic deletion, as well as
pharmacologic block of CaV2.2, impairs nociceptive processing
(3, 54). Additionally, central blockade of CaV2.2 is effective in
treating some cases of chronic pain that have been intractable
to other interventions (8).

Although the N-type channel appears to predominate in
neuropathic pain conditions, the L-type channel also appears to
play a role in acute and inflammatory pain signaling (55).
Because CRMP2 interacts with CaV1.2 as well as CaV2.2, TAT
Ct-dis is probably interrupting binding between CRMP2 and
both N- and L-type channels. The ability to simultaneously tar-
get both interactions may aid in its efficacy. Pharmacologic
block of L-type channels reduces acute response to noxious
peripheral stimuli (56). Administration of the L-type blocker,
nifedipine, into the dorsal horn of the spinal cord prevented
secondary thermal and mechanical hyperalgesia following

35074 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42 • OCTOBER 12, 2012

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

FIGURE 11. Distribution of FITC-conjugated TAT Ct-dis peptides in DRGs from naive and ddC-treated rats following intraperitoneal injection. Shown
are sections of lumbar DRGs from naive (i-vi) or ddC-treated (vii-xii) rodents, the latter having developed mechanical hypersensitivity, 30 and 60 min following
injection with FITC-labeled TAT Ct-dis (20 mg/kg intraperitoneally). Nuclei of all cells were stained with Hoechst (blue). Scale bar represents 20 ␮m.

injection of capsaicin into the hind paw (57). The L-type chan-
nel also appears to play a role in inflammatory-mediated pain
signaling. Spinal block of L-type channels attenuates the
enhanced response of primary afferents to noxious and innoc-
uous stimuli during inflammation-induced central sensitiza-
tion (58). Consequently, intrathecal administration of nifedip-
ine reduces late-phase nociceptive behavior following formalin
administration (3). Interestingly, a recent report that attributes
the maintenance of chronic neuropathic pain (spinal nerve liga-
tion model) to CaV1.2 (59). Favereaux et al. (60) also reported
bidirectional regulation of CaV1.2 by a single microRNA, thus
implicating CaV1.2 as a novel possible therapeutic target in
neuropathic chronic pain. The complementary roles of these
two calcium channels in both peripheral and spinal processing
of pain signaling indicate opportunities for therapeutic inter-
vention through control of their regulation. Although the

impact of CRMP2 on L-type channels is unknown, the potential
ability of CRMP2 to regulate both channels positions it as a
prime target for modulation of pain signaling. Subsequently, by
binding and sequestering CRMP2, TAT Ct-dis may simultane-
ously affect N-type and L-type channel function.

Previously, we determined that a peptide derived from
CRMP2 could reverse pain behavior associated with chronic
inflammatory and neuropathic pain conditions via interruption
of the CRMP2-CaV2.2 complex (11–13). Here, we demonstrate
that the reciprocal approach of targeting this interaction also
has analgesic potential. A channel peptide responsible for
CRMP2 binding also reversed pain behavior associated with
peripheral neuropathy. There is an advantage to the ability to
target the same interaction through multiple strategies. Each
approach may present different levels of efficacy and potency,
which become important in the search for larger therapeutic

OCTOBER 12, 2012 • VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 35075

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

windows. Also, separate approaches may allow for individual
tailoring of treatment strategies to avoid adverse effects seen as
the result of one approach but not the other. Targeting protein
interactions that regulate voltage-gated calcium channels as an
alternative to direct channel block has multiple advantages.
Similar levels of efficacy can be achieved by targeting channel
regulation compared with channel function. However, many of
the adverse side effects associated with direct channel block
may potentially be averted by targeting channel regulation.
Here, we demonstrate that protein-protein interactions pro-
vide the additional benefit of targeting one interaction from at
least two separate avenues.

Acknowledgments—We thank Dr. Ana Lazic (NanoTemper Technol-
ogies Inc.) for use of the Monolith NT.115 instrument for analysis of
peptide-CRMP2 interactions and Dr. May Khanna (Indiana Univer-
sity School of Medicine (IUSM)) for discussions on the crystal struc-
tures of the CaV I-II linkers. An antibody to CGRP was generously
provided by Dr. Michael R. Vasko (IUSM) and originally produced by
Michael J. Iadarola (National Institutes of Health). The peptide blot
was synthesized at the Stark Neurosciences Research Institute core
facility.

REFERENCES
1. Zamponi, G. W., Lewis, R. J., Todorovic, S. M., Arneric, S. P., and Snutch,
T. P. (2009) Role of voltage-gated calcium channels in ascending pain
pathways. Brain Res. Rev. 60, 84–89

2. Snutch, T. P. (2005) Targeting chronic and neuropathic pain. The N-type

calcium channel comes of age. NeuroRx. 2, 662–670

3. Malmberg, A. B., and Yaksh, T. L. (1994) Voltage-sensitive calcium chan-
nels in spinal nociceptive processing. Blockade of N- and P-type channels
inhibits formalin-induced nociception. J. Neurosci. 14, 4882–4890

4. Bowersox, S. S., Gadbois, T., Singh, T., Pettus, M., Wang, Y. X., and Luther,
R. R. (1996) Selective N-type neuronal voltage-sensitive calcium channel
blocker, SNX-111, produces spinal antinociception in rat models of acute,
persistent, and neuropathic pain. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 279, 1243–1249
5. White, D. M., and Cousins, M. J. (1998) Effect of subcutaneous adminis-
tration of calcium channel blockers on nerve injury-induced hyperalgesia.
Brain Res. 801, 50–58

6. Souza, A. H., Ferreira, J., Cordeiro Mdo, N., Vieira, L. B., De Castro, C. J.,
Trevisan, G., Reis, H., Souza, I. A., Richardson, M., Prado, M. A., Prado,
V. F., and Gomez, M. V. (2008) Analgesic effect in rodents of native and
recombinant Ph␣1␤ toxin, a high voltage-activated calcium channel
blocker isolated from armed spider venom. Pain 140, 115–126

7. McGivern, J. G. (2007) Ziconotide. A review of its pharmacology and use

in the treatment of pain. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 3, 69–85

8. Schmidtko, A., Lo¨tsch, J., Freynhagen, R., and Geisslinger, G. (2010)
Ziconotide for treatment of severe chronic pain. Lancet 375, 1569–1577
9. Bowersox, S. S., Singh, T., Nadasdi, L., Zukowska-Grojec, Z., Valentino, K.,
and Hoffman, B. B. (1992) Cardiovascular effects of ␻-conopeptides in
conscious rats. Mechanisms of action. J Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. 20,
756–764

10. Brittain, J. M., Piekarz, A. D., Wang, Y., Kondo, T., Cummins, T. R., and
Khanna, R. (2009) An atypical role for collapsin response mediator protein
2 (CRMP-2) in neurotransmitter release via interaction with presynaptic
voltage-gated calcium channels. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 31375–31390

11. Brittain, J. M., Duarte, D. B., Wilson, S. M., Zhu, W., Ballard, C., Johnson,
P. L., Liu, N., Xiong, W., Ripsch, M. S., Wang, Y., Fehrenbacher, J. C., Fitz,
S. D., Khanna, M., Park, C. K., Schmutzler, B. S., Cheon, B. M., Due, M. R.,
Brustovetsky, T., Ashpole, N. M., Hudmon, A., Meroueh, S. O., Hingtgen,
C. M., Brustovetsky, N., Ji, R. R., Hurley, J. H., Jin, X., Shekhar, A., Xu,
X. M., Oxford, G. S., Vasko, M. R., White, F. A., and Khanna, R. (2011)
inflammatory and neuropathic pain by uncoupling
Suppression of

CRMP-2 from the presynaptic Ca2⫹ channel complex. Nat. Med. 17,
822–829

12. Wilson, S. M., Brittain, J. M., Piekarz, A. D., Ballard, C. J., Ripsch, M. S.,
Cummins, T. R., Hurley, J. H., Khanna, M., Hammes, N. M., Samuels, B. C.,
White, F. A., and Khanna, R. (2011) Further insights into the antinocice-
ptive potential of a peptide disrupting the N-type calcium channel-
CRMP-2 signaling complex. Channels 5, 449–456

13. Ripsch, M. S., Ballard, C. J., Khanna, M., Hurley, J. H., White, F. A., and
Khanna, R. (2012) A Peptide Uncoupling CRMP-2 from the Presynaptic
Ca2⫹ Channel Complex Demonstrates Efficacy in Animal Models of Mi-
graine and AIDS Therapy-induced Neuropathy. Transl. Neurosci. 3, 1–8
14. Bucci, G., Mochida, S., and Stephens, G. J. (2011) Inhibition of synaptic
transmission and G protein modulation by synthetic CaV2.2 Ca²⫹ chan-
nel peptides. J. Physiol. 589, 3085–3101

15. Mochida, S., Sheng, Z. H., Baker, C., Kobayashi, H., and Catterall, W. A.
(1996) Inhibition of neurotransmission by peptides containing the synap-
tic protein interaction site of N-type Ca2⫹ channels. Neuron 17, 781–788
16. Frank, R. (2002) The SPOT synthesis technique. Synthetic peptide arrays
on membrane supports. Principles and applications. J. Immunol. Methods
267, 13–26

17. Chan, A. W., Khanna, R., Li, Q., and Stanley, E. F. (2007) Munc18. A
presynaptic transmitter release site N type (CaV2.2) calcium channel in-
teracting protein. Channels 1, 11–20

18. Wienken, C. J., Baaske, P., Rothbauer, U., Braun, D., and Duhr, S. (2010)
Protein-binding assays in biological liquids using microscale thermopho-
resis. Nat. Commun. 1, 100

19. van den Bogaart, G., Meyenberg, K., Diederichsen, U., and Jahn, R. (2012)
Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate increases Ca2⫹ affinity of synap-
totagmin-1 by 40-fold. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 16447–16453

20. Wang, Y., and Khanna, R. (2011) Voltage-gated calcium channels are not
affected by the novel anti-epileptic drug lacosamide. Transl. Neurosci. 2,
13–22

21. Wang, Y., Brittain, J. M., Jarecki, B. W., Park, K. D., Wilson, S. M., Wang,
B., Hale, R., Meroueh, S. O., Cummins, T. R., and Khanna, R. (2010) In
silico docking and electrophysiological characterization of lacosamide
binding sites on collapsin response mediator protein-2 identifies a pocket
important in modulating sodium channel slow inactivation. J. Biol. Chem.
285, 25296–25307

22. Brittain, J. M., Wang, Y., Wilson, S. M., and Khanna, R. (2012) Regulation
of CREB signaling through L-type Ca2⫹ channels by Nipsnap-2. Channels
6, 94–102

23. Brittain, J. M., Chen, L., Wilson, S. M., Brustovetsky, T., Gao, X., Ashpole,
N. M., Molosh, A. I., You, H., Hudmon, A., Shekhar, A., White, F. A.,
Zamponi, G. W., Brustovetsky, N., Chen, J., and Khanna, R. (2011) Neu-
roprotection against traumatic brain injury by a peptide derived from the
collapsin response mediator protein 2 (CRMP2). J. Biol. Chem. 286,
37778–37792

24. Chi, X. X., Schmutzler, B. S., Brittain, J. M., Wang, Y., Hingtgen, C. M.,
Nicol, G. D., and Khanna, R. (2009) Regulation of N-type voltage-gated
calcium channels (Cav2.2) and transmitter release by collapsin response
mediator protein-2 (CRMP-2) in sensory neurons. J. Cell Sci. 122,
4351–4362

25. Khanna, R., Chang, M. C., Joiner, W. J., Kaczmarek, L. K., and Schlichter,
L. C. (1999) hSK4/hIK1, a calmodulin-binding KCa channel in human T
lymphocytes. Roles in proliferation and volume regulation. J. Biol. Chem.
274, 14838–14849

26. Jacks, T., Shih, T. S., Schmitt, E. M., Bronson, R. T., Bernards, A., and
Weinberg, R. A. (1994) Tumor predisposition in mice heterozygous for a
targeted mutation in Nf1. Nat. Genet. 7, 353–361

27. Hingtgen, C. M., Roy, S. L., and Clapp, D. W. (2006) Stimulus-evoked
release of neuropeptides is enhanced in sensory neurons from mice with a
heterozygous mutation of the Nf1 gene. Neuroscience 137, 637–645

28. Wang, Y., Brittain, J. M., Wilson, S. M., Hingtgen, C. M., and Khanna, R.
(2010) Altered Calcium Currents and Axonal Growth in Nf1 Haploinsuf-
ficient Mice. Transl. Neurosci. 1, 106–114

29. Chen, J. J., Barber, L. A., Dymshitz, J., and Vasko, M. R. (1996) Peptidase
inhibitors improve recovery of substance P and calcitonin gene-related
peptide release from rat spinal cord slices. Peptides 17, 31–37

35076 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY

VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42 • OCTOBER 12, 2012

30. Bhangoo, S. K., Ren, D., Miller, R. J., Chan, D. M., Ripsch, M. S., Weiss, C.,
McGinnis, C., and White, F. A. (2007) CXCR4 chemokine receptor sig-
naling mediates pain hypersensitivity in association with antiretroviral
toxic neuropathy. Brain Behav. Immun. 21, 581–591

31. Joseph, E. K., Chen, X., Khasar, S. G., and Levine, J. D. (2004) Novel mech-
anism of enhanced nociception in a model of AIDS therapy-induced pain-
ful peripheral neuropathy in the rat. Pain 107, 147–158

32. Wang, Y., Wilson, S. M., Brittain, J. M., Ripsch, M. S., Salome´, C., Park,
K. D., White, F. A., Khanna, R., and Kohn, H. (2011) Merging structural
motifs of functionalized amino acids and ␣-aminoamides results in novel
anticonvulsant compounds with significant effects on slow and fast inac-
tivation of voltage-gated sodium channels and in the treatment of neuro-
pathic pain. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2, 317–322

33. Zillner, K., Jerabek-Willemsen, M., Duhr, S., Braun, D., La¨ngst, G., and
Baaske, P. (2012) Microscale thermophoresis as a sensitive method to
quantify protein. Nucleic acid interactions in solution. Methods Mol. Biol.
815, 241–252

34. Sheng, Z. H., Rettig, J., Takahashi, M., and Catterall, W. A. (1994) Identi-
fication of a syntaxin-binding site on N-type calcium channels. Neuron 13,
1303–1313

35. Patrakitkomjorn, S., Kobayashi, D., Morikawa, T., Wilson, M. M.,
Tsubota, N., Irie, A., Ozawa, T., Aoki, M., Arimura, N., Kaibuchi, K., Saya,
H., and Araki, N. (2008) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) tumor suppres-
sor, neurofibromin, regulates the neuronal differentiation of PC12 cells via
its associating protein, CRMP-2. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 9399–9413

36. Pragnell, M., De Waard, M., Mori, Y., Tanabe, T., Snutch, T. P., and Camp-
bell, K. P. (1994) Calcium channel ␤-subunit binds to a conserved motif in
the I-II cytoplasmic linker of the ␣1-subunit. Nature 368, 67–70

37. De Waard, M., Liu, H., Walker, D., Scott, V. E., Gurnett, C. A., and Camp-
bell, K. P. (1997) Direct binding of G-protein ␤␥complex to voltage-de-
pendent calcium channels. Nature 385, 446–450

38. Li, B., Zhong, H., Scheuer, T., and Catterall, W. A. (2004) Functional role
of a C-terminal G␤␥-binding domain of Cav2.2 channels. Mol. Pharmacol.
66, 761–769

39. Maximov, A., Su¨dhof, T. C., and Bezprozvanny, I. (1999) Association of
neuronal calcium channels with modular adaptor proteins. J. Biol. Chem.
274, 24453–24456

40. Spafford, J. D., Munno, D. W., Van Nierop, P., Feng, Z. P., Jarvis, S. E.,
Gallin, W. J., Smit, A. B., Zamponi, G. W., and Syed, N. I. (2003) Calcium
channel structural determinants of synaptic transmission between iden-
tified invertebrate neurons. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 4258–4267

41. Van Petegem, F., Clark, K. A., Chatelain, F. C., and Minor, D. L., Jr. (2004)
Structure of a complex between a voltage-gated calcium channel ␤-sub-
unit and an ␣-subunit domain. Nature 429, 671–675

42. Tedford, H. W., Kisilevsky, A. E., Vieira, L. B., Varela, D., Chen, L., and
Zamponi, G. W. (2010) Scanning mutagenesis of the I-II loop of the
Cav2.2 calcium channel identifies residues arginine 376 and valine 416 as
molecular determinants of voltage-dependent G protein inhibition. Mol.
Brain. 3, 6

43. Dodge, F. A., Jr., and Rahamimoff, R. (1967) On the relationship between
calcium concentration and the amplitude of the end-plate potential.
J. Physiol. 189, 90P–92P

44. Chen, L., and Harrison, S. D. (2007) Cell-penetrating peptides in drug
development. Enabling intracellular targets. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 35,
821–825

45. Chauhan, A., Tikoo, A., Kapur, A. K., and Singh, M. (2007) The taming of
the cell-penetrating domain of the HIV Tat. Myths and realities. J. Control
Release 117, 148–162

46. Polyakov, V., Sharma, V., Dahlheimer, J. L., Pica, C. M., Luker, G. D., and
Piwnica-Worms, D. (2000) Novel Tat peptide chelates for direct transduc-
tion of technetium 99m and rhenium into human cells for imaging and

Anti-nociceptive Ca2ⴙ Channel Peptides

radiotherapy. Bioconjug. Chem. 11, 762–771

47. Manceur, A. P., Driscoll, B. D., Sun, W., and Audet, J. (2009) Selective
enhancement of the uptake and bioactivity of a TAT-conjugated peptide
inhibitor of glycogen synthase kinase-3. Mol. Ther. 17, 500–507

48. Jimenez-Andrade, J. M., Herrera, M. B., Ghilardi, J. R., Vardanyan, M.,
Melemedjian, O. K., and Mantyh, P. W. (2008) Vascularization of the
dorsal root ganglia and peripheral nerve of the mouse. Implications for
chemical-induced peripheral sensory neuropathies. Mol. Pain. 4, 10

49. Piekarz, A. D., Due, M. R., Khanna, M., Wang, B., Ripsch, M. S., Wang, R.,
Meroueh, S. O., Vasko, M. R., White, F. A., and Khanna, R. (2012) CRMP-2
peptide-mediated decrease of high and low voltage-activated calcium
channels, attenuation of nociceptor excitability, and anti-nociception in a
model of AIDS therapy-induced painful peripheral neuropathy. Mol. Pain.
8, 54

50. Bell, T. J., Thaler, C., Castiglioni, A. J., Helton, T. D., and Lipscombe, D.
(2004) Cell-specific alternative splicing increases calcium channel current
density in the pain pathway. Neuron 41, 127–138

51. Altier, C., Dale, C. S., Kisilevsky, A. E., Chapman, K., Castiglioni, A. J.,
Matthews, E. A., Evans, R. M., Dickenson, A. H., Lipscombe, D., Vergnolle,
N., and Zamponi, G. W. (2007) Differential role of N-type calcium channel
splice isoforms in pain. J. Neurosci. 27, 6363–6373

52. Winquist, R. J., Pan, J. Q., and Gribkoff, V. K. (2005) Use-dependent block-
ade of Cav2.2 voltage-gated calcium channels for neuropathic pain.
Biochem. Pharmacol. 70, 489–499

53. Cizkova, D., Marsala, J., Lukacova, N., Marsala, M., Jergova, S., Orenda-
cova, J., and Yaksh, T. L. (2002) Localization of N-type Ca2⫹ channels in
the rat spinal cord following chronic constrictive nerve injury. Exp. Brain
Res. 147, 456–463

54. Saegusa, H., Kurihara, T., Zong, S., Kazuno, A., Matsuda, Y., Nonaka, T.,
Han, W., Toriyama, H., and Tanabe, T. (2001) Suppression of inflamma-
tory and neuropathic pain symptoms in mice lacking the N-type Ca2⫹
channel. EMBO J. 20, 2349–2356

55. Vanegas, H., and Schaible, H. (2000) Effects of antagonists to high thresh-
old calcium channels upon spinal mechanisms of pain, hyperalgesia, and
allodynia. Pain 85, 9–18

56. Neugebauer, V., Vanegas, H., Nebe, J., Ru¨menapp, P., and Schaible, H. G.
(1996) Effects of N- and L-type calcium channel antagonists on the re-
sponses of nociceptive spinal cord neurons to mechanical stimulation of
the normal and the inflamed knee joint. J. Neurophysiol. 76, 3740–3749
57. Sluka, K. A. (1997) Blockade of calcium channels can prevent the onset of
secondary hyperalgesia and allodynia induced by intradermal injection of
capsaicin in rats. Pain 71, 157–164

58. Neugebauer, V., Ru¨menapp, P., and Schaible, H. G. (1996) Calcitonin
gene-related peptide is involved in the spinal processing of mechanosen-
sory input from the rat’s knee joint and in the generation and maintenance
of hyperexcitability of dorsal horn neurons during development of acute
inflammation. Neuroscience 71, 1095–1109

59. Fossat, P., Dobremez, E., Bouali-Benazzouz, R., Favereaux, A., Bertrand,
S. S., Kilk, K., Le´ger, C., Cazalets, J. R., Langel, U., Landry, M., and Nagy, F.
(2010) Knockdown of L calcium channel subtypes. Differential effects in
neuropathic pain. J. Neurosci. 30, 1073–1085

60. Favereaux, A., Thoumine, O., Bouali-Benazzouz, R., Roques, V., Papon,
M. A., Salam, S. A., Drutel, G., Le´ger, C., Calas, A., Nagy, F., and Landry, M.
(2011) Bidirectional integrative regulation of Cav1.2 calcium channel by
microRNA miR-103. Role in pain. EMBO J. 30, 3830–3841

61. Pavlidis, P., and Noble, W. S. (2003) Matrix2png. A utility for visualizing

matrix data. Bioinformatics 19, 295–296

62. Almagor, L., Chomsky-Hecht, O., Ben-Mocha, A., Hendin-Barak, D., Das-
cal, N., and Hirsch, J. A. (2012) The role of a voltage-dependent Ca2⫹
channel intracellular linker. A structure-function analysis. J. Neurosci. 32,
7602–7613

OCTOBER 12, 2012 • VOLUME 287 • NUMBER 42

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 35077

