Cancer Cell

Article

Activated ALK Collaborates with MYCN
in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

Shizhen Zhu,1,6 Jeong-Soo Lee,1,6,8 Feng Guo,1 Jimann Shin,1,9 Antonio R. Perez-Atayde,2 Jeffery L. Kutok,3,10
Scott J. Rodig,3 Donna S. Neuberg,4 Daniel Helman,1 Hui Feng,1 Rodney A. Stewart,1,7 Wenchao Wang,1
Rani E. George,1,5 John P. Kanki,1 and A. Thomas Look1,5,*
1Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
2Department of Pathology, Children’s Hospital Boston
3Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital
4Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
5Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children’s Hospital Boston
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
6These authors contributed equally to this work
7Present address: Huntsman Cancer Institute, Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
8Present address: Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Aging Research Center, Daejeon 305-806, Korea
9Present address: Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA
10Present address: Molecular Pathology, Inﬁnity Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
*Correspondence: thomas_look@dfci.harvard.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.02.010

SUMMARY

Ampliﬁcation of the MYCN oncogene in childhood neuroblastoma is often accompanied by mutational
activation of ALK (anaplastic lymphoma kinase), suggesting their pathogenic cooperation. We generated a
transgenic zebraﬁsh model of neuroblastoma in which MYCN-induced tumors arise from a subpopulation
of neuroblasts that migrate into the adrenal medulla analog following organogenesis. Coexpression of
activated ALK with MYCN in this model triples the disease penetrance and markedly accelerates tumor onset.
MYCN overexpression induces adrenal sympathetic neuroblast hyperplasia, blocks chromafﬁn cell differen-
tiation, and ultimately triggers a developmentally-timed apoptotic response in the hyperplastic sympathoa-
drenal cells. Coexpression of activated ALK with MYCN provides prosurvival signals that block this apoptotic
response and allow continued expansion and oncogenic transformation of hyperplastic neuroblasts, thus
promoting progression to neuroblastoma.

INTRODUCTION

Neuroblastoma is a childhood solid tumor that arises in the
peripheral sympathetic nervous system (PSNS), typically in the
adrenal medulla or paraspinal ganglia, during embryogenesis
(Brodeur, 2003; Maris, 2010). When disseminated at diagnosis
in older children, the disease carries a very poor prognosis
despite the use of
intensive therapies. Ampliﬁcation of the
MYCN oncogene is found in tumor cells from 20% of neuro-
blastoma patients and is the most reliable marker of a poor prog-

nosis (Brodeur, 2003; Maris et al., 2007). Overexpression of
MYCN in the PSNS of transgenic mice, using the rat tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH) promoter,
results in tumors that closely
resemble human neuroblastoma arising in the sympathetic
ganglia (Chesler and Weiss, 2011; Weiss et al., 1997), indicating
that aberrant expression of MYCN promotes the development of
this tumor in vivo.

The anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene encodes a
receptor tyrosine kinase that is normally expressed at high levels
in the nervous system and was originally identiﬁed as a fusion

Signiﬁcance

Neuroblastoma is an important developmental tumor arising in the peripheral sympathetic nervous system, which accounts
for 10% of cancer-related deaths in childhood. The ALK receptor tyrosine kinase is mutationally activated in a subset of
primary neuroblastomas, but the mechanisms through which ALK signaling cooperates with MYCN overexpression in
neuroblastoma pathogenesis remain unclear. By generating a transgenic zebraﬁsh model that overexpresses human
MYCN and activated ALK in the ﬁsh analog of the adrenal medulla, we now show that upregulated MYCN mediates sympa-
thetic neuroblast hyperplasia, which is mitigated by a developmentally-timed apoptotic response. Activated ALK blocks
neuroblast apoptosis at this critical time in development, establishing a mechanism for the synergistic relationship between
these two oncoproteins in the pathogenesis of neuroblastoma.

362 Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

MYCN and ALK in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

protein with nucleophosmin in cases of anaplastic large cell
lymphoma (Morris et al., 1994). Activation of ALK can regulate
cellular proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis via a number
of different signaling pathways,
including PI3K/AKT, RAS/
MAPK, and STAT3, but its precise physiologic role remains
elusive (Chiarle et al., 2008; Palmer et al., 2009). Recently, we
and others reported that ampliﬁcation of the ALK gene occurs
only in MYCN-ampliﬁed primary neuroblastomas and that within
this group 15% of cases have ALK ampliﬁcation (George et al.,
2008; Mosse´ et al., 2008). Activating ALK mutations were also
identiﬁed in both familial and sporadic neuroblastoma cases,
including but not limited to a subset with MYCN ampliﬁcation,
further implicating this kinase in neuroblastoma pathogenesis
(Chen et al., 2008; George et al., 2008; Janoueix-Lerosey et al.,
2008; Mosse´ et al., 2008). Mechanisms through which signaling
by aberrantly activated ALK cooperates with MYCN overexpres-
sion to enhance neuroblastoma development remain undeﬁned,
posing a major obstacle to the development of effective targeted
treatments for this devastating disease.

We have generated a transgenic zebraﬁsh model

in which
overexpression of human MYCN in the PSNS induces tumors
in the ﬁsh analog of the adrenal medulla that closely resemble
human neuroblastoma. Using this model system, we undertook
studies to explore mechanistically the interaction between muta-
tionally activated ALK and MYCN overexpression during neuro-
blastoma pathogenesis in the PSNS.

RESULTS

Transgenic EGFP Expression in the PSNS
We ﬁrst isolated a 5.2 kb promoter fragment upstream of the
the zebraﬁsh dopamine-b-hydroxylase
coding sequence of
gene (dbh), which encodes the rate-limiting enzyme for
noradrenalin synthesis. This fragment was used to drive expres-
sion of enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein (EGFP) in a stable ze-
braﬁsh transgenic line, Tg(dbh:EGFP), designated DbH in this
article. In juvenile and adult transgenic zebraﬁsh, EGFP was
speciﬁcally expressed by sympathetic neurons of the superior
cervical ganglia (Figures 1A–1C), the ﬁrst sympathetic ganglion
to develop in early embryogenesis, and by each sequential
segmental ganglion of the sympathetic chain (Figures 1A, 1B,
and 1D). EGFP was also expressed by sympathoadrenal cells
of the interrenal gland (Figures 1A, 1B, and 1E), the zebraﬁsh
equivalent of the human adrenal gland (Hsu et al., 2003). In the
interrenal gland, the EGFP-expressing cells can be visualized
within a discrete region in the ventral aspect of the head kidney,
intermixed with adrenal cortical cells that are TH- and EGFP-
negative (Figure 1E). The speciﬁcity of EGFP expression for sym-
pathoadrenal cells when driven by the dbh promoter fragment is
demonstrated by coexpression of endogenous TH (Figures 1C–
1E), another enzyme expressed by sympathetic neurons and
chromafﬁn cells (An et al., 2002; O’Brien et al., 2004).

Zebraﬁsh Expressing MYCN Develop Neuroblastoma
Using a coinjection strategy (Langenau et al., 2008), we gener-
ated a stable transgenic zebraﬁsh line, Tg(dbh:EGFP-MYCN),
designated MYCN in this article, that overexpresses the human
MYCN gene fused to EGFP under control of the dbh promoter.
In MYCN transgenic ﬁsh the expansion of cells expressing

EGFP as tumors developed was readily detectable in living ﬁsh
by immunoﬂuorescence microscopy (Figure 2A). EGFP+ tumor
masses were found in the anterior abdomen, corresponding to
the interrenal gland, and were composed of small, undifferenti-
ated, round-tumor cells with hyperchromatic nuclei, often form-
ing nests (Figure 2B). Tumor cells were strongly immunoreactive
for TH and the pan-neuronal markers Hu and Synaptophysin
(Figure 2C), indicating their PSNS-related neuronal origin (Gould
et al., 1986; Marusich et al., 1994; Teitelman et al., 1979). Normal
interrenal chromafﬁn cells also expressed TH, but not Hu or Syn-
aptophysin (Figure 2C), indicating that the neuroblastomas arose
from sympathetic neuroblast precursors and not chromafﬁn
cells, as is the case in human neuroblastoma (Figure 2E).

Neuroblastoma is frequently considered in the differential
diagnosis of malignant small round-cell tumors of childhood,
and electron microscopy is a helpful tool for distinguishing
among these malignancies. A diagnosis of neuroblastoma can
be established ultrastructurally by demonstrating the presence
of neurosecretory granules within the cytoplasm or cytoplasmic
processes of tumor cells (Figure 2E) (Mierau et al., 1998). These
neurosecretory granules were evident in the tumors we identiﬁed
in the zebraﬁsh (Figure 2D), strengthening their association with
childhood neuroblastoma. The histopathological, immunohisto-
chemical and ultrastructural
features of neuroblastoma are
shown in Figure 2E, to illustrate their similarities with those of
neuroblastomas induced by MYCN overexpression in zebraﬁsh
(Figures 2B–2D) (Hoshi et al., 2008; Mierau et al., 1998; Molenaar
et al., 1990; Taxy, 1980; Torno´ czky et al., 2007). These ﬁndings
support our use of this model to investigate activated ALK as
a contributor to MYCN-driven tumorigenesis.

ALK Accelerates MYCN-Induced Neuroblastoma
We and others have implicated activating mutations of ALK in
the pathogenesis of neuroblastoma, including cases that also
show MYCN ampliﬁcation (De Brouwer et al., 2010; George
et al., 2008; Mosse´ et al., 2008). To address whether ALK and
MYCN genetically interact during neuroblastoma induction, we
generated a second stable transgenic zebraﬁsh line that
expresses the human ALK gene harboring the F1174L mutation,
one of the most prevalent somatic activating mutations found
in neuroblastoma patients and human cell
lines (Chen et al.,
2008; George et al., 2008). The dbh:EGFP and dbh:ALKF1174L
constructs were coinjected into zebraﬁsh embryos at the one-
cell stage to generate a transgenic line expressing both the
EGFP and activated ALK transgenes, Tg(dbh:EGFP;dbh:
ALKF1174L), designated ALK in this article. EGFP was speciﬁ-
cally expressed by sympathoadrenal cells in the interrenal
gland of the ALK transgenic ﬁsh at 5 weeks postfertilization
(wpf), and ALK was coexpressed with EGFP by the same cells
(Figure S1A available online). This transgenic line was bred to
the MYCN heterozygous transgenic line, and the offspring
were monitored for evidence of tumors. All of the expected
genotypes were represented in the offspring of this cross: (1)
MYCN; (2) ALK; (3) MYCN;ALK; and (4) wild-type (WT) AB ﬁsh
lacking either transgene. A tumor watch was performed on a total
of 1,156 sorted offspring. The ﬁsh were isolated in individual
tanks as soon as tumors appeared; and were sacriﬁced for
molecular and pathologic analyses when there was evidence
of tumor progression.

Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 363

MYCN and ALK in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

Cancer Cell

Figure 1. Transgenic Gene Expression in the Sympathetic Neurons and the Interrenal Gland
(A) Left: Schematic of a transverse section illustrating zebraﬁsh anatomical structures, dorsal upward. Right: Schematic of a sagittal section illustrating zebraﬁsh
anatomical structures, anterior to left.
(B) EGFP expression (green) in the zebraﬁsh chain of sympathetic ganglia (arrowheads), the IRG (arrow), and medulla oblongata (asterisk) at 3 wpf. Lateral view of
confocal-brightﬁeld image, anterior to left. The magniﬁed view of the boxed region is shown on the right. Scale bar represents 500 mm.
(C) EGFP is coexpressed with TH in the SCG at 6 wpf (sagittal section); TH coexpression is indicated in red. Scale bar represents 20 mm.
(D) EGFP is coexpressed with TH in the chain of sympathetic ganglia at 6 wpf (transverse section). TH coexpression is indicated in red. Scale bar
represents 20 mm.
(E) EGFP is coexpressed with TH in the IRG at 8 months postfertilization (mpf) (sagittal section). TH coexpression is indicated in red. Scale bar represents 100 mm.
Ao, aorta; Cb, cerebellum; Chfn, chromafﬁn cells; E, esophagus; G, gill; H, heart; HK, head kidney; I, intestine; IRG, interregnal gland; KB, kidney body; L, liver; Me,
medulla; Nc, notochord; SB, swim bladder; SC, spinal cord; SCG, superior cervical ganglion; Sym.C, sympathetic chain. See also Figure S1.

The ﬁrst 23 tumors arose between 5–7 weeks of age, and all
had the compound transgenic genotype, MYCN;ALK (Figure 3A).
The expression of MYCN and ALK proteins and ALK RNA was
conﬁrmed in the tumors of these compound transgenic ﬁsh by
immunohistochemical and RT-PCR analyses,
respectively
(Figures S1B and S1C). Tumors continued to arise after 9 weeks
of age in both the MYCN-only and the MYCN;ALK compound
transgenic lines, but their rate of induction was much higher in
the latter group (Figure 3A). Tumor penetrance in the MYCN;ALK
compound transgenic ﬁsh was also much higher: 55.6% versus
17.3% for the MYCN transgenic ﬁsh (p < 0.0001; Figure 3A).
Although germline mutations of ALK cause hereditary neuroblas-
toma (Mosse´ et al., 2008), tumors did not develop in ﬁsh ex-
pressing this transgene alone over the 6-month monitoring

364 Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

period (Figure 3A). Tumors in the compound transgenic ﬁsh
arose in the interrenal gland, as did those in the MYCN ﬁsh,
and these tumors were comparable histologically, immunohisto-
chemically, and ultrastructurally (Figure S2) to human neuroblas-
toma (Figure 2E).

To control for possible founder effects in our transgenic lines,
and to examine whether overexpression of wild-type ALK
(ALKWT) as well as mutationally activated ALK could collaborate
with MYCN in neuroblastoma pathogenesis, we overexpressed
either activated human ALK or human ALKWT in MYCN ﬁsh.
For this experiment, we coinjected the following constructs
into the one-cell stage of MYCN transgenic and control embryos:
(1) dbh-ALKF1174L with dbh-mCherry; (2) dbh-ALKWT with dbh-
mCherry; or (3) dbh-mCherry alone. We have shown that this

Cancer Cell

MYCN and ALK in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

in MYCN-

2. Neuroblastomas Arise

Figure
Expressing Transgenic Zebraﬁsh
(A) Top: DbH ﬁsh. Bottom: MYCN ﬁsh with EGFP-
expressing tumor (arrow) at 32 weeks postfertilization
(wpf). Scale bar represents 1 mm.
(B) Top: H&E-stained sagittal sections of DbH ﬁsh. Boxes
indicate the SCG and the IRG, and are magniﬁed in the
right panels. Bottom: H&E-stained sagittal sections of
MYCN ﬁsh with neuroblastic tumors. Boxes indicate the
SCG and the IRG and are magniﬁed in the right panels.
Arrows indicate SCG neurons. The majority of tumors
arise in the IRG of MYCN ﬁsh, although as seen in this
example,
tumor cells in the SCG were occasionally
observed in individual ﬁsh that also had tumors in the
IRG. G, gill; L, liver; I, intestine; IRG, interregnal gland;
SCG, superior cervical ganglion; T, testis. Scale bars
represent 50 mm.
(C) Top: Sagittal sections through the interregnal gland of
DbH ﬁsh. Chromafﬁn cells of
the interregnal gland
express TH (arrows). Bottom: Sagittal sections through
the interregnal gland of a MYCN ﬁsh with EGFP-
expressing tumor. Cells throughout the tumor in the in-
terregnal gland express TH, Synaptophysin (Synap), and
Hu. Scale bar represents 100 mm.
(D) Electron microscopy (EM)
reveals neurosecretory
granules in the MYCN-expressing tumors (arrows). Scale
bar represents 500 nm.
(E) Pathological,
immunohistochemical, and ultrastruc-
tural analyses of a human neuroblastoma. Arrows point
to neurosecretory granules. Scale bars represent 500 mm
(left panel), 100 mm (middle panels), and 2 mm (right
panel), respectively. See also Figure S2.

coinjection strategy results in cointegration into DNA and coex-
pression of the two coinjected transgenes as mosaics in a subset
of cells in 50% of the injected embryos (Langenau et al., 2008).
Thus, the expression of mCherry served as a marker for the co-
expression of ALK in tissues of the mosaic primary injected
animals. When these animals were monitored for the tumor
onset, neuroblastomas were not observed in any of the siblings
that did not inherit the MYCN transgene and were injected with
either the ALKWT or ALKF1174L transgenes, emphasizing that
overexpression of MYCN is required for tumorigenesis in this
model. Eight tumors arose by 9 wpf in the MYCN ﬁsh coinjected
with dbh-ALKF1174L and dbh-mCherry (Figures 3B and S3A),
whereas none were observed by 9 wpf in the MYCN line coin-
jected with dbh-ALKWT and dbh-mCherry (p = 0.002; Figures
3B and S3B) or with dbh-mCherry alone (p = 0.007; Figures 3B
and S3C). In addition, four tumors in the MYCN line coinjected
with dbh-ALKWT and dbh-mCherry and ﬁve tumors in the
MYCN line injected with dbh-mCherry alone were identiﬁed after
11 wpf (Figure 3B), similar to the time of tumor onset in the unin-
jected MYCN line (Figure 3A). These ﬁndings show that activated
ALK cooperates with MYCN overexpression to accelerate the
onset of neuroblastoma, regardless of the integration site in indi-
vidual mosaic animals, and that overexpression of ALKWT at the
levels driven by the dbh promoter does not appear to collaborate
with MYCN to induce neuroblastoma in this model system.

MYCN-Induced Loss of Sympathoadrenal Cells
To investigate the cellular basis for MYCN-induced neuroblas-
toma and its modiﬁcation by constitutively activated ALK, we
examined the development of sympathoadrenal cells in (1)
DbH; (2) MYCN; (3) ALK; and (4) MYCN;ALK transgenic ﬁsh
during the embryonic and larval stages. During normal develop-
ment, PSNS cells arise from the neural crest and migrate
ventrally to locations adjacent
to the dorsal aorta (Huber,
2006). After forming the superior cervical ganglia, a subset of
sympathoadrenal cells migrate further to invade the meso-
nephros and differentiate to form chromafﬁn cells in the inter-
renal gland (An et al., 2002; Huber, 2006; Stewart et al., 2004).
We identiﬁed cells of the developing superior cervical ganglia
at 80 hr postfertilization (hpf) in living DbH transgenic ﬁsh and
in whole-mount in situ hybridization preparations with dbh- and
th- riboprobes (Figure 4A), indicating that EGFP expression in
the developing embryonic PSNS of this transgenic line recapitu-
lates the normal endogenous expression patterns of dbh and th
(Figure 4A). By 80 hpf, EGFP was apparent in the superior
cervical ganglia, as well as in non-PSNS dopaminergic neurons,
such as the medulla oblongata and cranial ganglia (Figure 4A). By
contrast, most MYCN transgenic embryos (80%) failed to
express a detectable level of EGFP fused to human MYCN in
the superior cervical ganglia at 80 hpf, even though the fusion
protein was clearly expressed in non-PSNS tissues (Figure 4B),

Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 365

MYCN and ALK in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

Cancer Cell

and in most animals, the absence of detectable sympathoadre-
nal cells persisted through 10 dpf (Figure S4C). The lack of EGFP
expression is consistent with the markedly reduced numbers of
sympathoadrenal cells in MYCN embryos indicated by the loss
of cells with endogenous th and dbh RNA expression by
whole-mount
in situ hybridization (Figures 4B versus 4A).
Because th and dbh are markers for differentiated sympathoa-
drenal cells, the absence of cells expressing EGFP-MYCN under
control of the dbh promoter could reﬂect either MYCN-induced
apoptosis or an arrest
in sympathoadrenal progenitor cell
differentiation.

To distinguish between these possibilities, we ﬁrst performed
TUNEL and anti-activated Caspase-3 staining on sections of 36,
51, and 72 hpf MYCN versus DbH transgenic ﬁsh. We found no
evidence of TUNEL- or anti-activated Caspase-3-positive cells
in the superior cervical ganglia or regions where sympathoadre-
nal cells would be expected to form (Figure S5; data not shown),
suggesting that the absence of detectable sympathoadrenal
cells is not due to cell death, but rather to a failure to initiate
the PSNS developmental program at this early time in develop-
ment. To test
this possibility, we performed whole-mount
in situ hybridization at 54 hpf and 80 hpf for expression of the
phox2b, zash1a, and AP-2 alpha (tfap2a) genes, which encode
transcription factors required for sympathoadrenal cell speciﬁ-
cation and maintenance (Figure 5) (Guillemot et al., 1993; Lucas
et al., 2006; Pattyn et al., 1999). Each of these sympathoadrenal
cell progenitor markers was readily detectable in the superior
cervical ganglia region of control embryos, but undetectable in
MYCN transgenic embryos at these stages, indicating that spec-
iﬁcation of the earliest identiﬁable sympathoadrenal cell progen-
itors was blocked by expression of the EGFP-MYCN fusion
gene. The suppression of sympathoadrenal cell development
by EGFP-MYCN appears to be tissue-speciﬁc, because expres-
sion of the EGFP-MYCN by non-PSNS dopaminergic neuronal
cells in these embryos was largely unaffected, including expres-
sion by cells of the locus coeruleus, medulla oblongata, and
cranial ganglia (Figures 4B versus 4A and S4C).

To investigate the possibility that neuroblastoma might arise
from residual EGFP-MYCN+ sympathoadrenal cells that can
be identiﬁed at 3 dpf in 20% of the transgenic embryos, we
analyzed these embryos in more detail at 5 dpf. At this time,
neurons of the superior cervical ganglia in control DbH trans-
genic ﬁsh express EGFP and are both TH+ and Hu+ (arrows in
Figure S4A), whereas chromafﬁn cells lose Hu expression as
they differentiate into chromafﬁn cells, reﬂecting a loss of their
neuronal phenotype (arrowheads in Figure S4A). Interestingly,
the small populations of EGFP+ cells observed in the superior
cervical ganglia of MYCN animals were heterogeneous in their
immunoreactivity patterns, including cells that were TH+/Hu 
(arrowheads in Figure S4B), TH /Hu  (double arrowheads in
Figure S4B), or TH+/Hu+ (data not shown). However, these
residual cells did not appear to contribute to neuroblastoma
development, as there was no difference in the time of disease
onset in the 20% of ﬁsh that had small numbers of residual cells
at 5 dpf compared to the majority of MYCN transgenic ﬁsh,
which lacked detectable cells in the superior cervical ganglia
(Table S1).

Expression of mutant ALK F1174L in ALK transgenic ﬁsh did
not affect the development of sympathoadrenal cells, as shown

Figure 3. Activated ALK Accelerates Disease Onset and Increases
the Penetrance of MYCN-Induced Neuroblastoma
(A) Cumulative frequency of neuroblastoma in stable transgenic zebraﬁsh by
Kaplan-Meier analysis. ALKmut represents stable transgenic ﬁsh expressing
the ALK (F1174L) transgene. WT, wild-type.
(B) Onset of neuroblastoma in MYCN transgenic ﬁsh or wild-type (WT) ﬁsh as
mosaics coinjected with the following DNA constructs: (1) dbh-ALKF1174L
and dbh-mCherry (mosaic ALKmut);
(2) dbh-ALKWT and dbh-mCherry
(mosaic ALKWT); or (3) dbh-mCherry alone. The difference between tumor
onset by 9 wpf in the MYCN ﬁsh coinjected with dbh-ALKF1174L and dbh-
mCherry (MYCN; mosaic ALKmut) and that in the MYCN line coinjected with
dbh-ALKWT and dbh-mCherry (MYCN; mosaic ALKWT) or dbh-mCherry alone
(MYCN) is signiﬁcant at p = 0.002 and p = 0.007, respectively, with two-tailed
Fisher exact test. See also Figure S3.

366 Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

MYCN and ALK in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

by EGFP ﬂuorescence and expression of the th and dbh RNAs
(Figures 4C and S4C). Furthermore, the expression of activated
ALK in the presence of MYCN in MYCN;ALK transgenic embryos
did not rescue the loss of sympathoadrenal cells observed in the
MYCN transgenic embryos (Figures 4D and S4C). Thus,
although activated ALK clearly cooperates with MYCN in tumor-
igenesis, this interplay does not depend on any ability of ALK to
reverse the pronounced MYCN-induced suppression of sympa-
thoadrenal cell development during early embryonic and larval
stages.

Hyperplasic Hu+ Cells in the Interrenal Gland
Analysis of the PSNS during the ﬁrst 10 days of life in MYCN
transgenic zebraﬁsh revealed the profound capacity of high level
of MYCN to suppress the development of sympathoadrenal
cells, but did not provide any insight into why these transgenic
ﬁsh developed neuroblastoma. Because the ﬁrst tumors arose
in MYCN;ALK transgenic ﬁsh between 5–7 wpf, we examined
the interrenal gland of MYCN transgenic zebraﬁsh beginning at
3 wpf to identify the cells that give rise to neuroblastoma. In
DbH control animals, we observed GFP+/Hu+/TH+ neuroblast
cells in both the mediolateral (Figure 6A) and lateral regions of
the developing interrenal gland (Figure S6). The number of Hu+

Figure 4. MYCN Expression Causes Sympathoa-
drenal Cell Loss
(A) DbH transgenic line. Oblique views of dbh RNA
expression (left panels); lateral views of EGFP expression
in merged confocal-brightﬁeld images (middle panels);
dorsal views of th RNA expression (right panels). Arrows
point to the SCG, and arrowheads point to the CG. Scale
bar represents 100 mm.
(B) MYCN transgenic line. MYCN expression causes loss
of cells in the SCG (arrows). Scale bar represents 100 mm.
(C) ALK transgenic line. ALK expression does not interfere
with the SCG development (arrows). Scale bar represents
100 mm.
(D) MYCN;ALK transgenic line. Loss of cells in the SCG is
not rescued by activated ALK expression (arrows). Scale
bar represents 100 mm. AAC, arch-associated catechol-
aminergic neurons; CG (arrowheads), cranial ganglia; DA,
diencephalic dopaminergic neurons; e, ear; LC,
locus
coeruleus; MO, medulla oblongata; r, retina; SCG, supe-
rior cervical ganglion. See also Figure S4 and Table S1.

neuroblasts quantiﬁed from sections through
both interrenal gland regions remained low
between 3–7 wpf (Figure 6B); Hu+ cell numbers
in ALK transgenic ﬁsh were comparable to
those in controls (Figure 6B). By contrast, the
numbers of Hu+ neuroblasts were signiﬁcantly
increased in MYCN transgenic ﬁsh, as
compared to those in controls at 3 wpf (Fig-
ure 6B, p = 0.03). In 9 of 16 MYCN transgenic
ﬁsh examined, the numbers of Hu+ neuroblasts
were markedly increased at 5 wpf (Figures 6A
and 6B, p = 0.004). However, at 7 wpf, 11 of
16 MYCN ﬁsh lacked detectable Hu+ neuro-
blasts in the interrenal gland (Figure 6B), indi-
cating that during this 2-week period these cells
were either eliminated or had differentiated, thus losing their
expression of the neuronal marker Hu. In MYCN;ALK compound
transgenic ﬁsh the numbers of Hu+ cells also increased during
the 3- to 5-week period, but in contrast to transgenic ﬁsh ex-
pressing MYCN alone, the Hu+ cell numbers continued to
increase in 6 of 12 ﬁsh at 7 wpf (Figure 6B, p = 0.03). Thus,
Hu+ cells continue to expand in only a small fraction of trans-
genic animals expressing MYCN alone after 5 wpf, whereas
a much higher fraction of the double transgenic MYCN;ALK
animals showed progressive expansion of Hu+ cells, mirroring
the much higher fraction of these animals that develop fully
transformed neuroblastoma (Figure 3A).
To assess the effects of MYCN and activated ALK expression
on the differentiation of Hu+, TH+ neuroblast into Hu , TH+
adrenal chromafﬁn cells, we quantiﬁed the numbers of Hu ,
GFP+ cells within the interrenal gland of each of the zebraﬁsh
lines over time. We found increasing numbers of these cells
between 3–7 wpf in both control DbH and ALK transgenic zebra-
ﬁsh, indicating the differentiation of the Hu+ neuroblast precur-
sors into chromafﬁn cells (Figures 7A–7C). By contrast, the
Hu , GFP+ chromafﬁn cells did not increase normally and re-
mained at very low levels between 3–7 wpf in MYCN-overex-
pressing ﬁsh relative to control animals, regardless of whether

Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 367

MYCN and ALK in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

Cancer Cell

Figure 5. Expression of Early Sympathoadrenal
Markers Is Absent in MYCN Transgenic Embryos
during Early Development
(A and B) Top panels: DbH; lower panels: MYCN trans-
genic ﬁsh. Expression of sympathoadrenal cell markers at
54 hpf (A) and 80 hpf (B). The magniﬁed view of the boxed
region is shown on the right. Arrows point to the superior
cervical ganglion. Scale bars represent 50 mm (left panels)
and 100 mm (right panels, magniﬁed view).
(C) Diagram of the genetic interactions of sympathoa-
drenal genes during early development. Arrows indicate
the activation of target genes. Curved arrows indicate
positive feedback regulation. See also Figure S5.

the animals also express the activated ALK
transgene. Thus,
the expanding neuroblast
cell populations that we identiﬁed at 7 wpf in
MYCN transgenic animals appear to give rise
to fully transformed tumors a few weeks later,
and a fraction of the ﬁsh with these hyperplastic
precursors was markedly increased by coex-
pression of activated ALK, accounting for the
increased penetrance of neuroblastoma in the
compound transgenic line (Figure 3A). Taken
together, these ﬁndings indicate that overex-
pression of MYCN prevents the differentiation
of neuroblast precursors into adrenal chro-
mafﬁn cells, and induces a developmentally-
timed apoptotic response at 5.5 wpf in most
MYCN transgenic ﬁsh. However, concomitant
expression of activated ALK in these cells
promotes cell survival without altering the
MYCN-induced block in differentiation, result-
ing in the continued accumulation of Hu+ neu-
roblasts that culminates in the development of highly penetrant,
fully transformed neuroblastoma.

DISCUSSION

Early in the embryogenesis of our transgenic zebraﬁsh, MYCN
overexpression results in a profound loss of neural crest-derived
cells within the sympathoadrenal cell
lineage. Nevertheless,
these animals can develop neuroblastoma, and both the onset
and penetrance of the disease are markedly enhanced by
coexpression of a transgene encoding the activated ALK
receptor tyrosine kinase. Thus, our zebraﬁsh model clearly
demonstrates a synergistic relationship between these two
genes in neuroblastoma pathogenesis. Using multiparameter
confocal microscopy and immunohistochemistry to examine
embryos throughout early development, we show that MYCN-
induced neuroblastoma does not arise from the earliest cells
populating the superior cervical ganglia (3–6 dpf), but rather
from neuroblasts that migrate into the interrenal gland later in
development
the kidney has developed.
The interrenal gland is the zebraﬁsh equivalent of the human
adrenal gland, and sympathoadrenal precursors in the interrenal
gland coexpress neuronal-speciﬁc Hu proteins and the cate-
cholaminergic enzymes TH and Dbh. The interrenal gland origin

(21 dpf), after

the ﬁsh also expressed the activated ALK transgene (Figures 7A–
7C). At 7 wpf, we identiﬁed two MYCN transgenic ﬁsh and two
MYCN;ALK ﬁsh with some expansion of Hu /TH+ chromafﬁn
cells (Figure 7C). Thus, in a small subset of MYCN-overexpress-
ing ﬁsh, the sympathoadrenal cells manage to differentiate, lose
the Hu neuronal marker and expand at 7 weeks of age despite
activated ALK overexpression. The chromafﬁn cell expansion
seems to be self-limited, because all of the tumors that arise in
these ﬁsh express the Hu pan-neuronal marker (Figures 2C
and S2C).

To determine whether the loss of Hu+ cells in the transgenic
ﬁsh expressing MYCN alone between 5–7 wpf was due to
apoptotic cell death, we assessed the expression of activated
Caspase-3 as an indicator of apoptotic cell death. An important
difference was observed at 5.5 wpf: transgenic ﬁsh expressing
MYCN alone showed signiﬁcant numbers of apoptotic cells
coexpressing Hu and activated Caspase-3 (Figures 8B, 8C
and S7C), providing the basis for the profound loss of these cells
by 7 wpf. By contrast, in MYCN;ALK transgenic ﬁsh, we rarely
observed apoptotic cells expressing both Hu and activated
Caspase-3 (Figures 8B, 8C and S7D), consistent with the
continued increase in Hu+ cell numbers at 7 wpf in this group
(Figure 6B). Neuroblastomas that develop in MYCN transgenic
animals coexpress GFP, TH, and Hu, regardless of whether

368 Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

MYCN and ALK in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

Figure 6. MYCN Causes Hu+ Cell Hyperplasia in the Interrenal Gland
(A) Sagittal sections through the interrenal gland in DbH (top panels), MYCN (middle panels), and MYCN;ALK (lower panels) transgenic ﬁsh at 5wpf (dorsal up,
anterior left). EGFP, green; Hu, magenta; TH, red. Representative sections through the interrenal gland in DbH ﬁsh contain three to ﬁve GFP+/Hu+/TH+
sympathetic neuroblasts (arrows) and many GFP+/Hu /TH+ chromafﬁn cells (arrowheads). Hu+ cell numbers increase in MYCN and MYCN;ALK ﬁsh (brackets),
and can be GFP+ and TH+. Dotted lines indicate the head kidney (HK) boundary. Scale bar represents 20 mm.
(B) Numbers of Hu+ interrenal gland cells in DbH, ALK, MYCN, and MYCN;ALK transgenic ﬁsh at 3, 5, and 7 weeks. Means of Hu+ cell numbers were compared by
the two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test. See also Figure S6.

of neuroblastoma in zebraﬁsh recapitulates the adrenal medul-
lary site of origin observed in 50% of the children with this
tumor (Janoueix-Lerosey et al., 2010), in contrast to the murine
MYCN transgenic model, where tumors arise from hyperplastic
neuroblasts predominately in the sympathetic cervical ganglia
complex and the superior cervical ganglia (Alam et al., 2009;
Hansford et al., 2004). In the study by Hansford et al. (2004),
these hyperplastic neuroblasts regressed due to apoptotic cell
death in normal and hemizygous transgenic animals, but
frequently progressed to fully transformed neuroblastoma in
homozygous transgenic animals. The similarities and differences
between the murine and zebraﬁsh transgenic models afford

complementary opportunities to investigate mechanisms under-
lying sympathoadrenal cell transformation within the distinct
anatomical locations that comprise the PSNS.

Using the zebraﬁsh model, we now show that expression of
aberrantly activated ALK potentiates the oncogenic effects of
MYCN by blocking the apoptotic death of MYCN-overexpress-
ing sympathoadrenal neuroblasts. The death of these cells
occurs within a well-deﬁned developmental window, 5.5 wpf,
indicating that although overexpression of MYCN causes aber-
rant expansion of these cells from 3 to 5 wpf, it also triggers an
apoptotic response at 5.5 wpf. By monitoring the appearance
of more differentiated adrenal chromafﬁn cell numbers in animals

Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 369

MYCN and ALK in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

Cancer Cell

Figure 7. MYCN Expression Blocks Chromafﬁn
Cell Differentiation in the Interrenal Gland
Numbers of GFP+/Hu  chromafﬁn cells in the interrenal
gland in DbH, ALK, MYCN, and MYCN;ALK transgenic ﬁsh
at 3 weeks (A), 5 weeks (B), and 7 weeks (C). Means of
GFP+/Hu  cell numbers were compared by the two-tailed
Wilcoxon signed-rank test.

genic ﬁsh do not undergo apoptosis during
their expansion to 5 wpf. Rather, the apoptotic
death of these cells appears to result from
a conﬂict between aberrant proliferative signals
emanating from overexpressed MYCN and
other developmentally timed signals that spec-
ify chromafﬁn cell fate. Thus, activated ALK
provides a cell survival signal that blunts the apoptotic response
of MYCN-overexpressing neuroblasts at this juncture in devel-
opment, but does not restore the ability of these cells to differen-
tiate. For the 17% of MYCN-only transgenic ﬁsh that develop
tumors, it is likely that additional genetic alterations cooperate
with this oncogene to contribute to neuroblastoma transforma-
tion. Nevertheless, we did not detect somatic missense muta-
tions within the tyrosine kinase domain of the zebraﬁsh alk

Figure 8. ALK Inhibits a Developmentally-Timed
Apoptotic Response Triggered by MYCN Overex-
pression in the Interrenal Gland
(A) Numbers of Hu+ interrenal gland cells in the DbH, ALK,
MYCN, and MYCN;ALK ﬁsh at 5.5 wpf. Means of Hu+ cell
numbers were compared by the two-tailed Wilcoxon
signed-rank test.
(B) Numbers of apoptotic Hu+ interrenal gland cells in the
DbH, ALK, MYCN, and MYCN;ALK ﬁsh at 5.5 wpf. The
numbers of transgenic ﬁsh at 5.5 wpf with apoptotic Hu+
cells in the interrenal gland were compared by two-tailed
Fisher exact test.
(C) Sagittal sections through the interrenal gland in MYCN
(top panels) and MYCN;ALK (bottom panels) transgenic
ﬁsh at 5.5 wpf
(dorsal up, anterior left). Hu, green;
activated Caspase-3, red. Hu+, activated Caspase-3+
apoptotic cells were detected in the MYCN transgenic ﬁsh
(arrowheads). Dotted lines indicate the head kidney (HK)
boundary. Scale bars represent 10 mm. See also Fig-
ure S7.

of each genotype, we show that these MYCN-overexpressing
neuroblasts fail to differentiate, resulting in reduced numbers
of Hu , TH+, Dbh+ chromafﬁn cells. The MYCN-induced
apoptotic response in these cells does not seem to result from
the types of constitutive MYC- or MYCN-induced apoptotic
signaling that has been described by others (Fanidi et al.,
1992; Finch et al., 2006; Nilsson and Cleveland, 2003), because
the MYCN-overexpressing immature neuroblasts in our trans-

370 Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

MYCN and ALK in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

gene in ten tumors from MYCN-only transgenic ﬁsh, or a loss of
capsase-8 expression, which has been implicated in the patho-
genesis of human neuroblastoma with MYCN ampliﬁcation.
Thus, mutations or epigenetic events that activate prosurvival
pathways other
than those mediated by alk activation or
capsase-8 loss of function appear to interact with MYCN overex-
pression in these tumors.

The mutant ALK (F1174L) gene that we expressed in our
zebraﬁsh model has not been observed in the germline of human
patients with familial neuroblastoma. This suggests that it may
generate signals that are incompatible with normal human
embryogenesis, making it more potent than the R1275Q muta-
tion, the most common heritable mutation in familial neuroblas-
toma. In our transgenic zebraﬁsh model, the ALK (F1174L)
mutation is tolerated in the germline, presumably because it is
driven in a tissue-speciﬁc manner in sympathoadrenal cells by
the dbh promoter.
In our model system, overexpression of
MYCN is required for the development of neuroblastoma and
activated ALK expression is not sufﬁcient, even though germline
mutations of ALK can function as an initiating event in human
neuroblastoma, and these tumors may or may not have MYCN
ampliﬁcation (Mosse´ et al., 2008). Further study in the zebraﬁsh
model will be required to determine whether mutational events
other than MYCN overexpression can cooperate with activated
ALK to induce neuroblastoma.

The potent anti-apoptotic effect of activated ALK expression
combined with MYCN overexpression might be expected to
mediate greater resistance to drug-induced apoptosis and
a poorer outcome for patients whose tumors have both ampliﬁed
MYCN and an activating ALK mutation. This prediction gains
support from a recent meta-analysis of ALK mutations in child-
hood neuroblastoma with MYCN ampliﬁcation, which showed
that the mutant ALK (F1174L) gene is expressed in a high propor-
tion of childhood tumors with MYCN ampliﬁcation, and that
these children have an especially poor outcome (De Brouwer
et al., 2010). A new ALK small molecule inhibitor, crizotinib
(PF-02341066), has produced encouraging results in a recently
completed phase II trial for patients with non-small-cell
lung
cancer that harbors activating ALK rearrangements, including
EML4-ALK or RANBP2-ALK (Butrynski et al., 2010; Kwak
et al., 2010; Sasaki et al., 2010), and has been approved by the
FDA for use in patients with such tumors. A phase I trial of the
same inhibitor was recently initiated in children with solid tumors,
including those with neuroblastoma harboring either mutated or
ampliﬁed ALK. Despite these advances, a recent report indicates
that the ALK (F1174L) mutation confers resistance to crizotinib
(Sasaki et al., 2010), which will likely interfere with the activity
of this drug against neuroblastomas harboring this mutation.
We suggest that the zebraﬁsh model described in this article
will provide a useful platform for testing alternative small mole-
cule inhibitors of F1174L-activated ALK, or key targets within
its downstream pathways, to improve the treatment of this
aggressive form of childhood neuroblastoma.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Zebraﬁsh
Zebraﬁsh were the AB background strain. Embryos were staged according to
Kimmel et al. (1995). All zebraﬁsh studies and maintenance of the animals were

in accord with Dana-Farber Cancer
#02-107.

Institute IACUC-approved protocol

DNA Constructs for Transgenesis
The 5.2-kb promoter region of the dbh gene was ampliﬁed by PCR from
a zebraﬁsh BAC clone and subcloned into vectors to drive the expression
including Tg(dbh:EGFP), Tg(dbh:EGFP-MYCN), and
of several genes,
Tg(dbh:EGFP;dbh:ALKF1174L) in tissues normally expressing the dbh gene.
Embryos were injected with these DNA constructs at the one-cell stage and
grown to adulthood. Fin clips from the offspring were genotyped for the stable
integration and germline transmission of the transgenes. The Tg(dbh:EGFP),
Tg(dbh:EGFP-MYCN), and Tg(dbh:EGFP;dbh:ALKF1174L) zebraﬁsh lines are
designated the ‘‘DbH,’’ ‘‘MYCN,’’ and ‘‘ALK’’ transgenic line in this article,
respectively.

Tumor Watch of Transgenic Fish
MYCN and ALK heterozygous transgenic ﬁsh were crossed, and offspring
were screened every 2 weeks starting from 5 wpf for ﬂuorescent EGFP-
expressing cell masses indicative of tumors. In addition, for Figure 3B, either
activated human ALK or wild-type human ALK (ALKWT) were overexpressed
in MYCN ﬁsh as mosaics by coinjecting the following constructs into the
one-cell stage of MYCN transgenic and control embryos: (1) dbh-ALKF1174L
with dbh-mCherry; (2) dbh-ALKWT with dbh-mCherry; or (3) dbh-mCherry
alone. The primary injected embryos were raised and monitored for the onset
of tumorigenesis as described above. Fish with tumors were separated and
analyzed further by H&E staining and immunohistochemical assays.

RNA In Situ Hybridization, Cryosectioning, Parafﬁn Sectioning, and
Immunostaining
RNA in situ hybridization assays were performed according to Thisse and
Thisse (Thisse and Thisse, 2008). Constructs for making RNA probes to detect
dbh, th, phox2b, and tfap2a expression have been described (Stewart et al.,
2006). Fish were ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in agar/
sucrose or parafﬁn blocks for cryosectioning or parafﬁn sectioning, respec-
tively. Sections were immunostained by conventional protocols (Macdonald,
1999) using antibodies against GFP, TH, Hu, Synaptophysin, and ALK.

Electron Microscopy and Imaging
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of tumor cells was carried out at the
Harvard Medical School EM Facility with a Tecnai G2 Spirit BioTWIN scope
equipped with an AMT 2k CCD camera. A Zeiss LSM 510 META confocal
microscope and Leica SP5X Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope were
used to capture ﬂuorescent images at high magniﬁcation, and a Leica M420
stereoscopic microscope captured bright ﬁeld and low-magniﬁcation ﬂuores-
cent images. Images were processed with Leica LAS AF Lite, Improvision
Openlab v5 and Adobe Photoshop software.

Additional methods are presented in Supplemental Experimental Procedures.

ACCESSION NUMBERS

The GenBank accession number for the dbh promoter sequence reported in
this paper is JQ727685.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures, one table, and Supple-
mental Experimental Procedures and can be found with this article online at
doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2012.02.010.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a grant CA104605 from the National Cancer Insti-
tute, NIH (A.T.L.), a Young Investigator Award from Children’s Tumor Founda-
tion and Neuroblastoma Foundation (J.S.L.), a fellowship from the Friends for
Life (S.Z., R.E.G.), a fellowship from the Hope Street Kids Foundation (J.S.L.),
a fellowship from Durand Family Fund for Pediatric Neuroblastoma Research
(J.S.L.), a fellowship from the David A. Abraham Fund and Pediatric Low Grade

Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 371

MYCN and ALK in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

Cancer Cell

Astrocytoma Foundation (J.S.), an award K99CA134743 from the National
Cancer Institute, NIH (H.F.), an award R00 NS058608 from NIH/NINDS
(R.A.S.), and a grant from the National Institutes of Health and the Children’s
Oncology Group (R.E.G.). We thank John Gilbert for editing the manuscript
and critical comments, and Greg Molind, Lu Zhang, Derek Walsh, and John
P. Lyons for excellent care of our zebraﬁsh facility.

Received: May 26, 2011
Revised: November 23, 2011
Accepted: February 7, 2012
Published: March 19, 2012

REFERENCES

Alam, G., Cui, H., Shi, H., Yang, L., Ding, J., Mao, L., Maltese, W.A., and Ding,
H.F. (2009). MYCN promotes the expansion of Phox2B-positive neuronal
progenitors to drive neuroblastoma development. Am. J. Pathol. 175,
856–866.

An, M., Luo, R., and Henion, P.D. (2002). Differentiation and maturation of ze-
braﬁsh dorsal root and sympathetic ganglion neurons. J. Comp. Neurol. 446,
267–275.

Brodeur, G.M.
enigma. Nat. Rev. Cancer 3, 203–216.

(2003). Neuroblastoma: biological

insights into a clinical

Butrynski, J.E., D’Adamo, D.R., Hornick, J.L., Dal Cin, P., Antonescu, C.R.,
Jhanwar, S.C., Ladanyi, M., Capelletti, M., Rodig, S.J., Ramaiya, N., et al.
(2010). Crizotinib in ALK-rearranged inﬂammatory myoﬁbroblastic tumor.
N. Engl. J. Med. 363, 1727–1733.

Chen, Y., Takita, J., Choi, Y.L., Kato, M., Ohira, M., Sanada, M., Wang, L.,
Soda, M., Kikuchi, A., Igarashi, T., et al. (2008). Oncogenic mutations of ALK
kinase in neuroblastoma. Nature 455, 971–974.

Chesler, L., and Weiss, W.A. (2011). Genetically engineered murine models—
contribution to our understanding of the genetics, molecular pathology and
therapeutic targeting of neuroblastoma. Semin. Cancer Biol. 21, 245–255.

Chiarle, R., Voena, C., Ambrogio, C., Piva, R., and Inghirami, G. (2008). The
anaplastic lymphoma kinase in the pathogenesis of cancer. Nat. Rev.
Cancer 8, 11–23.

De Brouwer, S., De Preter, K., Kumps, C., Zabrocki, P., Porcu, M., Westerhout,
E.M., Lakeman, A., Vandesompele, J., Hoebeeck, J., Van Maerken, T., et al.
(2010). Meta-analysis of neuroblastomas reveals a skewed ALK mutation
spectrum in tumors with MYCN ampliﬁcation. Clin. Cancer Res. 16, 4353–
4362.

Fanidi, A., Harrington, E.A., and Evan, G.I. (1992). Cooperative interaction
between c-myc and bcl-2 proto-oncogenes. Nature 359, 554–556.

different growth rates among four human neuroblastomas heterotransplanted
into nude mice. Med. Mol. Morphol. 41, 151–159.

Hsu, H.J., Lin, G., and Chung, B.C. (2003). Parallel early development of zebra-
ﬁsh interrenal glands and pronephros: differential control by wt1 and ff1b.
Development 130, 2107–2116.

Huber, K. (2006). The sympathoadrenal cell lineage: speciﬁcation, diversiﬁca-
tion, and new perspectives. Dev. Biol. 298, 335–343.

Janoueix-Lerosey, I., Lequin, D., Brugie` res, L., Ribeiro, A., de Pontual, L.,
Combaret, V., Raynal, V., Puisieux, A., Schleiermacher, G., Pierron, G., et al.
(2008). Somatic and germline activating mutations of the ALK kinase receptor
in neuroblastoma. Nature 455, 967–970.

Janoueix-Lerosey, I., Schleiermacher, G., and Delattre, O. (2010). Molecular
pathogenesis of peripheral neuroblastic tumors. Oncogene 29, 1566–1579.

Kimmel, C.B., Ballard, W.W., Kimmel, S.R., Ullmann, B., and Schilling, T.F.
(1995). Stages of embryonic development of the zebraﬁsh. Dev. Dyn. 203,
253–310.

Kwak, E.L., Bang, Y.J., Camidge, D.R., Shaw, A.T., Solomon, B., Maki, R.G.,
Ou, S.H., Dezube, B.J., Ja¨ nne, P.A., Costa, D.B., et al. (2010). Anaplastic
lymphoma kinase inhibition in non-small-cell lung cancer. N. Engl. J. Med.
363, 1693–1703.

Langenau, D.M., Keefe, M.D., Storer, N.Y., Jette, C.A., Smith, A.C., Ceol, C.J.,
Bourque, C., Look, A.T., and Zon, L.I. (2008). Co-injection strategies to modify
radiation sensitivity and tumor initiation in transgenic Zebraﬁsh. Oncogene 27,
4242–4248.

Lucas, M.E., Mu¨ ller, F., Ru¨ diger, R., Henion, P.D., and Rohrer, H. (2006). The
bHLH transcription factor hand2 is essential for noradrenergic differentiation
of sympathetic neurons. Development 133, 4015–4024.

Macdonald, R. (1999). Zebraﬁsh immunohistochemistry. Methods Mol. Biol.
127, 77–88.

Maris, J.M. (2010). Recent advances in neuroblastoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 362,
2202–2211.

Maris, J.M., Hogarty, M.D., Bagatell, R., and Cohn, S.L.
Neuroblastoma. Lancet 369, 2106–2120.

(2007).

Marusich, M.F., Furneaux, H.M., Henion, P.D., and Weston, J.A. (1994). Hu
neuronal proteins are expressed in proliferating neurogenic cells.
J. Neurobiol. 25, 143–155.

Mierau, G.W., Weeks, D.A., and Hicks, M.J. (1998). Role of electron micros-
copy and other special techniques in the diagnosis of childhood round cell
tumors. Hum. Pathol. 29, 1347–1355.

Molenaar, W.M., Baker, D.L., Pleasure, D., Lee, V.M., and Trojanowski, J.Q.
(1990). The neuroendocrine and neural proﬁles of neuroblastomas, ganglio-
neuroblastomas, and ganglioneuromas. Am. J. Pathol. 136, 375–382.

Finch, A., Prescott, J., Shchors, K., Hunt, A., Soucek, L., Dansen, T.B.,
Swigart, L.B., and Evan, G.I. (2006). Bcl-xL gain of function and p19 ARF
loss of function cooperate oncogenically with Myc in vivo by distinct mecha-
nisms. Cancer Cell 10, 113–120.

Morris, S.W., Kirstein, M.N., Valentine, M.B., Dittmer, K.G., Shapiro, D.N.,
Saltman, D.L., and Look, A.T. (1994). Fusion of a kinase gene, ALK, to a nucle-
olar protein gene, NPM, in non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Science 263, 1281–
1284.

George, R.E., Sanda, T., Hanna, M., Fro¨ hling, S., Luther, W., 2nd, Zhang, J.,
Ahn, Y., Zhou, W., London, W.B., McGrady, P., et al. (2008). Activating muta-
tions in ALK provide a therapeutic target in neuroblastoma. Nature 455,
975–978.

Mosse´ , Y.P., Laudenslager, M., Longo, L., Cole, K.A., Wood, A., Attiyeh, E.F.,
Laquaglia, M.J., Sennett, R., Lynch, J.E., Perri, P., et al. (2008). Identiﬁcation of
ALK as a major familial neuroblastoma predisposition gene. Nature 455,
930–935.

Gould, V.E., Lee, I., Wiedenmann, B., Moll, R., Chejfec, G., and Franke, W.W.
(1986). Synaptophysin: a novel marker for neurons, certain neuroendocrine
cells, and their neoplasms. Hum. Pathol. 17, 979–983.

Guillemot, F., Lo, L.C., Johnson, J.E., Auerbach, A., Anderson, D.J., and
Joyner, A.L. (1993). Mammalian achaete-scute homolog 1 is required for the
early development of olfactory and autonomic neurons. Cell 75, 463–476.

Hansford, L.M., Thomas, W.D., Keating, J.M., Burkhart, C.A., Peaston, A.E.,
Norris, M.D., Haber, M., Armati, P.J., Weiss, W.A., and Marshall, G.M.
(2004). Mechanisms of embryonal tumor initiation: distinct roles for MycN
expression and MYCN ampliﬁcation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 12664–
12669.

Hoshi, N., Hitomi, J., Kusakabe, T., Fukuda, T., Hirota, M., and Suzuki, T.
(2008). Distinct morphological and immunohistochemical
features and

Nilsson, J.A., and Cleveland, J.L. (2003). Myc pathways provoking cell suicide
and cancer. Oncogene 22, 9007–9021.

O’Brien, E.K., d’Alenc¸ on, C., Bonde, G., Li, W., Schoenebeck, J., Allende,
M.L., Gelb, B.D., Yelon, D., Eisen, J.S., and Cornell, R.A.
(2004).
Transcription factor Ap-2alpha is necessary for development of embryonic
melanophores, autonomic neurons and pharyngeal skeleton in zebraﬁsh.
Dev. Biol. 265, 246–261.

Palmer, R.H., Vernersson, E., Grabbe, C., and Hallberg, B. (2009). Anaplastic
lymphoma kinase: signalling in development and disease. Biochem. J. 420,
345–361.

Pattyn, A., Morin, X., Cremer, H., Goridis, C., and Brunet, J.F. (1999). The
homeobox gene Phox2b is essential for the development of autonomic neural
crest derivatives. Nature 399, 366–370.

372 Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

Cancer Cell

MYCN and ALK in Neuroblastoma Pathogenesis

Sasaki, T., Okuda, K., Zheng, W., Butrynski, J., Capelletti, M., Wang, L., Gray,
N.S., Wilner, K., Christensen, J.G., Demetri, G.I., et al. (2010). The neuroblas-
toma-associated F1174L ALK mutation causes resistance to an ALK kinase
inhibitor in ALK-translocated cancers. Cancer Res. 70, 10038–10043.

Teitelman, G., Baker, H., Joh, T.H., and Reis, D.J. (1979). Appearance of cate-
cholamine-synthesizing enzymes during development of rat sympathetic
nervous system: possible role of tissue environment. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 76, 509–513.

Stewart, R.A., Look, A.T., Kanki, J.P., and Henion, P.D. (2004). Development of
the peripheral sympathetic nervous system in zebraﬁsh. Methods Cell Biol. 76,
237–260.

Stewart, R.A., Arduini, B.L., Berghmans, S., George, R.E., Kanki, J.P., Henion,
P.D., and Look, A.T. (2006). Zebraﬁsh foxd3 is selectively required for neural
crest speciﬁcation, migration and survival. Dev. Biol. 292, 174–188.

Taxy, J.B. (1980). Electron microscopy in the diagnosis of neuroblastoma.
Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 104, 355–360.

Thisse, C., and Thisse, B. (2008). High-resolution in situ hybridization to whole-
mount zebraﬁsh embryos. Nat. Protoc. 3, 59–69.

Torno´ czky, T., Semje´ n, D., Shimada, H., and Ambros, I.M. (2007). Pathology of
peripheral neuroblastic tumors: signiﬁcance of prominent nucleoli in undiffer-
entiated/poorly differentiated neuroblastoma. Pathol. Oncol. Res. 13,
269–275.

Weiss, W.A., Aldape, K., Mohapatra, G., Feuerstein, B.G., and Bishop, J.M.
(1997). Targeted expression of MYCN causes neuroblastoma in transgenic
mice. EMBO J. 16, 2985–2995.

Cancer Cell 21, 362–373, March 20, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 373

