Review

For reprint orders, please contact reprints@future-drugs.com

Cancer stem cells and brain 
tumors: uprooting the bad seeds
Da Yong Lee and David H Gutmann†

The cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis is predicated on the idea that not all cells have 
equal proliferative potential and that, in brain tumors, the cells with the greatest ability to 
proliferate and contribute to tumorigenesis have phenotypic and functional properties 
similar to normal neural stem cells (NSCs). Over the past few years, multiple investigators 
have shown that CSCs isolated from human brain tumors (glioma and medulloblastoma) 
undergo self-renewal and multilineage cell differentiation, similar to normal NSCs. In 
addition, CSCs from these tumors, when implanted into rodent brains, generate tumors 
histologically identical to the parental tumors, suggesting that progenitor/stem cells can 
fully recapitulate the neoplastic phenotype in vivo. While these seminal studies clearly 
highlight the central role of stem cells in brain tumors, they also evoke important 
questions regarding the importance of these unique cells to tumor initiation, maintenance 
and treatment. 

Expert Rev. Anticancer Ther. 7(11), 1581–1590 (2007)

Brain tumors
Tumors  of  the  nervous  system  represent  the
leading cause of cancer-related death in chil-
dren  and  the  fourth  leading  cause  in  adults
[1].  Despite  decades  of  research  and  clinical
experience,  the  life  expectancy  of  an  adult
diagnosed  with  a  high-grade  brain  tumor  is
typically  less  than  1 year  [2].  Our  ability  to
develop  new  therapies 
for  these  deadly
cancers  is  highly dependent on an  improved
understanding  of  the  molecular  and  cellular
changes that contribute to their development
and continued growth.

on 

this 

classification 

Brain tumors are currently classified by the
WHO  according  to  the  normal  cell  type  in
the  brain  that  the  tumor  resembles  most  [3].
Based 
scheme,
neuropathologists  distinguish  between  glial
cell  tumors  (e.g., astrocytomas,  oligodendro-
gliomas  and  ependymomas)  and  neuronal
tumors  (e.g.,  medulloblastomas).  While  the
WHO histologic classification system implies
a cell of  origin  for  brain  tumors, in  fact, the
cell of origin has not been unequivocally iden-
tified for either glial or neuronal cell tumors.
Recent  studies  have  suggested  that  brain
tumors  are  composed  of  numerous  different

cell  types,  including  cells  resembling  neural
stem cells (NSCs), that each might contribute
to tumorigenesis and continued tumor growth
(maintenance).  In  this  article,  we  will  review
what  is  known  about  brain  tumor  stem  cells
relevant  to  developing  new  approaches  for
treating these clinically challenging cancers. 

(stromal) 

Heterogeneity of brain tumors
It  has  long  been  recognized  that  cancers  are
composed  of  heterogeneous  populations  of
different  cell  types.  In  this  regard,  brain
tumors  comprise  a  complex  microcosm  of
both  neoplastic  and  non-neoplastic  cells  that
each have distinct roles in dictating tumor for-
mation  and  growth  (FIGURE 1).  The  non-neo-
plastic 
contains
immune  system  cells  (microglia),  entrapped
normal cells (neurons, astrocytes, oligodendro-
cytes) and tumor-associated blood vessels. Tak-
ing a page from studies of other solid tumors,
recent reports have shown that important cel-
lular and molecular signals that emanate from
the brain tumor microenvironment are critical
for regulating neoplastic tumor cell growth. In
this  regard,  high  numbers  of  monocyte-like
cells (microglia) are consistently found within

compartment 

CONTENTS
Brain tumors 
Heterogeneity of 
brain tumors 
Cancer stem cells 
Growth control pathways 
Region-specific neural 
stem cells  
Expert commentary 
& five-year view 
Financial & competing 
interests disclosure
Key issues
References 
Affiliations 

†Author for correspondence
Washington University School of 
Medicine, Department of 
Neurology, 660 South Euclid 
Avenue, Box 8111, St Louis, 
MO 63110, USA
Tel.: +1 314 362 7379
Fax: +1 314 362 2388
gutmannd@wustl.edu

KEYWORDS: 
glioma, medulloblastoma, 
progenitor cell, self-renewal, stem 
cell, stem cell niche, tumor 
microenvironment, tumor 
suppressor gene

www.future-drugs.com

10.1586/14737140.7.11.1581

© 2007 Future Drugs Ltd

ISSN 1473-7140

1581

