Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
Vol. 93, pp. 9229-9234, August 1996
Neurobiology

Cell death in the Schwann cell lineage and its regulation
by neuregulin

(apoptosis/glia/glial growth factor/nervous system)

DANIEL E. SYROID*, PETER R. MAYCOX*t, PATRICK G. BURROLA*, NAILI Liut, DUANZHI WEN*, KUO-FEN LEE§,
GREG LEMKE*¶, AND TREVOR J. KILPATRICK*II
*Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, §Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines
Road, La Jolla, CA 92037; and tAmgen Inc., 1840 DeHavilland Road, Thousand Oaks, CA 91320

Communicated by Gerald D. Fischbach, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, May 14, 1996 (received for review March 15, 1996)

The development of Schwann cells, the my-
ABSTRACT
elin-forming glial cells of the vertebrate peripheral nervous
system, involves a neonatal phase of proliferation in which
cells migrate along and segregate newly formed axons. With-
drawal from the cell cycle, around postnatal days 2-4 in
rodents, initiates terminal differentiation to the myelinating
state. During this time, Schwann cell number is subject to
stringent regulation such that within the first postnatal week,
axons and myelinating Schwann cells attain the one-to-one
relationship characteristic of the mature nerve. The mecha-
nisms that underly this developmental control remain largely
undefined. In this report, we examine the role of apoptosis in
the determination of postnatal Schwann cell number. We find
that Schwann cells isolated from postnatal day 3 rat sciatic
nerve undergo apoptosis in vitro upon serum withdrawal and
that Schwann cell death can be prevented by fg forms of
neuregulin (NRG-f3) but not by fibroblast growth factor 2 or
platelet-derived growth factors AA and BB. This NRG-,8-
mediated Schwann cell survival is apparently transduced
through an ErbB2/ErbB3 receptor heterodimer. We also
provide evidence that postnatal Schwann cells undergo devel-
opmentally regulated apoptosis in vivo. Together with other
recent findings, these results suggest that Schwann cell apo-
ptosis may play an important role in peripheral nerve devel-
opment and that Schwann cell survival may be regulated by
access to axonally derived NRG.

Peripheral nerve development involves a symbiotic and dy-
namic interaction between axons and Schwann cells (1). When
Schwann cell precursors first contact axons, they are actively
dividing, flat, GAP43-positive cells. Their subsequent differ-
entiation into committed Schwann cells, which in the rat occurs
around embryonic days 16 and 17, is marked by the acquisition
of a bipolar morphology and S100 immunoreactivity (2). At
this stage, migrating cells extend processes, which penetrate
between axons and segregate them into progressively smaller
bundles. Schwann cell proliferation and segregation continue
such that in the early neonate, each myelinated axon is
wrapped by a single myelinating Schwann cell. Withdrawal
from the cell cycle at postnatal days 2-4 (3) initiates terminal
Schwann cell differentiation and the onset of myelination of a
subset of large-diameter axons.

How Schwann cell numbers are regulated to produce the
mature 1:1 relationship between axons and myelinating
Schwann cells remains largely unexplored. While inhibition of
proliferation is clearly involved, programmed cell death, which
usually proceeds through a series of well-defined transitions in
cellular morphology referred to as apoptosis (4), may also play
a role. Indeed, it is well established that programmed cell death
is a significant developmental event in both neuronal (5) and

The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge
payment. This article must therefore be hereby marked "advertisement" in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. §1734 solely to indicate this fact.

oligodendrocytic lineages (6), in which differentiating progen-
itor cells are susceptible to apoptosis upon exit from the cell
cycle. More recently, Schwann cell precursors have been shown
to undergo apoptotic cell death in vitro (7). If developmentally
regulated apoptosis in the Schwann cell lineage were to play a
significant role in establishing correct Schwann cell numbers in
the mature nerve, it may be expected to function primarily as
a postnatal event, subsequent to the cessation of neonatal
Schwann cell proliferation and coincident with terminal dif-
ferentiation. In this context, induction of Schwann cell death
would serve to ensure that myelinating Schwann cell and
axonal numbers were correctly matched by removing super-
numerary Schwann cells.

Although apoptosis is an important mechanism by which cell
numbers are regulated during development, it must be tightly
controlled if it is to subserve this function efficiently. For
developing neurons, this is largely accomplished by the positive
selection of surviving cells through the competition for limiting
target-derived trophic support (5, 8). Given the interdepen-
dency of Schwann cells and axons during peripheral nerve
development (9), an axonally derived trophic factor could
subserve an equivalent function for Schwann cells. One such
factor that may regulate the survival of developing postnatal
Schwann cells in vivo is glial growth factor. Glial growth factor,
which was originally described as a mitogen for rat Schwann
cells in vitro (10, 11), belongs to a group of related growth
factors with diverse biological functions that are now known
collectively as the neuregulins (NRG; for recent reviews on the
NRGs and their receptors, see refs. 12 and 13). NRG is highly
expressed by the neurons whose axons populate both devel-
oping and adult peripheral nerves, and this growth factor has
been shown to mediate a variety of effects on glial cell
development in culture (12-17). In particular, NRG has been
demonstrated to prevent the apoptotic death of Schwann cell
precursors in vitro (18).

The NRGs are encoded by a single gene, with alternative
splicing resulting in the generation of at least 12 distinct
membrane-bound or soluble molecules, all of which contain an
epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like region in their extracel-
lular domains. The various protein products can be subclassi-
fied into a and 13 species on the basis of sequence differences

Abbreviations: NRG, neuregulin; NRG-,B, NRG ,3 isoform; EGF,
epidermal growth factor; FGF-2, fibroblast growth factor 2;
PDGF-AA and PDGF-BB, platelet-derived growth factors AA and
BB; FCS, fetal calf serum; Fsk, forskolin; MTT, 3-[4,5-dimethylthia-
zol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide; TUNEL, terminal de-
oxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-fluorescein nick end-
labeling.
tPresent address: Department of Molecular Neuropathology, Smith-
Kline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, Third Avenue, Harlow, Essex,
CB11 3UG, United Kingdom.
ITo whom reprint requests should be addressed.
'Present address: Neuroimmunology Laboratory, The Walter and
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Parade, Parkville
3052, Melbourne, Australia.

9229

9230

Neurobiology: Syroid et al.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996)

in the carboxyl-terminal region of the EGF-like domain. NRGs
activate members of a subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases
that are related to the EGF receptor, a subfamily that also
includes the ErbB2/Neu, ErbB3, and ErbB4 receptors (12, 13).
Formation and activation of a functional NRG receptor is
thought to involve heterodimerization between the signal
transducer ErbB2 and either of two NRG binding components,
ErbB3 or ErbB4, although ErbB4 on its own may be activated
by NRG and elicit cellular responses.

In this paper, we establish that postnatal Schwann cells, both
in vitro and in vivo, are susceptible to apoptotic cell death and,
moreover, that Schwann cell death can be prevented by X3
forms of NRG (NRG-/3). In contrast, other well-characterized
Schwann cell mitogens, namely fibroblast growth factor 2
(FGF-2) and platelet-derived growth factor BB (PDGF-BB),
fail to mediate a survival effect. Furthermore, NRG-induced
survival activity in Schwann cells is shown to be potentially
mediated through an ErbB2/ErbB3 heterodimeric receptor.
These results suggest that programmed cell death in the
Schwann cell lineage is initiated by a relative deficit in the
provision of axonally synthesized NRG and provide a potential
mechanism by which peripheral nerve modeling occurs in
postnatal development.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cell Culture. Cultures of rat Schwann cells were prepared
from postnatal day 3 sciatic nerve and purified to greater than
99.5% homogeneity essentially as described (19). Cells were
plated on poly-L-lysine-coated (100 ,ug/ml; Sigma) 10-cm
tissue culture Petri dishes (Falcon) and maintained in DMEM
(GIBCO), 10% fetal calf serum (FCS; HyClone), 2 ,uM
forskolin (Fsk; Calbiochem), and partially purified bovine glial
growth factor, purified as described (11). Schwann cells grown
on eight-well chamber slides (Lab-Tek) were plated on poly-
L-lysine (100 ,ug/ml) and laminin (10 ,ug/ml; GIBCO). For
survival assays, cells were dissociated by trypsinisation, washed
once in DMEM containing 10% FCS to inactivate the trypsin,
and then washed an additional five times in cold serum-free
DMEM to remove serum. Cells were plated at 200-800 cells
per well in microwell plates (Nunc), in either DMEM with
growth factor or DMEM containing BSA (Sigma) as the
negative control. In each experiment, the final concentration
of BSA in the negative control was equivalent to that present
in the test conditions. Assays were performed over a 72-hr
period using multiple microwell plates, such that numbers of
viable cells at each time point (0, 1, 2, and 3 days) were scored
from six wells in a single plate using a 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-
2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) survival assay
(20). Survival assays were carried out independently at least
three times, except for conditions in which survival activity was
not detected, in which case survival assays were carried out
twice. The number of viable cells per condition was normalized
as a fraction of the baseline or initial plating density (time 0)
and expressed as a survival percentage.

Growth Factors. FGF-2, PDGF-AA, and PDGF-BB were
from Boehringer Mannheim. Human recombinant ( forms of
NRG were obtained from Amgen. A full-length form of
NRG-,31 [NRG-31(14_246); amino acids 14-246] and two
truncated forms [NRG-(3, amino acids 177-228, and NRG-
(31(177-246), amino acids 177-246] were used. BSA (0.1% final
concentration) was added to all growth factors as a carrier
protein.

MTT Survival Assay. MTT (Sigma) was added to cells at a
concentration of 0.5 mg/ml, and the cells were then further
incubated at 37°C for 1 hr. The number of cells in the bottom
of each well exhibiting a positive blue granular reaction
product was assessed.
[3H]Thymidine Incorporation Assay. Schwann cells (10,000
cells per well) were plated onto eight-well chamber slides in

DMEM containing 10% FCS, Fsk (2 ,uM), and NRG-,3 (50
ng/ml) and grown for 24 hr. Cells were then washed three
times in serum-deficient DMEM and incubated for 24 hr in
either DMEM containing 10% FCS, Fsk (2 ,uM), and NRG-13
(50 ng/ml), DMEM containing NRG-,B only (50 ng/ml; using
the full-length NRG-,31 and both truncated forms of the
molecule), or DMEM containing BSA only. Each culture
condition was performed in triplicate. [3H]Thymidine (Amer-
sham) was then added to all wells at a concentration of 0.03
,uCi/ml (1 Ci = 37 GBq), and after a further 24 hr, the cells
were fixed for 20 min at room temperature in 4% paraformal-
dehyde/PBS buffer (137 mM NaCl/2.7 mM KCl/4.3 mM
Na2HPO4 7H20/1.4 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.3).

Slides were washed for 5 min at room temperature in PBS;
dehydrated through sequential washes for 2 min each in water
and 70%, 95%, and 100% ethanol; and then finally air-dried at
room temperature. The slides were then quickly dipped in
NTB-2 emulsion (1:1 in water; Kodak) at 45°C, air-dried, and
stored for 2 weeks at 4°C in the dark. Slides were developed in
D-19 (Kodak) and fixed in Kodak fixer according to the
manufacturer's specifications. Slides were counterstained in
Mayer's hematoxylin (Sigma) for 5 min, washed in tap water
for 5 min, and then mounted.

Cells that had four or more silver grains over their nuclei
were considered to be [3H]thymidine-positive. The experiment
was performed three times, and on each occasion, the per-
centage of cells with positive nuclei from the three wells
exposed to each culture condition was determined by assessing
approximately 300 randomly chosen nuclei.

Detection of Apoptotic Cells. For the detection of apoptotic
Schwann cells in vitro, Schwann cells grown on eight-well
chamber slides were fixed for 5 min at room temperature in 4%
paraformaldehyde/PBS. Cells were washed three times for 5
min in PBS, permeabilized by incubation for 5 min at room
temperature in PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma),
and then washed as described above. Apoptotic cells were
detected using the TUNEL technique (21) by incubating the
cells for 1 hour at 37°C in terminal deoxynucleotidyltrans-
ferase-mediated dUTP-fluorescein nick end labeling
(TUNEL) reaction mixture supplied in the in situ Cell Death
Detection Kit, Fluorescein (Boehringer Mannheim). Cells
were washed as above and then stained with Hoechst nuclear
stain (1 ,ug/ml in PBS; Sigma) for 2 min at room temperature.
Cells were washed again as above, and slides were mounted
using Vectashield fluorescence mounting medium (Vector
Laboratories).

For the detection of apoptotic Schwann cells in vivo, longi-
tudinal sections of rat sciatic nerve were first fixed for 10 min
in 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS. Sections were then washed two
times for 5 min in PBS and digested with proteinase K (20
,ug/ml in PBS; Sigma) for 10 min at room temperature.
Sections were washed two times for 5 min in distilled water and
fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin (10% formaldehyde in
PBS) for 10 min at room temperature. Sections were washed
two times for 5 min in PBS and then post-fixed in ethanol/
acetic acid (2:1) for 5 min at -20°C. Sections were washed two
times for 5 min in PBS, and the TUNEL reaction was
performed as described above except that reactions were
allowed to proceed for 2 hr. Sections were washed four times
for 5 min in PBS and stained with Hoechst nuclear stain as
described for 5 min at room temperature. Sections were then
washed three times for 5 min in PBS, and slides were mounted
as described above.

Cryostat Sections of Sciatic Nerve. Postnatal day 3 rat sciatic
nerves were dissected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS
for 30 min. Nerves were first embedded in agar (2.5% in PBS;
Sigma) and then incubated overnight in 20% sucrose/PBS at
4°C. Sciatic nerves were then embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT
compound (Miles) and frozen in dry ice. Frozen longitudinal
sciatic nerve sections (8 ,um) were cut and collected onto

Neurobiology: Syroid et al.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996)

9231

Vectabond-treated (Vector Laboratories) glass slides using a
cryostat microtome and allowed to dry overnight at room
temperature. Sections were stored at -70°C.

RESULTS

Postnatal Schwann Cells Undergo Apoptosis in Vitro. We
first examined whether Schwann cells isolated from postnatal
day 3 rat sciatic nerve undergo apoptosis in vitro, in serum-free
conditions. Schwann cells were grown to 90% confluency,
washed in serum-deficient DMEM, and then incubated for 48
hr in either the presence or the absence of serum (Fig. 1). Cells
were assessed for the morphological features of apoptosis
using phase contrast microscopy, Hoechst nuclear staining,
and the TUNEL technique. Although cells maintained in the
presence of serum appeared morphologically normal (Fig. 1A)
with oval-shaped nuclei characteristic of Schwann cells grown
in vitro (Fig. 1B), widespread Schwann cell death occurred
upon serum withdrawal (see Fig. 2A). Cells became rounded,
and a significant percentage were convoluted (Fig. 1D). Such
cells displayed both nuclear fragmentation and chromatin
condensation (denoted by arrows; Fig. 1E), both morpholog-
ical features of apoptotic cell death (4). Moreover, the TUNEL
technique established that both the fragmented nuclei and a
subset of cells with morphologically normal nuclei served as
substrates for the incorporation of dUTP (Fig. 1F). These
observations suggest that such nuclei were at different stages
in the apoptotic pathway but that DNA fragmentation, another
distinguishing feature of apoptotic cell death, was well ad-
vanced in each dying cell. Cells maintained in the presence of
serum did not incorporate dUTP (Fig. 1C). Despite the
positive TUNEL reaction for Schwann cells grown in the
absence of serum, we failed to identify DNA laddering (data
not shown), similar to the previously reported inability to
detect DNA laddering in oligodendrocytes undergoing apo-
ptotic cell death (20). Death of Schwann cells subjected to
serum withdrawal was partially inhibited over 24 hr (approx-
imately 50%) when cells were cultured in the presence of the
protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (data not shown),
suggesting that active metabolic processes were at least par-
tially involved in mediating the observed Schwann cell death.

Taken together, these results indicate that Schwann cell death
was apoptotic rather than necrotic in nature.

Schwann Cell Death Is Inhibited by NRG. To assess the
kinetics of Schwann cell death, cells were plated in serum-
deficient DMEM in microwell plates at low cell density, and
serial MTT incorporation assays were performed (Fig. 2). This
study revealed an ongoing reduction in viable cell numbers
over a 3-day period (BSA-negative control; Fig. 2A). These
results are consistent with the morphological data above,
which suggest that Schwann cell death was asynchronous in
nature, a phenomenon that is also associated with apoptotic
cell death (4). This was further corroborated by the observa-
tion that at any given time point there was significant variability
in the degree to which individual cells incorporated and
converted MTT into the chromogenic reaction product (data
not shown).

We next examined whether Schwann cell death could be
inhibited by the administration of various growth factors
previously implicated in playing a role in glial cell development
in vitro. Three growth factors, namely FGF-2, PDGF-BB, and
NRG-,B1, are mitogenic for Schwann cells in vitro, an activity
which is potentiated by the Fsk-mediated elevation of intra-
cellular levels of cAMP (9, 16, 22-24). Moreover, FGF-2 and
NRG-131 can act as survival factors for Schwann cell precursors
in vitro (7, 18), whereas PDGF-AA can mediate the survival of
oligodendrocytes and their 0-2A progenitors both in vitro and
in vivo (20). As shown in Fig. 2A, FGF-2, PDGF-AA, and
PDGF-BB could not effect the survival of Schwann cells plated
in the absence of serum. However, NRG-, (a truncated form
of NRG-,B1 containing amino acids 177-228, essentially en-
compassing the 13-type EGF-like domain) was able to maintain
viable Schwann cell numbers at approximately 80% of the
initial plating density over a 3-day period (Fig. 2A) and did so
in a dose-dependent manner (data not shown). Another
truncated form of NRG-,31 containing amino acids 177-246,
NRG-131(177-246), exerted a survival effect on Schwann cells
similar to that derived from NRG-f3, whereas the full-length
molecule containing amino acids 14-246, NRG-31(14_246), was
slightly less efficient in potentiating Schwann cell survival (Fig.
2B). These observations are consistent with previous demon-
strations that the NRG 13-type EGF-like domain is sufficient
to effect the survival of Schwann cell precursors in vitro (18)

FIG. 1.

Postnatal Schwann cells die by apoptosis in vitro upon serum withdrawal. Confluent cultures of rat Schwann cells in eight-well chamber
slides were washed two times with serum-deficient DMEM and incubated for 48 hr in either the presence (A-C) or the absence (D-F) of serum.
(A and D) Phase contrast microscopy showing cellular morphology. (B and E) Hoechst staining of cells showing nuclear morphology. (C and F)
Detection of Schwann cells undergoing apoptosis using the TUNEL technique. Arrows denote nuclear fragmentation. (Bar = 10 ,um.)

9232

Neurobiology: Syroid et al.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996)

A

'a

2

o-01

B

.E
2
el

60

20

100

0

1

2

3

40

0

c

100

.E
as01
CO)

80

60

40

20 1

0

1

2

3

Days Post Serum Withdrawal

FIG. 2. NRG promotes the survival of Schwann cells in vitro. Rat
Schwann cells were washed five times in serum-deficient DMEM and
plated on multiple microwell plates either in the presence of the factor
indicated or with BSA. Viable cells were identified and counted using
an MTT incorporation assay at daily intervals over a 3-day period. (A)
NRG-,3 could effect Schwann cell survival, whereas FGF-2, PDGF-
AA, PDGF-BB, and BSA could not (factor concentration was 10
ng/ml). (B) Full-length NRG-p1l(14_246) was less efficient in mediating
Schwann cell survival than truncated NRG-J3 and NRG-1(177-246)
(factor concentration was 50 ng/ml). (C) NRG-P (10 ng/ml) could
effect Schwann cell survival only when added coincident with cell
plating (time 0), but not when added 2 or 4 hr after plating. Error bars
represent the standard deviation from the mean in survival activity
derived from three separate experiments. Conditions in which survival
activity was not detected were carried out twice; error bars represent
the range in survival activity.

and the proliferation of postnatal Schwann cells in culture (16),
and support earlier work demonstrating that the EGF-like
domain is both necessary and sufficient for NRG receptor
activation in vitro (12, 13). Schwann cells cultured in serum-
deficient DMEM containing NRG-3 converted MTT into
extremely high levels of the chromogenic reaction product,
indicating that these Schwann cells were much more metabol-
ically active than those cultured with the other factors or with
BSA alone (data not shown). Cells cultured in DMEM con-
taining NRG-13 also displayed marked morphological differ-
ences in comparison with cultures containing the other factors,
or control cultures containing BSA only. For example, cells
cultured with NRG-f were elongated and bipolar (see Fig. 3B),

whereas the majority of the few viable weakly MTT-positive
cells in control cultures (data not shown) were rounded and did
not display extended processes (see Fig. 3C).

Given that up to 3 days were required for a subset of the
Schwann cells to lose MTT positivity and to become apoptotic
in BSA-containing control cultures (Fig. 2A), we examined
whether such cells could be rescued from cell death by the
addition of NRG-f3 at various times after plating. Interestingly,
administration of NRG-f3 2 hr after plating was only able to
effect the survival of a small subset of Schwann cells, whereas
addition of NRG-f3 4 hr after plating was entirely ineffective
in down-regulating cell death (Fig. 2C). These results further
support the notion that a genetic program is initiated during
apoptotic cell death and demonstrate that Schwann cells are
irreversibly committed to a cell death pathway within 2-4 hr of
plating in the absence of serum.

NRG Is a Schwann Cell Survival Factor. To examine the
possibility that NRG-3 isoforms were acting as Schwann cell
mitogens rather than as survival factors, [3H]thymidine incor-
poration assays were performed. As shown in Fig. 3A, the vast
majority of cells cultured under proliferative conditions ac-
tively incorporated [3H]thymidine (89%; 946 nuclei). In con-
trast, only 0.03% of Schwann cells cultured in the presence of
NRG-f3 alone incorporated [3H]thymidine [Fig. 3B; 2922
nuclei (additional NRG-f31 isoforms not shown)], whereas no
[3H]thymidine incorporation was detected in negative control
cultures containing BSA only (Fig. 3C; 758 nuclei). These
results demonstrate that the NRG-13 isoforms, in the absence
of other cofactors, are Schwann cell survival factors in vitro.
ErbB2 and ErbB3 Are Expressed by Schwann Cells. To
examine the expression profile of NRG receptors in rat
Schwann cells, a Northern blot analysis was carried out. As
indicated in Fig. 4, Schwann cells cultured in the presence of
serum express both ErbB2 and ErbB3 NRG receptor mRNAs.
However, expression of the ErbB4 receptor mRNA was not
detected (data not shown). These results are in agreement with
previous studies in which the expression profile of NRG
receptors was examined in proliferating human Schwann cells
in vitro (16). Interestingly, expression of the ErbB2 and ErbB3
receptors was maintained for both 4 and 24 hr after serum
withdrawal (Fig. 4). The results suggest that the NRG-induced
survival signal in postnatal Schwann cells is transduced
through an ErbB2/ErbB3 heterodimeric receptor and that the
temporal dependence in the ability of NRG-,B to abrogate
Schwann cell apoptosis subsequent to serum withdrawal (Fig.
2C) is not due to ErbB2 or ErbB3 down-regulation.

Schwann Cell Death in Vivo. To determine whether
Schwann cell apoptosis might play a role in postnatal periph-
eral nerve development in vivo, the TUNEL technique was
adopted to identify apoptotic Schwann cells in longitudinal
sections of postnatal day 3 rat sciatic nerves. Schwann cells can
easily be identified in longitudinal sciatic nerve sections based
on their typical elliptical nuclear morphology (Fig. 5A and C).
When numerous sections (n = 20; approximately 24,000
nuclei) were directly examined for the presence of apoptotic
Schwann cells using the TUNEL technique, approximately
0.18% of the Schwann cells in these sciatic nerves were
unambiguously undergoing apoptosis at the time of fixation.
Two representative apoptotic Schwann cells detected using the
TUNEL technique are shown (Fig. 5 B and D), whereas
alterations in nuclear morphology associated with apoptotic
cell death in these two cells are shown in the corresponding
Hoechst stained nuclei (A and C, respectively). Note the more
severe nuclear fragmentation (denoted by arrows) for the
apoptotic Schwann cell in Fig. 5 C and D, suggesting that
apoptosis for this Schwann cell is at a more advanced stage
than that for the apoptotic Schwann cell in Fig. 5 A and B. In
contrast to developing nerves, no apoptotic Schwann cells were
detected in longitudinal sections of mature adult rat or mouse
sciatic nerves [n = 17; approximately 25,000 nuclei (data not

Neurobiology: Syroid et al.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996)

9233

,

4'*

s4'.'

is

'I~~~~~~~~~~~w

-r

£

..9

..,.,,,:,.:.

4E

fiEi

.

'

FIG. 3. NRG is a Schwann cell survival factor in vitro. Subconfluent cultures of Schwann cells were grown for 24 hr on eight-well chamber slides
in the presence of serum, NRG-f3 (50 ng/ml) and Fsk (2 ALM). Cells were washed three times in serum-deficient DMEM and incubated for 24 hr
in DMEM containing either serum, NRG-,B (50 ng/ml), and Fsk (2 ALM) (A), NRG-,B (50 ng/ml) (B), or BSA (C). [3H]Thymidine (0.03 ,uCi/ml)
was then added, and the cells were further incubated for 24 hr, after which the cells were fixed and [3H]thymidine incorporation was assessed. (Bar =
10 ALm.)
shown)]. The results demonstrate that postnatal rat Schwann
cells undergo apoptotic cell death in vivo and suggest that this
process may be a developmentally regulated rather than a
stochastic event.

autocrine manner to potentiate their survival. Postnatal
Schwann cells undergo apoptotic cell death in vitro only upon
serum withdrawal, and cell death is asynchronous in nature,
the majority of cells dying over 3 days (Fig. 2A). In contrast,
Schwann cell precursors are more susceptible to apoptotic cell
death in vitro, the majority of cells dying within 5-6 hr of
plating (7). These observations are consistent with the exis-
tence of distinct molecular mechanisms for the induction of
apoptotic cell death in the two Schwann cell populations or,
alternatively, of the function of distinct downstream signaling
pathways that ultimately converge in Schwann cell apoptosis.
Multiple apoptotic signaling mechanisms may serve to mod-
ulate cellular responses to the variety of developmental cues
that exist for these distinct Schwann cell populations.

Postnatal Schwann cells and their precursors can also be
distinguished by their response to survival factors in vitro.
Whereas NRG can mediate the survival of both cell types,
FGF-2 can act as a survival factor only for Schwann cell
precursors (Fig. 2A; ref. 7). That FGF-2 could not effect the
survival of postnatal rat Schwann cells was somewhat surpris-

DISCUSSION

The results above demonstrate that postnatal Schwann cells,
like their embryonic precursors (7, 18), are susceptible to
apoptotic cell death in vitro. However, postnatal Schwann cells
are not only morphologically distinct from their precursor cells
but can also be distinguished on the basis of their in vitro
behavior. Although postnatal Schwann cells remain viable but
quiescent in vitro when cultured in the presence of serum but
in the absence of exogenous factors, Schwann cell precursors
undergo rapid apoptotic cell death in the absence of exogenous
growth factor support (7). This may reflect the existence of an
unidentified serum-derived survival factor to which only post-
natal Schwann cells can respond or, alternatively, the synthesis
of a factor by postnatal Schwann cells that then operates in an

A ErbB2

ErbB3

est

cm

qe

CM
N__

,

+

.

,

+

4BeiV

ui"-

B

"w ~~~28S

"""

t - - 18S

FIG. 4. NRG signals through an ErbB2/ErbB3 receptor het-
erodimer in mediating Schwann cell survival. Northern blots were
prepared using total RNA (approximately 10 ,g per lane) isolated
from subconfluent Schwann cells either cultured in DMEM containing
serum only (+Ser) or upon serum withdrawal (-Ser) for either 4 or
24 hr. (A) Both ErbB2 and ErbB3 are expressed in Schwann cells in
vitro as indicated by arrows (transcript size approximately 4.8 and 6.2
kb, respectively). Moreover, expression was maintained upon serum
withdrawal. cDNA fragments encompassing the extracellular domains
of rat ErbB2 and human ErbB3 were used to probe blots, which were
washed under high stringency conditions. Note that nonspecific trap-
ping of ErbB3 probe was by 28S and 18S ribosomal RNA. (B)
Methylene blue staining of 28S and 18S RNA after transfer.

FIG. 5.

Postnatal Schwann cells undergo apoptosis in vivo.
Schwann cell apoptosis in the early tat neonate was examined in situ
using 8-,um-thick cryostat frozen sections of postnatal day 3 sciatic
nerve. (A and C) Hoechst staining of sciatic nerve showing typical
elliptical Schwann cell nuclear morphology. (B and D) Detection of
Schwann cells undergoing apoptosis using the TUNEL technique.
Arrows denote nuclear fragmentation. Note the more severe frag-
mentation of the Schwann cell nucleus shown in C and D, indicating
that apoptosis of this cell is at a more advanced stage than that of the
apoptotic Schwann cell shown in A and B. Schwann cells undergoing
apoptosis were not detected in the mature adult rodent sciatic nerve
(data not shown). (Bar = 5 ,um.)

9234

Neurobiology: Syroid et al.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996)

ing given that FGF-2 by itself can be mitogenic for these cells
(9, 22). Response to FGF-2 as a survival factor in postnatal
Schwann cells may depend on coadministration of Fsk, which
is known, through elevation of intracellular cAMP, to up-
regulate growth factor receptor expression (25) and which is
required for optimal stimulation of postnatal rat Schwann cell
proliferation by FGF-2 (24). These same considerations apply
to PDGF-BB, which also can act as a mitogen for postnatal rat
Schwann cells (9, 22, 23), but whose mitogenic effect also
depends on cAMP elevation (25).

Our results also demonstrate that postnatal Schwann cells in
the rodent sciatic nerve undergo apoptotic cell death in vivo
and suggest that Schwann cell apoptosis may be developmen-
tally regulated. Cell death may represent a mechanism by
which Schwann cell numbers are regulated during postnatal
development and matched to the number of axons, such that
the appropriate stoichiometry between axons and Schwann
cells is established. Although the frequency of Schwann cell
apoptosis in postnatal day 3 nerves at the time of fixation was
low (approximately 0.18%), this rate of Schwann cell death
appears to be maintained during early postnatal development,
at least from postnatal days 2-6 (data not shown). During this
period, the generation of new cells rapidly declines (3); hence,
the cumulative proportion of apoptotic Schwann cells during
early postnatal development is likely to be much greater and
may be analogous to developmentally regulated neuronal
apoptosis (5) and oligodendrocytic cell death (6), in which
cumulative cell death approaches 50%. Indeed, the frequency
of apoptotic oligodendrocytes at any given time during the
peak period of oligodendrocyte cell death in the developing rat
optic nerve (postnatal days 4-10) is only 0.25% (20). Although
the relative importance of Schwann cell death in peripheral
nerve development in vivo remains to be established, these
results suggest that postnatal Schwann cell apoptosis may play
a significant role in modeling of the peripheral nerve.

Differentiating Schwann cells may be induced to undergo
apoptosis in response to either the loss of, or the failure to
secure, limiting axonally derived trophic support, analogous to
the mechanism by which correct neuronal numbers and ap-
propriate connections are established during development (5,
8). Because NRG potentiates the survival of postnatal
Schwann cells in vitro (Fig. 2), it is conceivable that Schwann
cell survival in vivo depends upon the provision of axonally
derived NRG. Furthermore, because at least some NRGs are
known to be expressed as membrane-bound molecules, it is
easy to envisage that Schwann cells that have lost axonal
contact, and thus trophic support, would be susceptible to cell
death. Strong evidence for this model is provided by recent
studies in which the terminal Schwann cells associated with the
motor endplates of the neonatal rodent neuromuscular junc-
tion have been observed to undergo apoptotic cell death after
peripheral nerve transection, an event that is prevented by the
exogenous provision of NRG (26). Given this observation, it
would be of interest to examine whether exogenously supplied
NRG could preclude apoptotic Schwann cell death in the
developing nerve as well. It is conceivable that, in addition to
a potential role in defining overt Schwann cell numbers during
postnatal development, Schwann cell apoptosis may also be a
means by which improperly positioned Schwann cells are
removed from surrounding axons.

Although growth factor withdrawal is almost certainly in-
volved in the initiation of apoptotic Schwann cell death, it will
be of great interest to identify the downstream molecules that

mediate this process. Indeed, Schwann cells may afford a
particularly useful system for characterization of the molecular
mechanisms underlying programmed cell death in the nervous
system in general. These cells are easily manipulated and
expanded in vitro, unlike neurons, and can be maintained as
primary cultures, unlike PC12 cells, which have been com-
monly adopted as an in vitro system for the study of neuronal
cell death. Furthermore, the availability of Schwann cell-
specific promoters renders the study of cell death in this
lineage particularly amenable to molecular genetic approaches
in vivo (27).

We thank Danny Ortuhlo, Catherine Jackson, and Darcie Baynes for
technical assistance and Bob Hyman for kindly providing anti-Thy-1
antibodies. This work was supported by postdoctoral fellowships from
the National Multiple Sclerosis Society (D.E.S.), the Boehringer-
Ingelheim Funds and the Human Frontiers in Science Program
Organisation (P.R.M.), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the
Bushell Fellowship of the Royal Australasian College of Physicians
(T.J.K.), and by a grant from the National Institutes of Health (G.L.).

1.

2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.
26.

27.

Webster, H.deF. & Favilla, J. T. (1984) in Peripheral Neuropathy,
eds. Dyck, P. J., Thomas, P. K., Lambert, E. H. & Bunge, R.
(Saunders, Philadelphia), pp. 329-359.
Jessen, K. R. & Mirsky, R. (1992) Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2,575-581.
Brown, M. J. & Asbury, A. K. (1981) Exp. Neurol. 74, 170-186.
Gerschenson, L. E. & Rotello, R. J. (1992) FASEB J. 6, 2450-
2455.
Oppenheim, R. W. (1991) Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 453-501.
Barres, B. A. & Raff, M. C. (1994) Neuron 12, 935-942.
Jessen, K. R., Brennan, A., Morgan, L., Mirsky, R., Kent, A.,
Hashimoto, Y. & Gavrilovic, J. (1994) Neuron 12, 509-527.
Barde, Y.-A. (1989) Neuron 2, 1525-1534.
Eccleston, P. A. (1992) Exp. Cell Res. 199, 1-9.
Raff, M. C., Abney, E., Brockes, J. P. & Hornby-Smith, A. (1978)
Cell 15, 813-822.
Lemke, G. E. & Brockes, J. P. (1984) J. Neurosci. 4, 75-83.
Carraway, K. L., III & Burden, S. J. (1995) Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
5, 606-612.
Lemke, G. (1996) Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 7, 247-262.
Pinkas-Kramarski, R., Eilam, R., Spiegler, O., Lavi, S., Liu, N.,
Chang, D., Wen, D., Schwartz, M. & Yarden, Y. (1994) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 9387-9391.
Vartanian, T., Corfas, G., Li, Y., Fischbach, G. D. & Stefansson,
K. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 11626-11630.
Levi, A. D., Bunge, R. P., Lofgren, J. A., Meima, L., Hefti, F.,
Nikolics, K. & Sliwkowski, M. X. (1995) J. Neurosci. 15, 1329-
1340.
Shah, N. M., Marchionni, M. A., Isaacs, I., Stroobant, P. &
Anderson, D. J. (1994) Cell 77, 349-360.
Dong, Z., Brennan, A., Liu, N., Yarden, Y., Lefkowitz, G.,
Mirsky, R. & Jessen, K. R. (1995) Neuron 15, 585-596.
Brockes, J. P., Fields, K. L. & Raff, M. C. (1979) Brain Res. 165,
105-118.
Barres, B. A., Hart, I. K., Coles, H. S., Burne, J. F., Voyvodic,
J. T., Richardson, W. D. & Raff, M. C. (1992) Cell 70, 31-46.
Gavrieli, Y., Sherman, Y. & Ben-Sasson, S. A. (1992) J. Cell Biol.
119, 493-501.
Stewart, H. J. S., Eccleston, P. A., Jessen, K. R. & Mirsky, R.
(1991) J. Neurosci. Res. 30, 346-352.
Hardy, M., Reddy, U. R. & Pleasure, D. (1992) J. Neurosci. Res.
31, 254-262.
Davis, J. B. & Stroobant, P. (1990) J. Cell Biol. 110, 1353-1360.
Weinmaster, G. & Lemke, G. (1990) EMBO J. 9, 915-920.
Trachtenberg, J. T. & Thompson, W. J. (1996) Nature (London)
379, 174-177.
Messing, A., Behringer, R. R., Hammang, J. P., Palmiter, R. D.,
Brinster, R. L. & Lemke, G. (1992) Neuron 8, 507-520.

