 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Published Online: 29 June, 1998 | Supp Info: 
Downloaded from 

jcb.rupress.org 

on June 12, 2018

http://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.141.7.1589

Drosophila

Structural Analysis of 
Domains Important for Growth Control and Subcellular Localization
Dennis R. LaJeunesse, Brooke M. McCartney, and Richard G. Fehon
Developmental, Cell and Molecular Biology Group, Department of Zoology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
27708-1000

 Merlin Reveals Functional 

Merlin, the product of the 
Neurofibromatosis 
) tumor-suppressor gene, is a member of the 

Abstract. 
(
type 2 
NF2
protein 4.1 superfamily that is most closely related to 
ezrin, radixin, and moesin (ERM). NF2 is a dominantly 
inherited disease characterized by the formation of bi-
lateral acoustic schwannomas and other benign tumors 
associated with the central nervous system. To under-
stand its cellular functions, we are studying a Merlin ho-
mologue in 
. As is the case for NF2 tumors, 
Drosophila
ate relative to their neighbors. Using in vitro mutagene-
sis, we define functional domains within Merlin re-
quired for proper subcellular localization and for 
genetic rescue of lethal 

Drosophila
 cells lacking 

 alleles. Remarkably, the 

 function overprolifer-

Merlin

Merlin

ecent

R

Rb

p53

 and 

  studies  have  identified  a  rapidly  growing
number of tumor suppressor genes whose normal
function in cells directly or indirectly regulates cel-
lular proliferation. Not surprisingly, many of these genes,
, have been shown to encode proteins
such as 
that  regulate  aspects  of  the  cell  cycle  (for  review  see
Brown, 1997). However, other tumor suppressor genes ap-
pear to function in processes less clearly related to control
of the cell cycle. One of the most intriguing genes of this
  gene,
latter  class  is  the 
which  encodes  a  member  of  the  protein  4.1  superfamily,
Merlin (Rouleau et al., 1993; Trofatter et al., 1993). Mem-
bers of the protein 4.1 superfamily, a large group of mem-

Neurofibromatosis  type  2

1
)
NF2

  (

Address all correspondence to Richard G. Fehon, B361 LSRC, Research
Drive,  Duke  University,  Durham,  NC  27708-1000.  Tel.:  (919)  613-8192.
Fax: (919) 613-8177. E-mail: rfehon@acpub.duke.edu

-terminal region; 

Abbreviations used in this paper

1. 
: AEL, after egg laying; AHS, after heat
shock; BB, Blue Box region; BBA, Merlin with the seven Blue Box resi-
dues changed to alanine; CNS, central nervous system; CNTR, conserved
NH
ERM,
2
ezrin-radixin-moesin; FLP, yeast 2 micron Flipase enzyme; FRT, Flipase
Recognition  Target  site;  GFP,  green  fluorescent  protein; 
;
Merlin
NF2, Neurofibromatosis type 2; S2 cells, Schneider line 2 cells; UAS, up-
stream activation sequences of yeast Gal4 transcription factor.

BB, Merlin with Blue Box region removed;
 

, 
Mer

⌬

results of these experiments demonstrate that all essen-
tial genetic functions reside in the plasma membrane–
associated NH
-terminal 350 amino acids of Merlin. 
2
Removal of a seven–amino acid conserved sequence 
within this domain results in a dominant-negative form 
of Merlin that is stably associated with the plasma 
membrane and causes overproliferation when ex-
pressed ectopically in the wing. In addition, we provide 
evidence that the COOH-terminal region of Merlin has 
a negative regulatory role, as has been shown for ERM 
proteins. These results provide insights into the func-
tions and functional organization of a novel tumor sup-
pressor gene.

brane-associated cytoplasmic proteins, include protein 4.1;
talin;  the  ezrin,  radixin,  moesin  (ERM)  proteins;  Merlin;
 Expanded; several protein phosphatases; and
Drosophila
at least two nonmuscle myosins (for review see McCartney
and Fehon, 1997). The defining feature of this superfamily
is  a  conserved  region  of  200–300  amino  acids  usually  lo-
  terminus  of  the  protein.  This  region  is
cated  in  the  NH
2
particularly well conserved between Merlin and the ERM
proteins. The ERM proteins appear to function as molecu-
lar linkers by binding to transmembrane proteins through
-terminal domain and linking them to the cortical
the NH
2
actin cytoskeleton through a COOH-terminal actin-bind-
ing domain. Consistent with this role, ERM proteins local-
ize  to  actin-rich  structures  such  as  the  adherens  junction
and microvilli (Franck et al., 1993; Takeuchi et al., 1994).

Although the structural similarities between Merlin and
the ERM proteins suggest that they may have similar func-
tions,  the  exact  nature  of  Merlin’s  cellular  functions  has
not been defined. Recent studies in cultured cells indicate
that expressed Merlin protein accumulates in some actin-
rich membrane domains, such as membrane ruffles at the
leading  edge  of  migrating  cells  (Gonzalez-Agosti  et  al.,
1996; Sainio et al., 1997), consistent with the localization of
ERM  proteins.  However,  several  lines  of  evidence  indi-
cate that Merlin has functions that are clearly distinct from
-terminal
those of ERM proteins. First, although the NH
2

 The Rockefeller University Press, 0021-9525/98/06/1589/11 $2.00

The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 141, Number 7, June 29, 1998 1589–1599
http://www.jcb.org

1589

ª
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

domains of Merlin and the ERM proteins are similar (the
protein  4.1  superfamily  domain),  Merlin  lacks  the  well-
defined  COOH-terminal  actin-binding  domain  found  in
ERM proteins (Turunen et al., 1994; Gary and Bretscher,
1995). In addition, while the ERM proteins are function-
ally redundant (Takeuchi et al., 1994), there is no evidence
for  redundancy  between  the  ERM  proteins  and  Merlin.
 gene can be mutated to lethality in both
The 
 and mouse (Fehon et al., 1997; McClatchey et
Drosophila
al., 1997). Finally, in vivo studies of subcellular localization
of  Merlin  and  Moesin  reveal  that  they  can  be  distinct,
again supporting the idea that these proteins have differ-
ent functions (McCartney and Fehon, 1996).

NF2/Merlin

NF2

Merlin

Moesin

 genes, 

, a well conserved 

, the sole ERM gene in 

To define the cellular functions of Merlin and the ERM
proteins,  we  have  isolated  and  characterized  two 
Dro-
,
Drosophila
sophila
 homologue (McCartney
and 
and Fehon, 1996). In the present study, we show that 
Mer-
 and is required
lin
for  the  proper  regulation  of  cell  proliferation.  Further-
more, our analysis indicates that essential Merlin functions
occur  at  the  cytoplasmic  face  of  the  cell  membrane  and
that  all  of  these  functions  can  be  mediated  by  the  con-
served NH
2

 is essential for viability in 

-terminal region.

Drosophila

Materials and Methods

Drosophila

Drosophila Cultures and Stocks Used
All 
molasses, and agar medium. 
of 
scribed in Fehon et al. (1997).

  cultures  were  maintained  on  standard  corn  meal,  yeast,
 stocks were used for the transformation
  transgenes.  The  Merlin  alleles  used  in  this  study  are  de-

UASMerlin

1118

w

 

⫹

⫽
 

⫽
 

 
mC]

 
mC]

  with 

y  w  P{w[

Mer*  P{neoFRT}19A/FM6
⫹

PiM}10D  P{neoFRT}19A/Y;P{hs-FLP},  Sb/TM6B.

Somatic Mosaic Analysis and Histology of Adult Eyes
1118
Fly stocks capable of producing clones were generated by crossing 
w
3
PiM}5A
sn
  Off-
P{w[
spring from this cross were heat shocked at either 36 or 72 h after egg lay-
⬚
ing (AEL) using one of two different heat shock regimens: 30 min at 38
C,
⬚
⬚
⬚
⬚
60 min at 25
C, and
C, 60 min at 25
C or 60 min at 38
C, and 30 min at 38
⬚
 
1118
60 min at 38
in the
C. In the adult, mutant clones were marked with 
3
eye and 
 in the thorax; wild-type sister clones were marked in the eye
sn
with four copies of the 
yel-
 mutation. To analyze clone size in the eye, flies were placed in vented
low
Eppendorf tubes (Madison, WI) and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. The
treated flies were dried with dry carbon dioxide, and the heads were then
dissected with a razor blade and mounted on a glass slide on double stick
tape. Eyes were examined and ommatidia counted with the compound mi-
croscope using transmitted light and the 10
 objective. Fixation and sec-
tioning of adult eyes was performed as previously described (Tomlinson
and Ready, 1987), with the exception that the tissue was postfixed in 2%
OsO
4

 transgene and in the thorax with the 

 and embedded in Araldite resin.

mini-white

w

⫻

Sequencing of Mutant Merlin Alleles
Genomic DNA was obtained from single first instar larvae hemizygous for
each 
 genomic DNA was ampli-
fied  using  intron-specific  primers.  The  resulting  PCR  products  were  se-
quenced  using  the  AmpliCycle  sequencing  kit  (Perkin-Elmer  Corp.,
Branchburg, NJ).

 allele (marked with 

Merlin

Merlin

yellow

). 

Construction of Truncated Merlin Proteins
-terminal  myc
A  Bluescript  shuttle  vector  was  generated  with  an  NH
2
⬘ 
epitope  tag  by  annealing  two  primers,  consmyc  S  (sense)  5
AAT  TCA
CCA  TGG  AGC  AAA  AGC  TCA  TTT  CTG  AAG  AGG  ACT  TGA
⬘ 
GGC CTA A and consmyc A (antisense) 5
GAT CTT AGG CTT CAA
GTC CTC TTC AGA AAT GAG CTT TTG CTC CAT GGT G, which
produce a duplex with over-hanging EcoRI and BglII ends. This fragment
was subsequently cloned into an EcoRI/BamHI-cut Bluescript SK
 plas-
mid. (All restriction enzymes were obtained from New England Biolabs,
Beverly, MA.) Digestion of the modified vector with StuI allowed PCR-
generated 
  transgenes  to  be  cloned  in-frame  immediately  down-
stream of the myc epitope.

Merlin

⫺

⌬

BB

⌬

All 

Merlin

 constructs were generated by PCR amplification from a full-
length Merlin cDNA clone (McCartney and Fehon, 1996). The sequence
of all PCR-amplified regions was confirmed by sequencing using standard
methods. To make upstream activation sequences of the yeast Gal4 tran-
scription factor (UAS) expression constructs, a XhoI/XbaI fragment from
the  BSSK-myc  shuttle  vector  was  then  cloned  into  an  XhoI/XbaI-pre-
pared pUASt transformation vector (Brand and Perrimon, 1993). Trans-
formation of these constructs was performed as described (Rebay et al.,
1993). 4–10 independent lines were established for each construct.

BB

⫺

BBA

Mer

Merlin

myc Mer

⬘ 
, the 5
half of 

To construct BSSK-

 was amplified us-
ing  the  M13  Universal  Primer  of  the  BSSK
  vector,  and  an  antisense
  primer  within  which  a  PvuII  site  was  engineered  (underlined  in
Merlin
⬘ 
primer sequence): 5
GCG TCA TCT GCA GCT GAT GCG. This prod-
⬘
uct was then digested with EcoRI and PvuII. The 3
 region was
 
similarly generated using M13 reverse and an internal Merlin sense primer
⬘ 
⬘
whose 5
TGG GAG GAA CGG ATC
 sequence began at codon 177: 5
AAG ACA TGG; this product was digested with PstI and ligated together
⬘
with the 5
. Positive clones
 piece into an EcoRI/PstI cut BSSK-
were  sequenced  to  verify  the  presence  of  the  deletion.  The  BSSK-
myc-
⬘
 vector was constructed in a similar manner using sense (5
 TAC
Mer
CAG  ATG  ACC  GCG  GCA  GCG  TGG  GAG  GAA  CGG)  and  anti-
⬘
sense (5
 CTC CCA CAT TTC CGC GGC TGC TGC GGC CTG ATC
GGT CAC TCC) primers that changed amino acids 171–177 to alanines
and contained a SacII site for cloning (underlined in primer sequence). To
make BSSK-
 mu-
tation  was  digested  with  NheI  and  NspI.  A  BSSK-
  vector  was
prepared by a complete NheI digest and a partial NspI digest. (The site is
unique in 
 vector.) A ligation was
performed using the prepared PCR product and the NheI/NspI-prepared
BSSK
 myc tag vector. Positive clones were sequenced to detect the pres-
ence of the point mutation.

, a genomic PCR fragment containing the 

, but another site is in the BSSK

⫹
mycMer

⫹
mycMer

3
mycMer

Merlin

3
Mer

⫺

⫺

⌬

BB

BBA

  UAS
,

,  UAS

mycMer

mycMer

⫹
mycMer

,  and  UAS

To  make  Merlin  green  fluorescent  protein  (GFP)  fusion  proteins,
3
UAS
mycMer
 and is
were digested with BglII and SacI. The SacI site is unique in 
located in the last codon of the 
 open reading frame. A GFP frag-
ment was excised from pGEM7GFPRS (a gift of Kevin Edwards and Dan
Kiehart,  Duke  University)  using  SacI  and  XbaI.  The  SacI  site  lies  eight
⬘
codons 5
 to the start ATG of the GFP open reading frame and is in-frame
to the 
 open reading frame. A pCaSpeR-hs vector was prepared us-
ing BglII and XbaI. A three-piece ligation was performed using gel-puri-
fied fragments of 

, GFP, and the prepared pCaSpeR-hs vector.

Merlin

Merlin

Merlin

Merlin

Wing Measurements
Wing cuticles were prepared by first incubating the entire fly in 70% etha-
nol and then submerging it in a drop of water on a siliconized slide, where
the wings were dissected away and mounted in 
l Aquamount (BDH
Laboratory  Supplies,  Poole,  England)  on  a  glass  slide.  Only  wings  that
had been well flattened during the mounting process were used for further
analysis. Camera lucida drawings were made of the wing perimeter, wing
veins, and any ectopic veination. These drawings were then scanned at 75
dots per inch using a flatbed scanner and analyzed using the “measure”
tool in NIH Image. The area of the entire wing or the individual areas be-
tween  the  wing  veins  (the  intervein  regions)  were  determined  and  ex-
pressed in square millimeters.

30 

ⵑ

␮

Transfection of Schneider 2 Cells and In Vivo 
Competition Experiments
For expression of the truncated Merlin fragments in Schneider line 2 (S2)
cultured cells, two sets of expression constructs were used: pCaSpeR-hs, a
heat shock inducible vector, and pRmHa-3, an inducible metallothionein
promoter vector. For the heat shock vectors, a BglII/XbaI fragment from
the UAS 
 truncation constructs was cloned into a BglII/XbaI-pre-
pared  pCaSpeR-hs  vector.  To  generate  pRmHa-3,  a  BglII/BamHI  frag-
ment  from  pCaSpeR-hs 
  constructs  was  cloned  into  BamHI-pre-
pared  pRmHa-3.  The  maintenance,  induction,  and  immunofluorescent
analysis of S2 cells was performed as previously described (Fehon et al.,

Merlin

Merlin

The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 141, 1998

1590

1990). In the time course experiments, transfected S2 cell cultures were in-
⬚
duced with a 20 min/38
C heat shock; samples were then collected at time
points 1, 3, and 6 h after heat shock (AHS) induction. The samples were
fixed and stained with a mouse anti-myc antibody 9c10.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Merlin

1–600

⌬

BB

Merlin

, 
Merlin

For the
 

in vivo competition experiment, we cotransfected S2 cells with
two different plasmids: a pRmHa-3 myc-tagged 
 construct (either
wild-type 
) and a pCaSpeR-hs non–myc-
tagged 
  GFP  fusion  protein  construct.  The  transfected  cells  were
treated with a CuSO
 solution (final concentration 0.6 mM) to induce the
4
metallothionein promoter, incubated for 3 h, and heat shocked for 20 min/
⬚
38
C to induce expression of the heat shock construct. Samples were col-
lected 5 h AHS, fixed, and stained with a mouse anti-myc antibody.

Merlin

, or 

Merlin

UASMer

 transgenes,

Determination of In Vivo Activity
1 w1118 Mer/
To determine the rescue activity of our 
FM7; T80Gal4/T80Gal4 females were crossed to UASmycMer transgenic
males. Four equal classes of flies would be expected from this cross, in-
cluding  males  hemizygous  for  a  Merlin  mutation  that  lack  endogenous
Merlin function. To determine the percentage of rescue, the number of F1
progeny excluding the rescued hemizygous males was divided by three to
yield the predicted number of mutant offspring. The number of observed
mutant progeny (marked by yellow) was then divided by this number to
yield the percentage of rescue. The numbers were then normalized to the
rescue provided by Merlin1–600, which provided the greatest rescue.

 y

Results

Characterization of Mutations within the Drosophila 
Merlin Gene
The Drosophila Merlin gene is located on the X chromo-
some at cytological position 18D-E. Four mutations within
Merlin  have  been  previously  identified  (Fehon  et  al.,
1997).  Although  none  of  these  alleles  causes  embryonic
lethality, three of these mutations cause larval and pupal
lethality  without  strong  distinguishing  phenotypes.  The
three lethal Merlin alleles encode putative truncated pro-
teins  as  a  result  of  nonsense  mutations:  Merlin1  (Mer1),
Gln324  to  stop;  Mer2,  Gln318  to  stop;  Mer4,  Gln170  to
stop.  A  single  viable  allele,  Mer3,  was  recovered  from
these screens and is due to a missense mutation of Met177
to Ile. Flies homozygous for Mer3 survive as viable, sterile
adults and display a broadened wing phenotype along with
low  and  variably  penetrant  expression  of  weakly  rough-
ened eyes and the development of abnormal head cuticle
structures  (data  not  shown).  Although  no  genetic  defi-
ciency exists to test for residual function of these alleles,
we conclude that Mer4 is likely a null mutation based on
the severity of the truncation predicted for this allele.

To  characterize  the  cellular  phenotypes  of  Merlin,  we
performed  a  somatic  mosaic  analysis  using  the  yeast  2
micron  Flipase  enzyme/Flipase  Recognition  Target  site
(FLP/FRT)  system  (Golic  and  Lindquist,  1989;  Xu  and
Rubin, 1993). The parental chromosome of all four Mer al-
leles carries an FRT site at cytological position 19A. Al-
though previous experiments mapped Merlin distal to this
FRT at 18D-E, we confirmed that Mer⫺ clones were gen-
erated after heat shock FLP induction by staining mosaic
tissue  with  the  Merlin  antibody  (data  not  shown).  In  the
adult eye, mutant clones were identified by the lack of pig-
ment due to the presence of the white mutation; wild-type
sister clones were marked by a dark orange eye color, and
heterozygous  ommatidia  were  pale  orange.  The  overall
morphology of the eye within the mutant clone appeared

Figure 1. Mer mutant clones in the eye overproliferate relative to
control clones. (A) Control clone w1118 sn3 19AFRT and (B) mu-
tant  clone  w1118  sn3  Mer319AFRT  induced  at  72  h  AEL.  In  all
cases, the mutant or control clone is marked with w1118 (white),
and the wild-type sister clone is marked with four copies of mini-w⫹
(red). The heterozygous background is marked with two copies of
mini-w⫹ (orange). Comparison of the mutant clone to either its
sister clone or to the control clone reveals that the Merlin mutant
clone  is  consistently  larger,  containing  more  ommatidia.  Histo-
logical sections of a w1118 sn3 Mer4 clone induced at 36 h AEL (C)
reveal  essentially  no  abnormal  phenotypes  in  the  ommatidial
morphology of the homozygous mutant tissue. This tissue can be
distinguished from the neighboring heterozygous or homozygous
wild-type tissue by the lack of pigment granules (yellowish spots)
due to the w1118 marker. (D) Summary of the proliferation analy-
sis of Merlin mutant clones. When the t test was applied to these
data, the difference in ratio between the control and all four Mer-
lin mutants was found to be significant (P ⬍ 0.001).

normal  (Fig.  1  B),  although  mutant  clones  occasionally
displayed  a  very  weak  roughened  phenotype  (data  not
shown). Histological sections of these clones revealed es-
sentially normal differentiation of ommatidia with only a
few  disruptions  in  the  organization  of  ommatidia  when
compared with the neighboring wild-type cells (Fig. 1 C).

Comparison of genetically marked, wild-type (control),
and Mer⫺ mutant clones in the eye suggested that the mu-
tant  clones  were  consistently  larger  than  their  wild-type

LaJeunesse et al. 

Functional Analysis of Drosophila NF2/Merlin Homologue

1591

sisters. To address this possibility, we compared the num-
ber of ommatidia within each mutant clone to the number
of  ommatidia  in  its  sister  clone  and  generated  a  ratio  of
mutant  clone  size  to  wild-type  sister  clone  size.  When  a
control  clone  was  generated,  the  area  of  the  white⫺-
marked clone was equal to that of its white⫹ sister (Fig. 1
A and D). In contrast, Merlin mutant clones ranged from
2.1 to 2.7 times the size of their wild-type sisters, depend-
ing on the allele of Merlin examined (Fig. 1, B and D). This
observation suggests that the Merlin mutant cells either pro-
liferate more rapidly than their wild-type neighbors or that
they  continue  proliferating  later  in  development.  Another
possible explanation is that the mutant cells have a defect in
cell  death  leading  to  apparent  overproliferation.  Acridine
orange staining of Merlin mutant imaginal discs did not indi-
cate any changes in the level of cell death, however (data not
shown). Because loss of Merlin function in clones results in
overproliferation  without  any  gross  morphological  defects,
we conclude that Merlin functions in a process that specifi-
cally affects the regulation of proliferation.

In Vitro Mutagenesis
To further investigate its cellular roles, we generated NH2-
and  COOH-terminal  truncations  of  the  Merlin  protein
(Fig. 2 A). These mutations were used to perform two sets
of  experiments:  First,  we  examined  the  subcellular  local-
ization of these mutant Merlin proteins when expressed in
cultured cells and in tissue, and second, we examined their
in vivo genetic functions. The fragments of Merlin gener-
ated  for  the  structure/function  analysis  were  selected
based  on  comparisons  with  human  Merlin  and  with  the
ERM proteins (McCartney and Fehon, 1996), with the as-

sumption that regions that are highly conserved are likely
to  have  functional  significance.  The  molecular  organiza-
tion of Merlin is similar to that of ERM family members
and consists of an NH2-terminal protein 4.1 domain, a pu-
tative  coiled-coil  domain,  and  a  COOH-terminal  region
(Fig.  2  A).  Because  of  the  apparent  modular  nature  of
Merlin, we generated several Merlin truncations that con-
tained portions of the NH2- or COOH-terminal halves of
the  protein  and  a  truncation  containing  only  the  central
coiled-coiled region. The size and stability of each Merlin
truncation was verified by immunoblot (Fig. 2 B). In addi-
tion,  we  examined  the  conserved  NH2-terminal  region
(CNTR) in greater detail. The CNTR is nearly 60% identi-
cal  between  Merlin  and  the  ERM  proteins;  however,  a
closer examination of this region revealed seven amino ac-
ids  (170YQMTPEM177)  that  are  identical  in  human  and
Drosophila Merlin but are divergent from the ERM pro-
teins  (McCartney  and  Fehon,  1996).  The  possible  func-
tional  significance  of  this  region  is  further  supported  by
the presence of the Mer3 missense mutation at amino acid
177. We have named this region “the Blue Box” (BB). To
investigate the functional significance of the BB, we engi-
neered  two  Merlin  proteins,  one  lacking  the  BB  region
(mycMer⌬BB)  and  one  in  which  the  BB  is  replaced  by  a
polyalanine stretch (mycMerBBA). Furthermore, to define
the nature and the activity of the original Mer3 allele, we
generated a myc-tagged version of this allele (mycMer3).

The Subcellular Localization of Merlin In
Vitro Mutants
We examined the subcellular localization of these Merlin
fragments in Drosophila S2 cultured cells and in the imagi-

Figure  2. (A)  Schematic  represen-
tation of myc-tagged forms of Mer-
lin  and  their  ability  to  rescue  Mer4
lethality. The name of each Mer al-
lele  corresponds  to  the  amino  acid
residues  present  in  the  construct.
Relative  rescue  was  defined  as  the
percentage  of  Mer4  hemizygous
males  that  survive  compared  with
expected  (calculated  from  sibling
classes,  see  Materials  and  Meth-
ods). The data is represented as an
average  of  at  least  three  separate
experiments using two to five inde-
pendent  insertion  lines  (number
shown  in  parenthesis).  (B)  Immu-
noblot  of  whole  S2  cell  extract
transfected  with  myc-tagged  Mer-
lin  heat  shock  transgenes,  probed
with anti-myc antibody 9c10: lane 1,
mycMer⫹; lane 2, mycMer1–600; lane 3, mycMer1–375; lane 4, mycMer 1–350; lane 5, mycMer1–330; lane 6, mycMer351–600; lane 7, mycMer 351–635.
Bullets denote each Merlin fragment.

The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 141, 1998

1592

nal disc epithelium to identify regions within Merlin that
are  required  for  proper  subcellular  localization.  Experi-
ments  in  cultured  cells  allowed  us  to  examine  both  the
temporal  patterning  and  the  subcellular  localization  of
Merlin.  As  previously  reported  (McCartney  and  Fehon,
1996),  wild-type  Merlin  is  initially  targeted  to  the  mem-
brane,  and  within  3  h,  much  of  the  protein  localizes  to
punctate  cytoplasmic  structures  (Fig.  3,  A–C).  A  similar
pattern  (membrane-associated  and  cytoplasmic  staining)
was also observed in endogenously expressed Merlin in S2
cells (data not shown) and within the imaginal disc epithe-
lium (McCartney and Fehon, 1996; Fig. 3 D). Removal of
the conserved COOH-terminal 35 amino acids resulted in
a  protein,  mycMer1–600,  that  was  localized  almost  exclu-
sively at the plasma membrane and did not appear to in-
ternalize (Fig. 3, E–G). This observation suggests that the
COOH-terminal  35  amino  acid  residues  play  a  role  in
Merlin internalization. In the imaginal epithelia of trans-
genic larvae, this truncated Merlin protein was localized to
the plasma membrane (similar to the localization of wild-
type Merlin) but did not display the punctate cytoplasmic
localization characteristic of the wild-type protein (Fig. 3

H).  More  severe  COOH-terminal  truncations  of  Merlin,
mycMer1–350  (Fig.  3,  I–L)  and  mycMer1–375  (data  not
shown) appeared to associate less strongly with the plasma
membrane,  suggesting  that  within  the  COOH  terminus
there are sites required for proper localization. Consistent
with  this  notion,  mycMer351–635  (Fig.  3,  M–P)  and
mycMer351–600 (data not shown), which retain most of the
COOH-terminal  half  of  Merlin  but  none  of  the  CNTR,
were  highly  membrane  associated  in  both  cultured  cells
and  imaginal  tissue.  Of  the  other  Merlin  constructs,
mycMer1–330 localized diffusely throughout the cytoplasm
with  no  distinct  subcellular  location,  while  mycMer1–169
and  mycMer601–635  had  little  or  no  expression  (data  not
shown),  owing  possibly  to  their  inherent  instability.  We
conclude from these results that components of both the
NH2- and COOH-terminal halves of Merlin are required
for its correct targeting to the plasma membrane.

To assess the role of the Blue Box (BB) region in Mer-
lin’s subcellular localization, we examined the subcellular
distribution  of  wild-type  and  mutant  proteins  fused  to
green  fluorescent  protein  (GFP).  Wild-type  Merlin-GFP
(GFPMer⫹)  retains  full  wild-type  rescue  function;  thus,

(I–L), 

Figure  3. Subcellular  local-
ization of myc-tagged Merlin
truncations 
in  Drosophila
S2  cells  and  wing  imaginal
disc  epithelia:  mycMer⫹
(A–D),  mycMer1–600  (E–H),
mycMer1–350 
and
mycMer351–635  (M–O).  All
samples  were  stained  with
mouse  anti-myc  antibody
(9c10) and a CY3-conjugated
secondary  antibody.  In  the
cultured  cell  experiments,
samples  were  collected  from
three  time  points  AHS  in-
duction:  1  h  AHS  (A,  E,  I,
and  M);  3  h  AHS  (B,  F,  J,
and N); and 6 h AHS (C, G,
K,  and  O).  Localization  of
the  Merlin  truncations  was
also examined in larval wing
imaginal discs (D, H, L, and
P).  All  images  of  the  imagi-
nal epithelium are tangential
optical sections of the apical-
most focal plane. In S2 cells,
mycMer⫹  (A–C)  has  a  tem-
poral and spatial pattern sim-
ilar  to  that  described  previ-
ously for expressed wild type
protein  (McCartney  and  Fe-
hon, 1996). Initially, Merlin is
targeted to the plasma mem-
brane (A); after 3 h, much of
the protein is found in the cytoplasm in punctate cytoplasmic structures (B and C). The localization of mycMer⫹ in the imaginal epithe-
lium  showed  characteristic  localization  to  the  apical  plasma  membrane  and  in  the  cytoplasm  (D).  The  COOH-terminal  truncation,
mycMer1–600, localized to the plasma membrane but had no punctate cytoplasmic staining (E–H). Initially in S2 cells, much of the 350–
amino acid NH2-terminal Merlin fragment was distributed throughout the cytosol (I and J); however, 6 h AHS, much of the protein is
found at the plasma membrane (K). In an imaginal epithelia, this protein is found in the apical plasma membrane and throughout the
cytoplasm (L). Deletion of the NH2-terminal domain in mycMer351–635 results in a protein that localizes to the plasma membrane in both
cultured cells and imaginal epithelium (M–P). Bar, 5 ␮m.

LaJeunesse et al. Functional Analysis of Drosophila NF2/Merlin Homologue

1593

imaginal 

GFPMer3 

Figure  4. Blue  Box  mutations
are  retained  at  the  plasma
membrane.  Subcellular  local-
ization  of  Merlin  Blue  Box
mutant proteins in S2 cells and
wing 
epithelium:
GFPMer⫹  (A–C),  mycMer⫹
(D), 
(E–G),
mycMer3  (H),  GFPMer⌬BB  (I–
K),  and  mycMer⌬BB  (L).  All
GFP  Merlin  fusion  proteins
were  visualized  using  the  in-
herent 
the
GFP moiety; Mer3 and Mer⌬BB
were visualized in the imaginal
disc  epithelium  using  guinea
pig  anti-Merlin  and  a  CY3-
conjugated 
secondary  anti-
body.  For  experiments  in  S2
cells,  samples  were  collected
from  three  time  points:  1  h
AHS  (A,  E,  and  I),  3  h  AHS
(B, F, and J), and 6 h AHS (C,
G, and K). The subcellular lo-
calization  of  the  Merlin  BB
mutant proteins was examined
in larval wing imaginal epithe-
lia (D, H, and L). GFPMer⫹ has a wild-type Merlin distribution in S2 cells and in tissue (A–D). Upon induction, GFPMer3 is targeted to
the plasma membrane of S2 cells (E). Unlike GFPMer⫹, much of the GFPMer3 protein remains at the plasma membrane at later time
points: 3 h AHS (F) and 6 h AHS (G). In tissue, mycMer3 displays both punctate and cytoplasmic localization with no discernible differ-
ence from wild type (H). Mer⌬BB is exclusively associated with the plasma membrane in both S2 cells (I–K) and imaginal disc tissue (L).
Bar, 5 ␮m.

fluorescence  of 

the  GFP  moiety  does  not  interfere  with  Merlin  function
(data not shown). In S2 cells, GFPMer3 remained associ-
ated  with  the  membrane  3–5  h  after  heat  shock  (Fig.  4,
E–G), unlike GFPMer⫹, which had all internalized by this
time (Fig. 4, A–C). Removal or replacement of the entire
BB resulted in proteins that were properly targeted to the
plasma membrane but were not internalized (Fig. 4, I–K).
Similarly,  in  imaginal  epithelia,  Mer⌬BB  was  exclusively
plasma membrane associated (Fig. 4 L).

Characterization of In Vivo Function
To  assay  the  in  vivo  function  of  the  mutant  Merlin  pro-
teins,  we  used  the  Gal4/UAS  system  (Brand  and  Perri-
mon,  1993)  to  express  Merlin  truncations  in  mutant  and
wild-type  genetic  backgrounds.  In  these  studies,  we  ad-
dressed two questions: First, what is the minimal protein
region  required  for  Merlin  function,  and  second,  do  any
mutant  Merlin  proteins  produce  antimorphic  (dominant-
negative)  phenotypes  when  expressed  in  vivo?  In  the
genetic  rescue  experiments,  UASMerlin  constructs  were
driven under a ubiquitously expressing Gal4 enhancer trap
(T80Gal4)  in  a  Mer4  mutant  background  and  tested  for
their ability to rescue Mer4 lethality. Complementation of
the  other  lethal  Merlin  alleles  (Mer1  and  Mer2)  was  also
performed  with  similar  results  (data  not  shown).  To  test
for possible dominant activity of a Merlin truncation, we
examined  the  nonmutant  class  flies  from  these  same  ex-
periments  for  phenotypes  similar  to  those  expressed  by
Merlin mutants.

In  the  control  experiments,  we  observed  almost  com-

plete  genetic  rescue  with  the  mycMer⫹  transgene  (Fig.  2
A).  Surprisingly,  even  stronger  genetic  rescue  was  ob-
served  with  a  truncated  Merlin  protein  missing  the
COOH-terminal  35  amino  acid  residues  (mycMer1–600).
This  improved  genetic  rescue  over  mycMer⫹  was  consis-
tently observed with independent transgenic lines, suggest-
ing that the truncated form has increased in vivo function.
We also observed partial rescue of Mer4 lethality with two
even shorter NH2-terminal Merlin transgenes, mycMer1–350
and mycMer1–375 (Fig. 2 A). All of the rescued flies were
phenotypically  wild-type  and  did  not  possess  any  of  the
characteristic Mer3 phenotypes. Expression of mycMer⌬BB
and mycMerBBA failed to rescue Mer4 lethality (Fig. 2 A),
indicating that this region has essential functions. In con-
trast, expression of mycMer3 partially rescued Mer4 lethal-
ity. However, unlike rescued flies from other experiments,
all  of  the  mycMer3  rescued  flies  expressed  wing  pheno-
types similar to those expressed by flies carrying the origi-
nal Mer3 allele. No rescue was observed with expression of
any  other  Merlin  truncation.  Taken  together,  the  results
indicate  that  all  essential  Merlin  functions  reside  in  the
NH2-terminal 350 amino acids of the protein.

In  the  same  genetic  experiments,  nonmutant  class  sib-
lings that carried ubiquitously expressing Mer transgenes
were  examined  for  dominant  phenotypes.  None  of  the
NH2-  or  COOH-terminal  deletions  displayed  any  domi-
nant phenotype in a Mer⫹ background. In contrast, we ob-
served dominant phenotypes resulting from expression of
the Merlin BB mutant proteins. This dominant phenotype
included  a  broadening  of  the  wing  blade,  variably  pene-
trant ectopic wing vein material (primarily around the sec-

The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 141, 1998

1594

phenotype, we observed a significant increase in the total
surface area of wings expressing BB mutant proteins (Fig.
5 E). The area of overgrowth was localized to the posterior
half  of  the  wing  where  the  engrailed  Gal4  specifically
drives  expression  (Fig.  5 B,  shaded  area),  although  a  de-
crease in surface area was observed between wing veins 2
and 3, a region anterior to the expression of the transgene.
To  determine  whether  the  increase  in  area  we  observed
was due to increased cell number or increased cell size, we
measured  the  densities  of  wing  hairs  at  several  positions
within the wing blade. (Each wing blade cell secretes a sin-
gle hair.) The overall wing hair density in wings expressing
BB Merlin proteins was indistinguishable from that in wings
expressing a wild-type protein (data not shown), indicating
that the broadening of the wing results from an increase in
cell number rather than in cell size. As shown in the somatic
mosaic analysis, loss of Mer function resulted in overprolif-
eration of mutant cells. Similarly, ectopic expression of BB
mutant proteins resulted in increased proliferation. These
results suggest that the BB mutant proteins act in a domi-
nant-negative manner and therefore interfere with the ac-
tivity of wild-type protein.

To confirm that the BB mutations have dominant-nega-
tive  activity,  we  examined  the  modification  of  the  domi-
nant Mer⌬BB wing phenotype in response to alteration of
endogenous gene dose. As would be expected for an anti-
morphic  allele,  dominant  Mer⌬BB  wing  phenotypes  were
enhanced by a reduction of endogenous gene dose (Mer4/⫹)
and were suppressed in response to an increase in the level
of endogenous Merlin (⫹/⫹;P{cos Mer⫹}; Table I). These
results confirm that Merlin BB proteins act as dominant-
negative proteins.

Based on the in vivo activity assay, mycMer1–600 appears
to  behave  as  an  activated  protein.  An  additional  way  to
test  this  proposal  is  to  determine  whether mycMer1–600  is
able  to  rescue  the  dominant-negative  activity  of  the  BB
mutant proteins. We examined the BB phenotype of wings
coexpressing Mer⌬BB and either wild-type Merlin (mycMer⫹)
or  the  putative  activated  form  (mycMer1–600).  Flies  ex-
pressing  mycMer⌬BB  under  the  apterous  Gal4  driver  dis-
play wings held at an average angle of 45⬚ from the body
axis (Fig. 6 A). This phenotype appears to be caused by in-
creased  proliferation  in  the  wing  hinge  region  (data  not
shown).  Coexpression  of  mycMer⫹  with  mycMer⌬BB  re-
sulted  in  a  slight  suppression  in  the  degree  of  outheld
wings  (Fig.  6  B).  However,  when  mycMer1–600  was  coex-
pressed with the mycMer⌬BB, we observed a dramatic sup-
pression of the dominant BB wing phenotype (Fig. 6 C). In
a control experiment, the COOH-terminal half of Merlin

Table I. Genetic Characterization of Merlin⌬BB

Genotype*

⫹/⫹; ⫹/⫹
⫹/⫹; Mer⫹/⫹
⫹/⫹; Mer⌬BB/⫹
Mer4/⫹; Mer⌬BB/⫹
⫹/⫹; Mer⌬BB/⫹;P[cosMer⫹]/⫹

n

100
100
350
74
74

Ectopic wing

material‡

Defects in
cross veins§

0
0
53
78
28

0/0
0/0
4/1
12/4
1/0

*UASMerlin transgenes driven under apterous Gal4 driver.
‡Percent of flies observed with these phenotypes.
§Anterior cross vein/posterior cross vein disruptions.

Figure 5. Expression of Mer⌬BB results in an increase in the size
of  the  wing  blade.  (A)  Expression  of  UASMer⫹  under  the  en-
grailed GAL4 driver. (C) Expression of two copies of UASMer⌬BB
under the engrailed GAL4 driver results in the expansion of the
wing blade. Camera lucida drawings of mounted wings expressing
UASMer⫹  (B)  and  UASMer⌬BB  (D)  under  the  engrailed  GAL4
driver were made to compare the overall wing area (E) and to de-
termine and compare the surface area of individual regions of the
wing blade. The shaded area in B delineates the approximate do-
main of expression under this driver. Values shown in D repre-
sent the percent change in area in these regions of the wing blade
when  compared  with  wings  expressing  Mer⫹.  The  overgrowth
phenotype observed in wings expressing UASMer⌬BB is limited to
the region of the wing where the construct is expressed (D). Loss
of area in regions of the wing blade where the construct is not ex-
pressed may be due to a compensation mechanism. The drawing
in D also displays several of the venation defects associated with
expression of Mer⌬BB. (E) The overall wing area is increased in
wings expressing Merlin Blue Box mutant proteins. The severity
of this effect is dependent on the severity and the dose of the mu-
tation. When the t test was applied to these values the difference
in  wing  area  between  wings  expressing  wild-type  Merlin  and
those expressing Merlin Blue Box mutants was found to be signif-
icant (P ⬍ 0.001).

ond wing vein), anterior and posterior cross vein defects,
and ectopic bristles or sense organs (Fig. 5, C and D and
data  not  shown).  The  most  striking  quality  of  this  domi-
nant phenotype was the enlargement of the wing blade, re-
sulting  in  a  curvature  of  the  wing  surface.  Furthermore,
high  levels  of  expression  of  the  Merlin  BB  mutant  pro-
teins  in  the  wing  blade  under  two  different  Gal4  drivers
(engrailedciBeGal4,  apterousmd5  Gal4)  resulted  in  an  out-
held  wing  phenotype  associated  with  alterations  in  the
wing hinge morphology (data not shown).

The broadening of the wing blade we observed with ex-
pression of Merlin BB mutations is characteristic of muta-
tions  that  cause  increased  cell  proliferation  in  the  wing
(Mahoney et al., 1991; Boedigheimer and Laughon, 1993;
Bryant  et  al.,  1993).  To  examine  this  phenotype  in  more
detail, we compared the surface area of wings expressing
Merlin  BB  proteins  or  wild-type  Merlin  under  the  en-
grailed GAL4 driver. As expected of an overproliferation

LaJeunesse et al. Functional Analysis of Drosophila NF2/Merlin Homologue

1595

Figure 6. Constitutively activated COOH-terminal truncation of
Merlin  suppresses  the  dominant  Mer⌬BB  phenotype.  Flies  coex-
pressing either wild-type or truncated forms of Merlin under the
apterousmd52  GAL4  (apGal4)  enhancer  trap  were  examined  for
suppression  of  the  Mer⌬BB  outheld  wing  phenotype.  Flies  were
placed into one of five classes of wings, each corresponds to the
degree  of  which  the  wings  were  outheld  from  the  central  body
axis: 0⬚, 22.5⬚, 45⬚, 67.5⬚, and 90⬚. The y-axis shows the percent of
flies within a class. When outcrossed, flies with the apGal4 UAS-
Mer⌬BB genotype hold their wings out at an average angle of 45⬚
(A). Flies expressing both UASMer⫹ and UASMer⌬BB show only
a slight difference from the control (B). However, expression of
UASMer1–600 greatly suppresses the outheld wing phenotype (C);
with two independent insertion lines of mycMer1–600, we observed
almost complete suppression. As a negative control, the expres-
sion of the nonrescuing UASMer351–635 has a profile similar to the
outcrossed stock (D).

was coexpressed with mycMer⌬BB, and no suppression of
the  phenotype  was  observed  (Fig.  6  D).  The  ability  of
mycMer1–600 to suppress the dominant BB phenotype sup-
ports the idea that this is an activated form of the Merlin
protein.

Competition Experiments
To  directly  observe  the  dominant-negative  behavior  of
mycMer⌬BB,  we  examined  the  localization  of  wild-type
Merlin protein in the presence of mycMer⌬BB. We cotrans-
fected  Drosophila  S2  cells  with  GFPMer⫹  and  either
mycMer⫹ or mycMer⌬BB and examined the localization of
both  proteins.  In  S2  cells  cotransfected  with  either  the
mycMer⫹ or mycMer1–600 competitor proteins, the major-
ity of GFPMer⫹ in these cells was associated with charac-
teristic punctate cytoplasmic structures 5 h after induction
(Fig. 7, A and D) as was shown earlier (Figs. 3 C and 4 C).
However,  in  almost  all  S2  cells  cotransfected  with  myc-
Mer⌬BB competitor, wild-type GFPMerlin remained at the
plasma membrane (Fig. 7, B–D). This result suggests that
localization to the plasma membrane is not sufficient for
Merlin  activity  and  that  mycMer⌬BB  interferes  with  wild-

Figure 7. Mer⌬BB alters subcellular distribution of wild-type Mer-
lin in S2 cells. The localization of GFPMer⫹ was examined in S2
cells cotransfected with either mycMer⫹ or mycMer⌬BB 5 h AHS.
Cells were stained with an anti-myc antibody to confirm expres-
sion of the second protein (data not shown). In S2 cells cotrans-
fected with a mycMer⫹ (A) or mycMer1–600 (data not shown), all
of  the  GFPMer⫹  protein  localizes  to  cytoplasmic  structures  5  h
AHS. However, in S2 cells cotransfected with mycMer⌬BB, a con-
siderable  fraction  of  the  GFPMer⫹  accumulates  at  the  plasma
membrane  (B  and  C).  In  D,  the  data  from  this  experiment  are
summarized.  Three  classes  of  GFPMer⫹  localization  were  ob-
served 5 h AHS. Bar, 5 ␮m.

type  Merlin  function  by  causing  it  to  accumulate  at  the
plasma membrane in a nonfunctional state.

Discussion
Although the protein 4.1 family has typically been charac-
terized as a group of membrane–skeletal proteins, recent
studies  have  revealed  a  diversity  of  function,  some  of
which may not be primarily related to the canonical mem-
brane–cytoskeletal  linker  function  (for  review  see  Mc-
Cartney  and  Fehon,  1997).  In  addition,  recent  genetic
studies  in  particular  have  implicated  protein  4.1  family
proteins  in  mediating  the  intercellular  interactions  that
regulate  cell  proliferation.  For  example,  mutations  in
Drosophila expanded, a divergent member of the protein
4.1 superfamily that localizes to the adherens junction, re-
sult  in  overproliferation  of  the  cells  that  form  the  adult
wings  (Boedigheimer  and  Laughon,  1993).  Previous  ex-
periments  have  shown  that  proliferation  in  this  tissue  is
controlled  by  cell–cell  interactions,  mediated  by  at  least
three known signal transduction pathways, wingless, deca-
pentapelegic,  and  Epidermal  Growth  Factor  (Edgar  and
Lehner,  1996).  Studies  of  Drosophila  Coracle,  a  protein
4.1 homologue, indicate that it is associated with the sep-
tate  junction,  a  structure  that  has  previously  been  impli-
cated in the regulation of cell growth (Woods and Bryant,
1993), and that coracle mutations interact genetically with
a  hypermorphic  mutation  of  the  Drosophila  Epidermal
Growth Factor-receptor homologue (Fehon et al., 1994). In
addition,  the  human  NF2  tumor-suppressor  gene  Merlin
clearly has a role in maintaining proper regulation of cell
proliferation.

The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 141, 1998

1596

In NF2, as well as in other diseases involving tumor-sup-
pressor genes, a genetically heterozygous individual expe-
riences  somatic  loss  of  the  second  copy  of  the  gene  in
certain tissues (called loss of heterozygosity or LOH), re-
sulting in the formation of tumors in those tissues. These
individuals are then genotypically mosaic with respect to
the tumor-suppressor gene. Although NF2 was originally
characterized  as  a  disease  of  the  central  nervous  system
(CNS),  somatic  loss  of  NF2  is  believed  to  occur  in  the
Schwann  cells  that  form  the  myelin  sheath  surrounding
CNS  axons.  The  glial  cells  form  a  polarized  epithelium
that isolates the axons from the surrounding environment.
Thus, although Merlin is expressed in the Drosophila CNS
(McCartney and Fehon, 1996), we have concentrated our
analysis of Drosophila Merlin function in epithelial tissues,
which also express Merlin and are readily amenable to ex-
perimental analysis.

We simulated loss of heterozygosity in Drosophila using
somatic  mosaic  analysis  in  which  the  effects  of  homozy-
gous loss of gene function in a patch of cells (a clone) were
examined in an otherwise heterozygous background. Us-
ing this system, we demonstrated that loss of Merlin func-
tion during larval development results in a two- to three-
fold  increase  in  proliferation  relative  to  the  wild-type
sister clone. This hypertrophied tissue is morphologically
normal, indicating that loss of Merlin function specifically
affects  proliferation  rather  than  differentiation  or  mor-
phogenesis. This conclusion is supported by the prolifera-
tion  defect  we  observed  in  tissues  overexpressing  Merlin
Blue  Box  mutant  proteins.  Interestingly,  as  with  human
NF2,  the  overproliferation  we  observed  seems  moderate
and does not result in the extreme hyperplasia observed in
other  Drosophila  “tumor  suppressors”  (Mahoney  et  al.,
1991; Bryant et al., 1993; Xu et al., 1995) or in the malig-
nant transformation associated with many human cancers.
As we demonstrated in this study, the degree of overpro-
liferation observed was dependent on the mutant allele of
Merlin examined. Similarly, individuals with NF2 display a
range of tumor growth rates that may reflect differences in
their Merlin genotypes. In general, nonsense mutations in
human  NF2  result  in  more  severe  phenotypes  than  mis-
sense mutations. Alternatively, it is possible that some of
the observed differences in the severity of NF2 is due to
second site modifying loci. Currently, we are using the ge-
netic  techniques  available  in  the  Drosophila  system  to
identify  second  site  modifiers  of  Merlin  mutant  pheno-
types.

To understand how Merlin functions in the cell and how
these functions relate to the regulation of proliferation, we
identified important functional domains within Merlin re-
quired for its activity and proper subcellular localization.
Genetic  rescue  experiments  using  a  series  of  NH2-  and
COOH-terminal truncations of Merlin indicate that all es-
sential Merlin functions reside in the CNTR. This result,
though somewhat surprising, is consistent with recent re-
sults from other protein 4.1 superfamily members. Studies
of Drosophila Coracle, a protein 4.1 homologue, indicate
that the CNTR of this protein performs several essential
functions within the septate junction (Ward et al., 1998).
In  addition,  recent  studies  of  the  ERM  proteins  indicate
that sequences COOH-terminal to the CNTR may play a
primarily regulatory role, a model that also seems to apply

to Merlin (see below). While there are clearly family mem-
bers  that  have  a  more  complex  functional  organization,
taken  together  these  results  indicate  that  the  CNTR  of
many protein 4.1 superfamily members acts as an indepen-
dent functional domain. The diversity of identified protein
4.1  superfamily  members  suggests  that  during  the  course
of evolution, the essential function of this domain, proba-
bly to serve as a targeting sequence to a particular region
of the cell membrane, has been adapted repeatedly to dif-
ferent proteins (Fehon et al., 1997).

In humans, many of the mutations associated with NF2
are predicted to generate truncated forms of Merlin as a
result of nonsense mutations (Jacoby et al., 1996; Welling
et  al.,  1996).  Given  the  results  presented  here,  some  of
these  truncated  products  should  retain  partial  function,
just as the mycMer1–350 allele appears to be partially func-
tional.  Although  it  is  possible  that  this  apparent  discrep-
ancy  results  from  differences  in  human  and  Drosophila
Merlin function, expression of human NF2 is sufficient for
genetic rescue of lethal Drosophila Merlin alleles, indicat-
ing that their functions are conserved (McCartney, B., V.
Ramesh,  and  R.  Fehon,  unpublished  observations).  Un-
like other protein 4.1 family members (Algrain et al., 1993;
Ward et al., 1998), the CNTR of Merlin is poorly targeted
to  the  plasma  membrane,  thereby  decreasing  functional
protein levels. Thus, even when overexpressed, the CNTR
provides only partial genetic rescue. It is therefore not sur-
prising that human NF2 alleles that truncate COOH-ter-
minally  to  the  CNTR  produce  severe  phenotypes  even
though  the  proteins  they  encode  may  retain  all  essential
Merlin  functions.  Further  tests  need  to  be  performed  to
confirm this hypothesis. If correct, stabilization of mutant
NF2  products  containing  an  intact  CNTR  (but  lacking
COOH-terminal  targeting  sequences)  could  be  an  effec-
tive  therapeutic  strategy  for  some  patients  afflicted  with
NF2  because  it  would  increase  the  levels  of  a  partially
functional Merlin protein.

We  have  shown  that  mycMer1–600  acts  as  an  activated
protein  that  displays  greater  rescuing  activity  and  sup-
presses the phenotypes produced by a dominant-negative
form  of  Merlin.  Pulsed  expression  of  Mer1–600  in  S2  cul-
tured cells under an inducible promoter indicates that the
levels of expression and the stability of this protein are not
significantly  different  from  wild-type  Merlin  (data  not
shown). Thus, the simplest explanation for this phenome-
non is that the COOH-terminal region contains a domain
important for reducing the activity of Merlin. Recent stud-
ies demonstrate that ERM protein activity is regulated by
a  Rho-based  signaling  pathway  (Takaishi  et  al.,  1995;
Hirao  et  al.,  1996;  Mackay  et  al.,  1997).  Rho-Kinase  has
been  shown  to  phosphorylate  a  conserved  threonine
within  the  COOH-terminal  35  amino  acids  of  all  ERM
proteins and thereby regulate the conformational change
that occurs during a putative transition from an inactive to
an active state (Matsui et al., 1998). Although the COOH-
terminal  35  amino  acids  of  Merlin  are  divergent  from
those  of  the  ERM  proteins,  the  threonine  residue  phos-
phorylated  by  Rho-Kinase  is  conserved  (McCartney  and
Fehon,  1996),  suggesting  that  Merlin  could  use  a  similar
mechanism  for  switching  between  an  inactive  and  an  ac-
tive state. Creation of an activated Merlin protein by the
removal of the COOH-terminal regulatory region is con-

LaJeunesse et al. Functional Analysis of Drosophila NF2/Merlin Homologue

1597

organizing  functional  regions  within  the  plasma  mem-
brane  (Helander  et  al.,  1996;  Ward  et  al.,  1998).  Merlin
may function in a similar fashion by coordinating interac-
tions of transmembrane signaling molecules and cytoplas-
mic  factors  that  regulate  cellular  proliferation.  We  now
plan to elucidate the signaling pathways that Merlin regu-
lates as well as identify genes involved in its regulation.
We would like to thank Cathy Laurie for use of the camera lucida, Dan
Kiehart  and  Kevin  Edwards  for  providing  the  GFP  plasmid,  and  the
Bloomington  stock  center  for  fly  stocks.  We  thank  Team  Injection  for
help with the generation of transgenic Drosophila lines used in this study,
Stephen White for technical assistance, and our colleagues in the Fehon
lab for suggestions and discussions.

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant (R01-
NS34783) to R.G. Fehon, National Neurofibromatosis Foundation Young
Investigator Awards to D.R. LaJeunesse and B.M. McCartney, and a Na-
tional Research Service Award postdoctoral fellowship (F32-NS10224) to
D.R. LaJeunesse.

Received for publication 3 March 1998 and in revised form 14 May 1998.

References

Figure 8. Model of Merlin activation at the cytoplasmic face of
the plasma membrane. Wild-type Merlin exists in two functional
states at the plasma membrane, inactive and active. While Mer-
lin⌬BB cannot itself be activated, it inhibits the transition of wild-
type  Merlin  from  an  inactive  to  an  active  state.  However,
Merlin1–600, being constitutively active, bypasses the requirement
for  activation  and  therefore  the  block  presented  by  Merlin⌬BB,
thus effectively suppressing the dominant Blue Box mutant phe-
notypes.

sistent with this notion, but further studies are required to
confirm this regulatory role. It is interesting to note in this
regard that an isoform of human and mouse NF2 that al-
ters  the  COOH  terminus  of  Merlin  has  been  identified
(isoform II; Haase et al., 1994; Pykett et al., 1994). Recent
studies  indicate  that  isoform  II,  which  retains  the  con-
served threonine residue, is less functional than isoform I
in  suppressing  growth  (Sherman  et  al.,  1997),  consistent
with the idea that the COOH terminus of Merlin has regu-
latory functions.

Two  Merlin  mutations  described  here,  the  dominant-
negative Mer⌬BB and the activated Mer1–600, are found pri-
marily  at  the  plasma  membrane.  This  apparently  con-
tradictory  result,  that  two  mutant  forms  of  Merlin  with
opposite functions both localize to the plasma membrane,
indicates that localization to the plasma membrane is not
sufficient  for  Merlin  function.  We  propose  that  Merlin
normally  undergoes  an  activation  process  that  occurs  at
the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane (Fig. 8). In
our model, not only is Mer⌬BB refractory to activation, but
it also inhibits activation of endogenous wild-type Merlin,
thus causing wild-type Merlin to accumulate at the plasma
membrane in a nonfunctional state and producing a domi-
nant phenotype. In contrast, Mer1–600 exists in a constitu-
tively activated state, thereby evading the block presented
by Mer⌬BB and suppressing the dominant BB mutant phe-
notype. The two functional states of wild-type Merlin may
represent two distinct conformations of the protein, as has
been  shown  for  ERM  proteins  (Berryman  et  al.,  1995;
Bretscher et al., 1995). Alternatively, Merlin may associate
with two distinct binding partners at the membrane. In ei-
ther case, one state may serve to associate Merlin with the
membrane, and the second may be required for Merlin ac-
tivation.

In this report, we have shown that Merlin is required for
the  regulation  of  proliferation  in  Drosophila  epithelial
cells  and  that  it  functions  at  the  plasma  membrane.  The
mechanism by which Merlin functions to regulate cellular
proliferation is still unclear. Recent evidence suggests that
other  proteins  of  the  protein  4.1  superfamily  operate  by

45–135.

Bryant, P.J., K.L. Watson, R.W. Justice, and D.F. Woods. 1993. Tumor suppres-
sor genes encoding proteins required for cell interactions and signal trans-
duction in Drosophila. Dev. Suppl. 239–249.

Edgar, B.A., and C.F. Lehner. 1996. Developmental control of cell cycle regula-

tors—a fly’s perspective. Science. 274:1646–1652.

Algrain,  M.,  O.  Turunen,  A.  Vaheri,  D.  Louvard,  and  M.  Arpin.  1993.  Ezrin
contains  cytoskeleton  and  membrane  binding  domains  accounting  for  its
proposed role as a membrane–cytoskeletal linker. J. Cell Biol. 120:129–139.
Berryman, M., R. Gary, and A. Bretscher. 1995. Ezrin oligomers are major cy-
toskeletal components of placental microvilli: a proposal for their involve-
ment in cortical morphogenesis. J. Cell Biol. 131:1231–1242.

Boedigheimer,  M.,  and  A.  Laughon.  1993.  expanded:  a  gene  involved  in  the
control  of  cell  proliferation  in  imaginal  discs.  Development  (Camb.).  118:
1291–1301.

Brand, A.H., and N. Perrimon. 1993. Targeted gene expression as a means of
altering  cell  fates  and  generating  dominant  phenotypes.  Development
(Camb.). 118:401–415.

Bretscher,  A.,  R.  Gary,  and  M.  Berryman.  1995.  Soluble  ezrin  purified  from
placenta  exists  as  stable  monomers  and  elongated  dimers  with  masked
COOH-terminal  ezrin-radixin-moesin  association  domains.  Biochemistry.
34:16830–16837.

Brown, M.A. 1997. Tumor suppressor genes and human cancer. Adv. Genet. 36:

Fehon, R.G., P.J. Kooh, I. Rebay, C.L. Regan, T. Xu, M.A.T. Muskavitch, and
S.  Artavanis-Tsakonas.  1990.  Molecular  interactions  between  the  protein
products  of  the  neurogenic  loci  Notch  and  Delta,  two  EGF-homologous
genes in Drosophila. Cell. 61:523–534.

Fehon, R.G., I.A. Dawson, and S. Artavanis-Tsakonas. 1994. A Drosophila ho-
mologue of membrane-skeleton protein 4.1 is associated with septate junc-
tions and is encoded by the coracle gene. Development (Camb.). 120:545–557.
Fehon,  R.G.,  T.  Oren,  D.R.  LaJeunesse,  T.E.  Melby,  and  B.M.  McCartney.
1997.  Isolation  of  mutations  in  the  Drosophila  homologues  of  the  human
Neurofibromatosis 2 and yeast CDC42 genes using a simple and efficient re-
verse-genetic method. Genetics. 146:245–252.

Franck, Z., R. Gary, and A. Bretscher. 1993. Moesin, like ezrin, colocalizes with
actin in the cortical cytoskeleton in cultured cells, but its expression is more
variable. J. Cell Sci. 105:219–231.

Gary, R., and A. Bretscher. 1995. Ezrin self-association involves binding of an
N-terminal domain to a normally masked C-terminal domain that includes
the F-actin binding site. Mol. Biol. Cell. 6:1061–1075.

Golic,  K.G.,  and  S.  Lindquist.  1989.  The  FLP  recombinase  of  yeast  catalyzes

site-specific recombination in the Drosophila genome. Cell. 59:499–509.

Gonzalez-Agosti, C., L. Xu, D. Pinney, R. Beauchamp, W. Hobbs, J. Gusella,
and V. Ramesh. 1996. The merlin tumor suppressor localizes preferentially
in membrane ruffles. Oncogene. 13:1239–1247.

Haase,  V.H.,  J.A.  Trofatter,  M.  MacCollin,  E.  Tarttelin,  J.F.  Gusella,  and  V.
Ramesh. 1994. The murine NF2 homologue encodes a highly conserved mer-
lin protein with alternative forms. Hum. Mol. Genet. 3:407–411.

Helander,  T.,  O.  Carpen,  O.  Turunen,  P.E.  Kovanen,  A.  Vaheri,  and  T.  Ti-
monen. 1996. ICAM-2 redistributed by ezrin as a target for killer cells. Na-
ture. 382:265–268.

Hirao, M., N. Sato, T. Kondo, S. Yonemura, M. Monden, T. Sasaki, Y. Takai, S.
Tsukita, and S. Tsukita. 1996. Regulation mechanism of ERM (ezrin/radixin/
moesin)  protein/plasma  membrane  association:  possible  involvement  of
phosphatidylinositol turnover and Rho-dependent signaling pathway. J. Cell
Biol. 135:37–51.

The Journal of Cell Biology, Volume 141, 1998

1598

Jacoby, L.B., M. MacCollin, R. Barone, V. Ramesh, and J.F. Gusella. 1996. Fre-
quency and distribution of NF2 mutations in schwannomas. Genes Chromo-
somes Cancer. 17:45–55.

Mackay, D.J., F. Esch, H. Furthmayr, and A. Hall. 1997. Rho- and rac-depen-
dent assembly of focal adhesion complexes and actin filaments in permeabi-
lized fibroblasts: an essential role for ezrin/radixin/moesin proteins. J. Cell
Biol. 138:927–938.

Mahoney, P.A., U. Weber, P. Onofrechuk, H. Biessmann, P.J. Bryant, and C.S.
Goodman.  1991.  The  fat  tumor  suppressor  gene  in  Drosophila  encodes  a
novel member of the cadherin gene superfamily. Cell. 67:853–868.

Matsui, T., M. Maeda, Y. Doi, S. Yonemura, M. Amano, K. Kaibuchi, and S.
Tsukita.  1998.  Rho-kinase  phosphorylates  COOH-terminal  threonines  of
ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins and regulates their head-to-tail associ-
ation. J. Cell Biol. 140:647–657.

McCartney, B.M., and R.G. Fehon. 1996. Distinct cellular and subcellular pat-
terns of expression imply distinct functions for the Drosophila homologues
of  moesin  and  the  neurofibromatosis  2  tumor  suppressor,  merlin.  J.  Cell
Biol. 133:843–852.

McCartney, B.M., and R.G. Fehon. 1997. The ERM family of proteins and their
roles  in  cell-cell  interactions.  In  Cytoskeletal-Membrane  Interactions  and
Signal Transduction. P. Cowin and M.W. Klymkowsky, editors. R.G. Landes
Bioscience, Austin, TX. 200–210.

McClatchey, A.I., I. Saotome, V. Ramesh, J.F. Gusella, and T. Jacks. 1997. The
Nf2 tumor suppressor gene product is essential for extraembryonic develop-
ment immediately prior to gastrulation. Genes Dev. 11:1253–1265.

Pykett, M.J., M. Murphy, P.R. Harnish, and D.L. George. 1994. The neurofi-
bromatosis  2  (NF2)  tumor  suppressor  gene  encodes  multiple  alternatively
spliced transcripts. Hum. Mol. Genet. 3:559–564.

Rebay, I., R.G. Fehon, and S. Artavanis-Tsakonas. 1993. Specific truncations of
Drosophila Notch define dominant activated and dominant negative forms
of the receptor. Cell. 74:319–329.

Rouleau, G.A., P. Merel, M. Lutchman, M. Sanson, J. Zucman, C. Marineau, K.
Hoang-Suan, S. Demczuk, C. Desmaze, B. Plougastel, et al. 1993. Alteration
in a new gene encoding a putative membrane-organizing protein causes neu-
rofibromatosis type 2. Nature. 363:515–521.

Sainio, M., F. Zhao, L. Heiska, O. Turunen, M. den Bakker, E. Zwarthoff, M.
Lutchman, M.A. Rouleau, J. Jaaskelainen, A. Vaheri, and O. Carpen. 1997.

Neurofibromatosis  2  tumor  suppressor  protein  colocalizes  with  ezrin  and
CD44  and  associates  with  actin-containing  cytoskeleton.  J.  Cell  Sci.  110:
2249–2260.

Sherman, L., H.M. Xu, R.T. Geist, S. Saporito-Irwin, N. Howells, H. Ponta, P.
Herrlich,  and  D.H.  Gutmann.  1997.  Interdomain  binding  mediates  tumor
growth suppression by the NF2 gene product. Oncogene. 15:2505–2509.

Takaishi,  K.,  T.  Sasaki,  T.  Kameyama,  S.  Tsukita,  S.  Tsukita,  and  Y.  Takai.
1995. Translocation of activated Rho from the cytoplasm to membrane ruf-
fling area, cell-cell adhesion sites and cleavage furrows. Oncogene. 11:39–48.
Takeuchi, K., N. Sato, H. Kasahara, N. Funayama, A. Nagafuchi, S. Yonemura,
S. Tsukita, and S. Tsukita. 1994. Perturbation of cell adhesion and microvilli
formation  by  antisense  oligonucleotides  to  ERM  family  members.  J.  Cell
Biol. 125:1371–1384.

Tomlinson, A., and D.F. Ready. 1987. Cell fate in the Drosophila ommatidium.

Dev. Biol. 123:264–275.

Drosophila tissues. Development (Camb.). 117:1223–1237.

Xu, T., W. Wang, S. Zhang, R.A. Stewart, and W. Yu. 1995. Identifying tumor
suppressors in genetic mosaics: the Drosophila lats gene encodes a putative
protein kinase. Development (Camb.). 121:1053–1063.

Trofatter, J.A., M.M. MacCollin, J.L. Rutter, R. Eldridge, N. Kley, A.G. Me-
non, K. Pulaski, H. Haase, C.M. Ambrose, D. Munroe, et al. 1993. A novel
moesin-, ezrin-, radixin-like gene is a candidate for the neurofibromatosis 2
tumor suppressor. Cell. 72:791–800.

Turunen, O., T. Wahlström, and A. Vaheri. 1994. Ezrin has a COOH-terminal
actin-binding site that is conserved in the ezrin protein family. J. Cell Biol.
126:1445–1453.

Ward, R.E.I., R.S. Lamb, and R.G. Fehon. 1998. A conserved functional do-
main of Drosophila Coracle is required for localization at the septate junc-
tion and has membrane organizing activity. J. Cell Biol. 140:1463–1474.

Welling,  D.B.,  M.  Guida,  F.  Goll,  D.K.  Pearl,  M.E.  Glasscock,  D.G.  Pappas,
F.H.  Linthicum,  D.  Rogers,  and  T.W.  Prior.  1996.  Mutational  spectrum  in
the  neurofibromatosis  type  2  gene  in  sporadic  and  familial  schwannomas.
Hum. Genet. 98:189–193.

Woods, D.F., and P.J. Bryant. 1993. Apical junctions and cell signalling in epi-

thelia. J Cell Sci. 17(Suppl.):171–181.

Xu, T., and G. Rubin. 1993. Analysis of genetic mosaics in developing and adult

LaJeunesse et al. Functional Analysis of Drosophila NF2/Merlin Homologue

1599

