Merlin/NF2 Suppresses Tumorigenesis
by Inhibiting the E3 Ubiquitin Ligase
CRL4DCAF1 in the Nucleus

Wei Li,1,8 Liru You,1,8 Jonathan Cooper,1,4 Gaia Schiavon,1 Angela Pepe-Caprio,1 Lu Zhou,5 Ryohei Ishii,6
Marco Giovannini,7 C. Oliver Hanemann,5 Stephen B. Long,2 Hediye Erdjument-Bromage,3 Pengbo Zhou,6
Paul Tempst,3 and Filippo G. Giancotti1,*
1Cell Biology Program
2Structural Biology Program
3Molecular Biology Program
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA
4Sloan-Kettering Division, Weill Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Cornell University, New York, NY 10065, USA
5Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Plymouth, Plymouth PL6 8BU, UK
6Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weil Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA
7House Ear Institute, Center for Neural Tumor Research, Los Angeles, CA 90057, USA
8These authors contributed equally to this work
*Correspondence: f-giancotti@ski.mskcc.org
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2010.01.029

SUMMARY

Current models imply that the FERM domain protein
Merlin, encoded by the tumor suppressor NF2,
inhibits mitogenic signaling at or near the plasma
membrane. Here, we show that the closed, growth-
inhibitory form of Merlin accumulates in the nucleus,
binds to the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4DCAF1, and
suppresses its activity. Depletion of DCAF1 blocks
the promitogenic effect of inactivation of Merlin.
Conversely, enforced expression of a Merlin-insensi-
tive mutant of DCAF1 counteracts the antimitogenic
effect of Merlin. Re-expression of Merlin and
silencing of DCAF1 implement a similar, tumor-
suppressive program of gene expression. Tumor-
derived mutations invariably disrupt Merlin’s ability
to interact with or inhibit CRL4DCAF1. Finally, deple-
tion of DCAF1 inhibits the hyperproliferation of
Schwannoma
and
suppresses the oncogenic potential of Merlin-deﬁ-
cient
lines. We propose that Merlin
suppresses tumorigenesis by translocating to the
nucleus to inhibit CRL4DCAF1.

from NF2

tumor cell

cells

patients

INTRODUCTION

The tumor suppressor NF2, which is inactivated in the familial
cancer syndrome Neuroﬁbromatosis type 2, encodes for Merlin,
a member of the Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin (ERM) family of proteins.
The prevalence of NF2 mutations in sporadic tumors, especially
Schwannomas, meningiomas, and malignant mesotheliomas,
and the predisposition of heterozygous Nf2 mutant mice to

develop multiple malignant tumor types suggest that Merlin
has a relatively broad tumor-suppressor function (McClatchey
and Giovannini, 2005; Okada et al., 2007). Despite extensive
research on Merlin’s role as a tumor suppressor, its biological
function remains poorly understood.

Classical ERM proteins, which consist of an N-terminal FERM
domain, a coiled-coil domain, and a C-terminal segment con-
taining an actin-binding motif, switch between a closed confor-
mation, presumed dormant, and an open conformation, which
mediates linkage of certain cell adhesion receptors to the actin
cytoskeleton (Bretscher et al., 2002). The sequence homology
of Merlin to ERM proteins and its apparently prevalent localiza-
tion to the cortical cytoskeleton have led to the hypothesis that
Merlin functions at or near the plasma membrane to inhibit the
transmission of promitogenic signals (McClatchey and Fehon,
2009). However, Merlin does not contain a canonical actin-
binding motif. In addition, it is the closed form of Merlin that
suppresses tumorigenesis and is thereby considered ‘‘active.’’
In fact, many tumor-derived missense mutations are predicted
to disrupt the closed conformation (Okada et al., 2007).

The interconversion between the closed and the open form of
Merlin is promoted by the p21-activated kinase PAK, which
phosphorylates Merlin at S518, disrupting the intramolecular
C-terminal tail-FERM interaction, which maintains the protein
in the closed conformation (Kissil et al., 2002; Xiao et al., 2002).
Cadherin-mediated adhesion inhibits PAK, causing an accumu-
lation of the dephosphorylated, growth-inhibitory form of Merlin.
Conversely, integrin-dependent adhesion to the matrix activates
PAK, causing inactivation of Merlin and, thereby, presumably
removing a block to cell-cycle progression (Okada et al., 2005).
Accordingly, inactivation of Merlin induces exit from contact
inhibition (Lallemand et al., 2003; Lallemand et al., 2009; Okada
et al., 2005) and accelerates progression through the G1 phase
of the cell cycle (Lo´ pez-Lago et al., 2009). These results suggest

Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 477

Figure 1. Merlin Associates with CRL4DCAF1 in the Nucleus
(A) Cos7 cells were transfected with the indicated FH-tagged (FH; FLAG-HA) forms of Merlin, lysed in RIPA, and subjected to TAP. Proteins were separated by
SDS-PAGE and stained with Colloidal Blue. Dots point to the FH-tagged baits and asterisks to the 169 and 127 kD bands identiﬁed by mass spectrometry as
DCAF1 and DDB1, respectively.
(B) 293T cells were transfected with FH-DCAF1 or empty vector. Total lysates and Flag immunoprecipitates (M2) were subjected to immunoblotting with anti-
bodies to the indicated proteins.
(C) As in (B), with transfection of the indicated constructs and immunoprecipitation with anti-FLAG (M2) or control (C) antibodies.
(D) As in (B), with cotransfection of Myc-Merlin or empty vector and immunoprecipitation with anti-FLAG (M2) or control (C). To control for the speciﬁcity of the
anti-P-Merlin antibodies, the indicated sample was treated with calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (CIP) prior to SDS-PAGE. Endogenous Merlin was detected
upon longer exposure.
(E) Meso-33 cells were transiently transfected with the indicated constructs and subjected to double-immunoﬂuorescent staining with anti-HA and anti-Myc fol-
lowed by DAPI.
(F) HeLa cells were infected with lentiviral vectors encoding a shRNA targeting Merlin or a control shRNA and subjected to immunoblotting (left) or staining with
afﬁnity-puriﬁed antibodies to the N-terminal segment of Merlin followed by DAPI (right).
(G) The indicated cells were stained as in (F).

478 Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

that Merlin integrates antithetic signals from cadherins and
integrins to regulate cell-cycle progression.

Merlin exerts inhibitory effects on multiple mitogenic signaling
pathways. The closed form of Merlin suppresses the recruitment
of Rac to the plasma membrane and the activation of PAK
(Kaempchen et al., 2003; Kissil et al., 2003; Okada et al., 2005)
and inhibits the activation of mTORC1 independently of Akt
(James et al., 2009; Lo´ pez-Lago et al., 2009). Furthermore,
Merlin inhibits the Ras-ERK and PI-3K-Akt pathways and focal
adhesion kinase (FAK)-Src signaling (Ammoun et al., 2008; Jin
et al., 2006a; Poulikakos et al., 2006; Rong et al., 2004). Finally,
Merlin cooperates with the related ERM protein Expanded to
activate the Hippo tumor-suppressor pathway in Drosophila
(Cho et al., 2006; Hamaratoglu et al., 2006). However, the contri-
bution of each of the identiﬁed pathways to NF2-dependent
tumorigenesis has not been deﬁned.

Although yeast two-hybrid screens and other approaches
have led to the identiﬁcation of several Merlin-binding proteins,
the biochemical function of Merlin and, hence, the mechanism
through which it suppresses tumorigenesis have remained
elusive. This study shows that the closed form of Merlin enters
the nucleus, binds to the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4DCAF1, and
inhibits its activity. Genetic evidence indicates that this inhibitory
interaction is essential for tumor suppression.

RESULTS

The Closed Form of Merlin Binds to DCAF1,
the Substrate Receptor of the E3 Ubiquitin
Ligase CRL4DCAF1
Tandem afﬁnity puriﬁcation (TAP) revealed that Merlin, tagged
at either its N or its C terminus, associates with proteins display-
ing an apparent molecular weight of 169 kD and 127 kD
(Figure 1A). The two proteins were recovered in similar amounts,
each at an apparent ratio of 1:5 to Merlin. Importantly, the
tumor-derived mutant L64P, which lacks tumor-suppressor
activity (Gutmann et al., 2001), did not associate with these
proteins (Figure 1A). MALDI-reTOF-MS followed by peptide
mass ﬁngerprinting and mass spectrometric sequencing
unequivocally identiﬁed the 127kD protein as DDB1 (DNA
Damage-Binding protein 1) and the 169 kD protein as DCAF1
(DDB1-and Cul4-Associated Factor 1)
(Figure 1A). NanoLC-
MS/MS indicated that wild-type Merlin, but not Merlin-L64P,
interacts also with Cul4B, albeit at a lower apparent stoichiom-
etry (Table S1 available online).

Prior studies have established that DDB1 functions as a SKP1-
like adaptor to recruit WD40 domain-containing substrate recep-
tors, such as DDB2, CSA (the Cockayne syndrome protein A),
and Det1-COP1 to the E3 ligase Cul4-Roc1 (Lee and Zhou,
2007, and references therein; O’Connell and Harper, 2007, and
references therein). DCAF1, which was originally identiﬁed as

the cellular receptor for the HIV protein Vpr and designated
VprBP, is one of several additional WD40 domain substrate
receptors able to combine with DDB1 to mediate assembly of
distinct Cul4 (CRL4) ligases (Lee and Zhou, 2007). In agreement
with the mass spectrometric analysis, immunoblotting indicated
that FH-Merlin combines with DCAF1, DDB1, and Cul4, but not
DYRK2 or EDD (Figure 1B), components of the alternative
EDD-DYRK2-DDB1-VprBP E3 ligase complex (Maddika and
Chen, 2009). These observations indicate that Merlin interacts
selectively with the E3 ligase CRL4DCAF1.

Since Merlin formed a stoichiometric complex with DCAF1 but
not DDB1 upon cotransfection in Cos7 cells (Figure S1A), we
hypothesized that Merlin binds directly to DCAF1 but indirectly
to DDB1. To test this hypothesis, we examined the ability of
GST-fusion proteins comprising either the FERM or the helical
and C-terminal domain of Merlin to bind to in vitro translated
DCAF1 or DDB1. As shown in Figure S1B, the FERM domain
of Merlin bound directly to DCAF1 but not DDB1, whereas the
helical and C-terminal segments did not (Figure S1B). Thus,
Merlin binds directly, through its FERM domain, to DCAF1.

In contrast,

To examine whether the conformational transition between the
open and the closed form regulates Merlin’s binding to
CRL4DCAF1, we tested the behavior of two well-characterized
phosphorylation mutants. Merlin-S518A, which cannot be phos-
phorylated at S518 and is stabilized in the closed conformation,
associated efﬁciently with DCAF1 and DDB1 in transfected 293T
cells.
the phosphorylation site mimetic mutant
Merlin-S518D, which is thought to maintain an open conforma-
tion, displayed dramatically diminished binding to DCAF1 and
DDB1 (Figure 1C). As anticipated, Ezrin and Merlin-L64P ex-
hibited essentially no binding in this assay. In agreement with
the model that the closed form of Merlin selectively interacts
with CRL4DCAF1, immunoblotting with anti-P-Merlin antibodies
indicated that the fraction of recombinant Merlin bound to
FH-DCAF1 is not detectably phosphorylated at S518 (Figure 1D).
Thus, the unphosphorylated, closed form of Merlin interacts
speciﬁcally with CRL4DCAF1, whereas the open form and a
well-characterized tumor-derived mutant do not, raising the
possibility that Merlin suppresses cell proliferation and tumori-
genesis by binding to CRL4DCAF1.

Merlin Associates with CRL4DCAF1 in the Nucleus
To identify the cellular compartment where Merlin interacts
with CRL4DCAF1, we cotransfected Myc-tagged DCAF1 and
HA-tagged Merlin into Merlin-deﬁcient Meso-33 mesothelioma
cells. These cells undergo growth arrest following re-expression
of Merlin and therefore represent an excellent model to study the
tumor-suppressor function of Merlin (see below). Immunoﬂuo-
rescent staining indicated that Myc-DCAF1 localizes in the
nucleus in Meso-33 cells (Figure 1E), suggesting that CRL4DCAF1
functions in this compartment like other CRL4 ligases (Lee and

(H) MCF-10A cells were subjected to subcellular fractionation. Equal amounts of proteins from the nuclear (NF) and nonnuclear (CM; cytosol + crude
membranes) fraction were subjected to immunoblotting with antibodies to the indicated proteins.
(I) Equal amounts of proteins from the nonnuclear (CM) and nuclear-soluble (NS) fraction of HeLa cells and Merlin immunoprecipitates were immunoblotted as
indicated. Anti-Cul4 recognizes Cul4-A as well as a higher molecular weight band, possibly corresponding to neddylated Cul4-A or Cul4-B (asterisk).
See also Figure S1.

Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 479

Zhou, 2007; O’Connell and Harper, 2007). Interestingly, in addi-
tion to localizing underneath the plasma membrane, HA-Merlin
also accumulated in the nucleus (Figure 1E). Subcellular fraction-
ation conﬁrmed these results (Figure S1C).

We reasoned that poor permeabilization of

the nuclear
membrane or epitope masking may have hampered detection
of Merlin in the nucleus in previous immunoﬂuorescence studies
(with the exception of Muranen et al., 2005). To study the localiza-
tion of endogenous Merlin, we designed a ﬁxation and permeabi-
lization protocol able to circumvent these potential problems (see
the Experimental Procedures). Using this protocol, we found that
a monospeciﬁc antibody to the N-terminal segment of Merlin
generates prominent nuclear staining in multiple cell types,
including HeLa squamous carcinoma cells and nonneoplastic
HEI286 Schwann cells, LP9 mesothelial cells, and MCF-10A
mammary epithelial cells (Figures 1F and 1G). This pattern of
staining was speciﬁc because it was suppressed by silencing of
Merlin (Figure 1F) and could be reproduced by using an antibody
to a C-terminal epitope (Figures S1D and S1E). Finally, biochem-
ical fractionation conﬁrmed that Merlin and DCAF1 accumulate in
the nucleus in multiple cell types (Figure 1H and Figure S1F).
Thus, Merlin can enter the nucleus and bind to DCAF1.

Many CRL4 ligases associate with DNA or chromatin during
the cell cycle or in response to DNA damage (O’Connell and
Harper, 2007). However, subnuclear fractionation indicated
that both DCAF1 and Merlin accumulate in the soluble nuclear
fraction and do not move into the chromatin fraction during
cell-cycle progression or in response to UV-induced DNA
damage (W.L. and F.G.G., unpublished data), consistent with
the hypothesis that CRL4DCAF1 performs a function distinct
from that of other known CRL4 ligases. Interestingly, coimmuno-
precipitation analysis showed that Merlin combines with DCAF1,
DDB1, and Cul4 in the soluble nuclear fraction, but not in the
nonnuclear fraction, despite the presence of abundant amounts
of these components (Figure 1I). This suggests that association
with a cofactor, dissociation of an inhibitor, or a posttranslational
modiﬁcation occurring in the nucleus promote the association of
Merlin with CRL4DCAF1. Taken together, these results indicate
that
the closed, growth-inhibitory form of Merlin binds to
CRL4DCAF1 in the nucleus.

Merlin Is Not a Substrate of CRL4DCAF1
Constitutively activated Akt can promote phosphorylation and
proteasome-mediated degradation of Merlin (Tang et al.,
2007), and overexpression studies have suggested that
CRL4DCAF1 mediates this process (Huang and Chen, 2008).
However, experiments with Cycloheximide indicated that Merlin
exhibits a half-life far exceeding 24 hr in several cell types (Fig-
ure S2A). In addition, treatment with the proteasome inhibitor
MG132 did not stabilize recombinant Merlin in Cos7 cells, and
Merlin-S518D and Merlin-L64P, which do not interact with
CRL4DCAF1, did not display increased stability in this assay
(Figure S2B). Finally, knockdown of DCAF1 did not cause
increased accumulation of Merlin in multiple cell types under
standard culture conditions, or in HeLa cells acutely exposed
to mitogens (Figures S2C and S2D). In fact, depletion of DCAF1
decreased the levels of Merlin, especially shortly after mitogenic
stimulation, suggesting that binding to DCAF1 stabilizes Merlin

480 Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

(Figure S2D). These results argue that Merlin is not targeted for
degradation by CRL4DCAF1 and suggest that Merlin functions
upstream, not downstream, of CRL4DCAF1.

Merlin Inhibits CRL4DCAF1
To examine the effect of Merlin on the ubiquitylating activity of
CRL4DCAF1, we set up an in vivo ubiquitylation assay. Cos7 cells
were transfected with FH-DCAF1 and Myc-ubiquitin, treated
with MG132 to stabilize ubiquitylated products, and immunopre-
cipitated with anti-Flag to isolate CRL4DCAF1 and associated
ubiquitylated products. Immunoblotting with anti-Myc antibody
revealed that FH-DCAF1 isolated from MG132-treated cells co-
precipitates with ubiquitylated species of apparent molecular
weight ranging from 55 to 300 kD, suggesting that CRL4DCAF1
ubiquitylates in vivo one or more substrates and that these
remain associated with the enzyme throughout immunoprecipi-
tation (Figure 2A, left). In contrast, FH-DCAF1 isolated from
untreated cells contained a modest amount of ubiquitylated
species of apparent molecular weight ranging from 180 to 250
kD. Cotransfection of increasing concentrations of HA-Merlin
caused a dose-dependent suppression of the accumulation of
ubiquitylated products, suggesting that Merlin suppresses the
ubiquitylating activity of CRL4DCAF1 (Figure 2A left). Immunoblot-
ting with anti-HA antibody indicated that Merlin does not
become ubiquitylated upon association with DCAF1, consistent
with the notion that Merlin is a regulator and not a substrate of the
ligase (Figure 2A right). Immunoblotting of total lysates provided
a control for the expression levels of recombinant proteins and
indicated that treatment with MG132 partially stabilizes DCAF1
(Figure S2E). These observations suggest that Merlin binds to
CRL4DCAF1 and suppresses its ability to mediate ubiquitylation
of target proteins.

To conﬁrm this hypothesis, we examined whether a mutant
form of DCAF1 unable to bind to Merlin mediates enhanced
CRL4DCAF1 ligase activity in cells expressing endogenous Merlin.
Deletion mapping indicated that the GST-FERM domain of
Merlin binds directly to a 90 aa C-terminal segment of DCAF1
in vitro (Figure S2F).
Immunoprecipitation experiments con-
ﬁrmed that DCAF1 (1–1417) lacking this C-terminal segment
combines with endogenous DDB1 but not with HA-Merlin in
Cos7 cells (Figure 2B). Interestingly, this mutant retained the
ability to interact with the HIV protein Vpr (Figure 2B), suggesting
that it is not grossly misfolded and indicating that Merlin and Vpr
bind to distinct sites on DCAF1. In addition, mutation of the
double DxR box on the bottom surface of the WD40 propeller
fold of DCAF1 (R1247/1283A) disrupted the association of
DCAF1 with DDB1, as previously reported (Jin et al., 2006b),
but not with Merlin (Figure S2G),
indicating that distinct
segments of DCAF1 mediate interaction with DDB1 and with
Merlin. Notably, in vivo ubiquitylation assays revealed that ligase
complexes containing DCAF1 (1–1417) exhibit higher apparent
enzymatic activity than those containing wild-type DCAF1 in
Cos7 cells (Figure 2C). Pretreatment with MG132 caused a large
increase in the activity of CRL4 containing wild-type DCAF1 but
had only a small effect on CRL4 containing DCAF1 (1–1417) (Fig-
ure 2C and Figure S2E), suggesting that the latter is a more
potent E3 ligase. These results suggest that deletion of the Merlin
binding segment of DCAF1 leads to constitutive activation of

Figure 2. Merlin Inhibits CRL4DCAF1-Depen-
dent Ubiquitylation
(A) Cos7 cells were transfected with 3 mg
FH-DCAF1 and 2 mg Myc-Ubiquitin in combination
with the indicated amounts of HA-Merlin and
treated with MG132 or left untreated. Flag or
control
immunoprecipitates (M2 and C, respec-
tively) were subjected to immunoblotting with
anti-Myc to visualize ubiquitylated proteins (left)
or anti-HA to visualize DCAF1 and Merlin (right).
Upper arrow points to DCAF1 and lower arrow to
Merlin.
(B) Cos7 cells were transfected with FH-DCAF1
or FH-DCAF1 (1–1417)
in combination with
HA-Merlin (top panel) or HA-Vpr (bottom panel).
Flag or control
immunoprecipitates were sub-
jected to immunoblotting. Levels of expression of
DCAF1, DDB1, and Merlin or Vpr were veriﬁed
by immunoblotting aliquots of total lysates.
(C) As in (B), with cotransfection of Myc-Ubiquitin
and treatment or not with MG132. Flag or control
immunoprecipitates were immunoblotted with
anti-Myc (left) or anti-HA (right).
(D) Cos7 cells stably infected with lentiviral vectors
encoding a control shRNA or a shRNA targeting
Merlin were subjected to immunoblotting (left) or
transfected with FH-DCAF1 and Myc-Ubiquitin
followed by immunoblotting of Flag or control
immunoprecipitates with anti-Myc (middle) or
anti-HA (right).
(E) Hypothetical model of Merlin-mediated inhibi-
tion of CRL4DCAF1. Merlin is proposed to function
as a competitive inhibitor of CRL4DCAF1. Blue
hexagons, three b propeller folds of DDB1, which
contact Cul4 (B) and DCAF1 (A and C); yellow
hexagon, WD40 domain of DCAF1; yellow sticks,
double DxR box implicated in binding to DDB1;
S, substrate; Ub, ubiquitin; Mer, closed Merlin.
See also Figure S2.

CRL4DCAF1, consistent with the notion that Merlin inhibits the E3
ligase activity.

Finally, we tested the effect of depletion of Merlin on
CRL4DCAF1 activity. Cos7 cells were infected with lentiviruses en-
coding a control short hairpin RNA (shRNA) or a shRNA targeting
Merlin and then subjected to in vivo ubiquitylation assay. The
results indicated that depletion of Merlin causes a signiﬁcant
increase in CRL4DCAF1 ligase activity (Figure 2D). The effect of
the shRNA targeting Merlin was speciﬁc, because it was sup-
pressed by overexpression of HA-Merlin but not of HA-Ezrin,
which does not associate with FH-DCAF1 (Figures S2H and
S2I). Together, the results of positive expression, mutational
activation, and depletion provide compelling evidence that
Merlin functions as a negative regulator of CRL4DCAF1 (see
Figure 2E for a hypothetical model).

CRL4DCAF1 Mediates the Hyperproliferation Caused
by Inactivation of Merlin
Recent studies have implicated CRL4DCAF1 in DNA replication
and progression through the G2 phase of the cell cycle (Hrecka

interfering RNAs (siRNAs)

et al., 2007; McCall et al., 2008). To examine whether Merlin
suppresses cell proliferation by inhibiting CRL4DCAF1, we
silenced DCAF1 in NF2 mutant Meso-33 mesothelioma cells
using a smart pool of small
(Fig-
ure S3A). Since loss of Merlin promotes progression through
G1 (Lo´ pez-Lago et al., 2009), we examined whether loss of
DCAF1 affects this speciﬁc phase of the cell cycle. BrdU incor-
poration experiments revealed that depletion of DCAF1 inhibits
the ability of G0 synchronized Meso-33 cells to progress through
G1 and enter S phase in response to mitogens (Figure 3A).
Deconstruction of the smartpool indicated that each individual
siRNA in the pool was able to inhibit expression of DCAF1 and
cell proliferation, as expected from speciﬁc inhibition (Figures
S3B and S3C).
In contrast, silencing of DCAF1 exerted a
moderate growth inhibitory effect in normal mesothelial Met-5A
cells (Figure 3B and Figure S3D), suggesting that Merlin-deﬁ-
cient cells are more sensitive to inactivation of DCAF1 than their
normal counterpart.

To further explore the role of CRL4DCAF1 in the proliferation of
Merlin-deﬁcient tumor cells, we designed a shRNA able to target

Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 481

Figure 3. DCAF1 Mediates Hyperproliferation and
Loss of Contact Inhibition in Merlin-Deﬁcient Cells
(A and B) Meso-33 cells (A) and Met-5a cells (B) were
transfected with a SMARTpool of siRNAs targeting the
adaptor protein AP3b, DCAF1, or a control nontargeting
pool, deprived of growth factors for 24 hr, incubated
with BrdU in the presence of mitogens for 24 hr, and sub-
jected to anti-BrdU staining followed by counterstaining
with DAPI. The graph shows the percentage (± standard
error of the mean [SEM]) of BrdU+ cells and the pictures
show representative ﬁelds.
(C and D) HUVECs (C) and HEI 286 human Schwann cells
(D) were transfected with a control si-RNA or two distinct
si-RNAs targeting DCAF1, alone or in combination with a
previously validated si-RNA targeting Merlin (Okada
et al., 2005). Cells were deprived of growth factors for
24 hr, plated under conﬂuent (C) or sparse (D) conditions
on ﬁbronectin, and subjected to BrdU incorporation in
the presence of mitogens for 24 hr followed by anti-BrdU
staining. The graphs show the percentage (±SEM) of
BrdU+ cells.
Immunoblotting was used to verify the
efﬁciency of knockdown.
(E) Meso-33 cells were transiently transfected with the
indicated mg of vectors encoding HA-Merlin, alone or in
combination with FH-DCAF1 or FH-DCAF1 (1–1417), and
subjected to immunoblotting (left) and BrdU incorporation
assay (right). The anti-HA blots including FH-DCAF1 and
HA-Merlin were exposed for the same time. The graph
shows the percentage (±SEM) of BrdU+ cells.
See also Figure S3.

both human and mouse DCAF1. Silencing of DCAF1 with this
shRNA inhibited phosphorylation of Rb and entry into the S
phase in Meso-33 cells (Figure S3E). FACS analysis of unsyn-
chronized Meso-33 cells conﬁrmed that depletion of DCAF1
predominantly inhibits progression through G1 (control Meso-
33: 23% G1, 68% S, 9% G2/M; DCAF1-depleted Meso-33:
59% G1, 35% S, 6% G2/M). Re-expression of DCAF1 from
either a moderate or a strong promoter rescued phosphorylation
of Rb and cell-cycle progression, conﬁrming the speciﬁcity of the
shRNA targeting DCAF1 (Figure S3E). We therefore used this
shRNA to silence DCAF1 in FC-1801 Schwannoma cells, which
were derived from NF2 conditional knockout mice, and their
normal counterpart, the FH-912 cells. Notably, inactivation of
DCAF1 caused a more profound growth inhibition in Merlin null
FC-1801 cells as compared to Merlin-positive FH-912 cells
(Figure S3F), conﬁrming that CRL4DCAF1 is required for the prolif-
eration of Merlin-deﬁcient tumor cells but to a lesser degree for
that of normal cells. These observations suggest that CRL4DCAF1
is a key component of the oncogenic signaling pathway acti-
vated by loss of Merlin.

To examine whether CRL4DCAF1 is required for exit from
contact inhibition after inactivation of Merlin, we silenced Merlin
in conﬂuent human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). As
anticipated, this manipulation induced a signiﬁcant fraction of
conﬂuent HUVECs to enter into S phase (Figure 3C). Notably,

depletion of DCAF1 with each of two distinct siRNAs suppressed
this unscheduled event (Figure 3C), suggesting that Merlin
induces contact inhibition through inhibition of CRL4DCAF1.

To conﬁrm that CRL4DCAF1 functions downstream of Merlin,
we conducted an additional genetic epistasis experiment in
HEI-286 Schwann cells, which are immortalized but not
neoplastic. Silencing of Merlin caused these cells to undergo
accelerated progression through G1 and entry into S phase in
response to growth factors (Figure 3D), in agreement with the
observation that Merlin contributes to restraining G1 progression
(Lo´ pez-Lago et al., 2009). Inactivation of DCAF1 reverted the
hyperproliferation caused by depletion of Merlin but did not
affect the rate of growth of control cells expressing Merlin
(Figure 3D), providing additional evidence that CRL4DCAF1 medi-
ates the growth inhibitory effect of Merlin.

If Merlin suppresses cell proliferation by inhibiting CRL4DCAF1,
expression of a mutant form of DCAF1 unable to interact
with Merlin should counteract the antimitogenic effect of Merlin.
To test this prediction, we transfected Meso-33 cells with
FH-Merlin, alone or in combination with wild-type DCAF1 or
DCAF1 (1–1417), and subjected them to BrdU incorporation
assay. Interestingly, expression of DCAF1 (1–1417) fully rescued
Meso-33 cells from undergoing growth arrest upon introduction
of Merlin, whereas wild-type DCAF1 had only a moderate effect
(Figure 3E). We note that, in spite of its higher level of expression,

482 Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

Figure 4. Expression of Merlin and Depletion of DCAF1 Induce a Largely Overlapping Gene Expression Program
(A) FC-1801 cells were infected with lentiviral vectors encoding a shRNA targeting DCAF1 (sh-DCAF1), a control shRNA (sh-Control), wild-type Merlin, Merlin-
L64P, or sh-DCAF1 in combination with wild-type Merlin and subjected to DNA microarray analysis. Unsupervised clustering of 1566 probe sets differentially
expressed R2 fold in at least one of the two major comparisons (sh-DCAF1 versus sh-Control and Merlin-WT versus Merlin-L64P). Values were normalized
to parental uninfected cells.
(B) Venn diagram shows the overlap between the list of genes differentially expressed upon expression of Merlin-WT or silencing of DCAF1 (R2-fold change).
Coregulated genes (885) are identiﬁed as differentially expressed R2-fold in one of the two comparisons and displaying a consensual signiﬁcant change in the
other comparison (p % 0.01 by the ANOVA test).
(C) Six hundred and sixty-seven genes coregulated upon expression of Merlin-WT or silencing of DCAF1 (R2-fold change in both comparisons) were subjected to
ingenuity pathway analysis. Both downregulated (353) and upregulated (314) genes are included in the category of biological functions. Representative down-
regulated genes are shown in blue, and representative upregulated genes in red in order of decreasing average fold change.
See also Figure S4.

Merlin did not bind stoichiometrically to wild-type DCAF1 under
these experimental conditions (Figure S3G). Presumably, tran-
sient transfection saturates the cellular machinery that modiﬁes
Merlin to enable it to bind to CRL4DCAF1 in Meso-33 cells. Taken
together, these results provide strong evidence that Merlin
suppresses cell proliferation by inhibiting CRL4DCAF1.

Merlin-Mediated Inhibition of CRL4DCAF1 Activates
a Growth-Inhibitory Gene Expression Program
CRL4 ligases can regulate gene expression by promoting ubiq-
uitylation of histones and recruitment of enzymes involved in
chromatin remodeling or histone methylation or by inducing
proteasome-mediated degradation of
transcription factors
(O’Connell and Harper, 2007). To examine whether Merlin
controls gene expression through inhibition of CRL4DCAF1, we
compared the gene expression program activated by expression
of Merlin or depletion of DCAF1 in Nf2 /  FC-1801 mouse
Schwannoma cells. Unsupervised clustering of 1566 probe
sets differentially expressed upon expression of wild-type but

not L64P mutant Merlin or upon speciﬁc depletion of DCAF1 re-
vealed largely overlapping changes in gene expression
(Figure 4A).
In fact, expression of Merlin and depletion of
DCAF1 induced a concordant upregulation or downregulation
of 855 probe sets (54%) (Figure 4B and Figure S4A). In spite of
this considerable functional overlap, expression of Merlin and
knock down of DCAF1 also induced speciﬁc effects on gene
expression (Figure 4B). These results indicate that Merlin regu-
lates gene expression largely through inhibition of CRL4DCAF1
that Merlin has CRL4DCAF1-independent
but also suggest
functions.

Ingenuity pathway analysis revealed that expression of Merlin
and inactivation of CRL4DCAF1 cause a concordant downregula-
tion of genes promoting cell-cycle progression and upregulation
of genes involved in growth arrest and apoptosis (Figure 4C). In
addition, these two manipulations downregulated several cell
adhesion genes, such as the integrin a subunits Itga6 and
Itga7, the integrin counter-receptor Vcam1, and the integrin-
linked kinase Ilk, and upregulated the Rho effectors Rock1 and

Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 483

Limk1. Ingenuity analysis of canonical pathways indicated that
expression of Merlin and loss of DCAF1 inhibit integrin and
PDGF signaling as well as the signaling pathways jointly regu-
lated by integrins and receptor tyrosine kinases (Figure S4B).
Interestingly, these two manipulations also led to downregula-
tion of the integrin signaling component Bcar3, which has been
implicated in recruitment of p130CAS to lamellipodia and in acti-
vation of Rac (Schrecengost et al., 2007). A survey of the genes
coordinately regulated by expression of Merlin or loss of DCAF1
revealed additional features of the gene expression program
activated by Merlin through inhibition of CRL4DCAF1. In addition
to expanding the category of genes involved in cell adhesion
and receptor tyrosine kinase signaling, this analysis revealed
through CRL4DCAF1, several genes
that Merlin regulates,
involved in intracellular trafﬁcking and a fraction of the known
Hippo pathway target genes (Figure S4C). These observations
suggest that Merlin’s inhibition of CRL4DCAF1 activates a broad
tumor-suppressive gene expression program.

Intramolecular Association of the FERM Domain
with the C-Terminal Tail Promotes Nuclear
Accumulation of Merlin
In order to obtain insight into the regulation of the association of
Merlin with CRL4DCAF1, we studied the mechanism that enables
Merlin to accumulate in the nucleus. Preliminary experiments
indicated that Merlin’s translocation in the nucleus does not
require DCAF1 (W.L. and F.G.G., unpublished data). Since Merlin
does not contain a canonical nuclear import sequence, we
examined the ability of the FERM domain and of the a-helical
and C-terminal domain of the protein to localize to the nucleus.
The FERM domain of Merlin (1–341) accumulated in the nucleus
of Meso-33 cells to a signiﬁcantly larger degree as compared to
the a-helical and C-terminal
wild-type Merlin.
domain of the protein (341–595) failed to localize to the nucleus
under the same conditions (Figures S5A and S5B). These results
indicate that the FERM domain of Merlin is sufﬁcient for nuclear
translocation and suggest that the C-terminal portion of the
protein may exert an inhibitory role. Since this portion of Merlin
contains a nuclear export signal
(Kressel and Schmucker,
2002), it is possible that this signal
is masked in the closed
conformer.

In contrast,

To examine whether antimitogenic signals, such as cell-to-cell
adhesion and growth factor deprivation, regulate the accumula-
tion of Merlin in the nucleus, we monitored the subcellular local-
ization of the unphosphorylated and phosphorylated form of
Merlin under various growth conditions. Mobility shift assay
and immunoblotting with anti-P-Merlin (S518)
indicated that
the dephosphorylated form of Merlin, which was prevalent in
conﬂuent cells especially if they were not exposed to mitogens,
accumulated predominantly in the nucleus, whereas Merlin
phosphorylated at S518 remained largely conﬁned to the non-
nuclear fraction under all conditions (Figures S5C and S5D).
To conﬁrm that the closed, growth-inhibitory form of Merlin
accumulates preferentially in the nucleus, we examined the
subcellular distribution of Merlin-S518A, which cannot be
phosphorylated by PAK, and Merlin-S518D, which mimics the
phosphorylated form of the protein. Notably, Merlin-S518A
accumulated in the nucleus to a signiﬁcantly higher extent than

484 Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

did wild-type Merlin (Figure S5E). In contrast, Merlin-S518D
displayed defective nuclear accumulation, suggesting that
PAK-mediated phosphorylation inhibits nuclear localization of
Merlin. In agreement with this hypothesis, a dominant negative
form of PAK enhanced nuclear accumulation of Merlin (W.L.
and F.G.G., unpublished data). Thus, intramolecular association
of the FERM domain with the C-terminal tail promotes nuclear
accumulation of Merlin, whereas phosphorylation of S518
inhibits this process.

Tumor-Derived Mutations Prevent Merlin’s Ability
to Interact with or to Inhibit CRL4DCAF1
Most NF2 missense mutations map to the FERM domain (Ahro-
nowitz et al., 2007). To further study the relevance of Merlin’s
interaction with CRL4DCAF1 for tumor suppression, we examined
several of these mutations. L46R, F62S, L64P, L141P, A211D,
and E270G have been found in two or more unrelated NF2
patients or are known to track with disease in individual families
and are therefore bona ﬁde pathogenic mutations. In contrast,
G197C, which was identiﬁed in a single patient affected by
mild bilateral Schwannoma, may represent a polymorphism
or a passenger mutation (Ahronowitz et al., 2007). Structural
considerations suggest that L46R, F62S, L64P, L141P, and
A211D disrupt the hydrophobic core of subdomain A or B,
whereas E270G simply removes a surface charge from subdo-
main C (Figures 5A–5C). In contrast, G197C can be accommo-
dated by a slight adjustment of the surface loop in which it
resides, without overt effects on the overall structure of subdo-
main B, and does not introduce or delete a charge (Figure 5C).
To evaluate their growth-suppressive function, we introduced
Merlin and mutants thereof into Meso-33 cells. As anticipated,
wild-type Merlin and Merlin-S518A suppressed progression
through G1 and entry in S phase in these cells, whereas
Merlin-S518D inhibited proliferation to a much smaller degree
(Figure 5D). Notably, all the bona ﬁde pathogenic mutants were
found to be devoid of growth inhibitory activity in Meso-33 cells.
In contrast, Merlin G197C suppressed proliferation as effectively
as wild-type Merlin, suggesting that this is not a pathogenic
mutation (Figure 5D). To examine the ability of tumor-derived
mutants of Merlin to interact with CRL4DCAF1 in cells, we sub-
jected Cos7 cells expressing FH-Merlin and mutants thereof to
coimmunoprecipitation. Remarkably, all the bona ﬁde tumor-
derived mutant forms of Merlin did not interact with CRL4DCAF1
in vivo, whereas the control mutant G197C associated with the
ligase as efﬁciently as wild-type Merlin under the same condi-
tions (Figure 5E, see Figure 1C for L64P), providing evidence
that Merlin needs to combine with CRL4DCAF1 to suppress
tumorigenesis.

To obtain insight into the mechanism through which each of
these pathogenic missense mutations impairs association of
Merlin with CRL4DCAF1 in vivo, we ﬁrst assessed their effect
on nuclear accumulation of the protein. Biochemical fraction-
ation indicated that L46R, L64P, L141P, and A211D accumu-
late in the nucleus to a much smaller degree than wild-type
Merlin or G197C (Figures 6A and 6B). Defective nuclear trans-
location and decreased level of expression, presumably arising
from deﬁcient protein stability, contributed to varying degrees
these mutants into the
to inhibit accumulation of each of

Figure 5. Several Pathogenic Missense Mutations Disrupt
Binding of Merlin to CRL4DCAF1 In Vivo
(A) Tumor-derived mutants (red sticks) are shown in the context of the
overall structure of the FERM domain of human Merlin (colored
ribbons; PDB 1ISN). The a-helical coiled-coil domain from the crystal
structure of the closed form of Spodoptera frugiperda Moesin (thin
gray a-carbon trace; PDB 2I1K), which is highly homologous to human
Merlin, is shown for reference. The coiled-coil domain was positioned
by superimposing the FERM domains from the structures of Merlin
and Moesin, which have a root mean square deviation for a-carbon
atoms of 1.3 A˚ and share 62% sequence identity.
(B) Close-up view of tumor-derived mutations (red sticks) located in
subdomain A (green ribbon) in the crystal structure of human Merlin.
Residues in contact with mutated residues are drawn as sticks and
colored according to atom type (carbon, yellow; sulfur, green).
(C) Subdomain B represented as in (B), with oxygen as magenta
sticks. Red sphere, G197.
(D) Meso-33 cells were transiently transfected with empty vector or
vectors encoding wild-type Merlin or indicated mutants. Asynchron-
ized cells growing in 10% fetal calf serum were subjected to BrdU
incorporation assay. The graph indicates the percentage (±SEM) of
BrdU-positive cells. Pictures show representative ﬁelds of cells trans-
fected with indicated vectors and stained with anti-BrdU (red) and
DAPI (blue).
(E) Cos7 cells were transfected with FH-tagged versions of wild-type
Merlin or indicated mutants. Flag or control
immunoprecipitates
(M2 and C, respectively) and total lysates were immunoblotted as
indicated.
See also Figure S5.

Merlin, which we had shown binds efﬁciently to in vitro
translated DCAF1. As shown in Figures 6C and 6D,
GST-FERM-A211D bound to DCAF1 in vitro almost as
efﬁciently as wild-type GST-FERM or GST-FERM-
G197C, suggesting that the A211D mutant does not
interact in vivo with CRL4DCAF1 because it does not
accumulate in the nucleus to sufﬁcient levels (Figures
6A and 6B). All the other mutant FERM domains dis-
played decreased ability to bind to recombinant
DCAF1: L46R, L64P, and E270G did not bind at all under
our experimental conditions, whereas F62S and L141P
displayed defective binding (Figures 6C and 6D). Since
F62S and E270G were able to accumulate in the nucleus
to normal or near-normal levels (Figures 6A and 6B), we
infer that they do not combine in vivo with CRL4DCAF1
because they are unable to interact directly with
DCAF1 with sufﬁcient afﬁnity. Notably, the E270G mutation
simply removes a charge from a surface exposed loop on sub-
domain C (Figure 5A), implicating this loop in interaction with
DCAF1 and conﬁrming the high speciﬁcity of the interaction of
Merlin with DCAF1. In contrast, both defective nuclear accumu-
lation and deﬁcient binding to DCAF1 contribute to the inability
of L46R, L64P, and L141P to interact with CRL4DCAF1 in vivo.
Together, these experiments indicate that the six tumor-derived
missense mutants that we have tested do not combine with
CRL4DCAF1 in vivo, owing to defective accumulation in the
nucleus, deﬁcient binding to DCAF1, or a combination of the
two mechanisms.

While mutations that introduce stop codons within the FERM
domain are likely to give rise to misfolded and unstable protein

Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 485

nucleus. At the two opposite ends of the spectrum, L46R and
L141 did not accumulate in the nucleus in spite of near wild-
type levels of expression, suggesting that these two mutations
affect predominantly nuclear translocation, whereas A211D
nuclear levels were low largely as a consequence of reduced
expression (Figures 6A and 6B). In contrast, F62S and E270
translocated into the nucleus as efﬁciently as wild-type Merlin,
although the amounts of the latter in the nucleus appeared to
be reduced. These results suggest that defective stability and
nuclear translocation contribute to impair the interaction of
certain tumor-derived mutant forms of Merlin with CRL4DCAF1.
To examine the ability of tumor-derived missense mutants to
interact with CRL4DCAF1 in vitro, we engineered each mutation
into a fusion protein comprising the isolated FERM domain of

Figure 6. Pathogenic Mutations Disrupt the Ability of
Merlin to Accumulate in the Nucleus, to Bind to DCAF1,
or to Inhibit CRL4DCAF1
(A) Meso-33 cells were transiently transfected with FH-tagged
versions of wild-type Merlin or the indicated mutants and sub-
jected to subcellular fractionation. Equal amounts of proteins
from the nonnuclear (CM) and nuclear (NF) fractions were sub-
jected to immunoblotting.
(B) The amount of Merlin or indicated mutants present in nuclear
and nonnuclear fractions was estimated by densitometry of the
blot in (A). Top: ratio of Merlin or indicated mutants present in
nuclear versus nonnuclear fractions. Bottom: amount of each
Merlin mutant present in the nucleus as a percentage over the
wild-type value.
(C) In vitro-translated and TNT-labeled DCAF1 was incubated with
0.5, 1, and 2 mg GST fusion proteins comprising the FERM domain
of wild-type Merlin or indicated mutants. GST-bound DCAF1 was
detected by blotting with HRP-streptavidin.
(D) Densitometric analysis of (C). The graph shows the binding
values in arbitrary units.
(E) Cos7 cells were transfected with the indicated FH-tagged
forms of Merlin and subjected to immunoprecipitation with control
(C) or anti-Flag Mab (M2) followed by immunoblotting.
(F) Cos7 cells were transfected with FH-DCAF1 and HA-Ubiquitin
in combination with the indicated Myc-tagged constructs or
empty vector and treated with MG132. Flag or control immunopre-
cipitates were immunoblotted with anti-HA (left). Total
lysates
were immunoblotted with anti-Myc (right).

prevalent
truncation mutants: Merlin 466X, which
lacks the C-terminal portion of the a-helical domain
as well as the C-terminal domain, and Merlin 341X,
which retains the FERM domain but lacks both the a-
helical and the C-terminal domains (Ahronowitz
et al., 2007). Coimmunoprecipitation indicated that
these two Merlin mutants retain the ability to interact
with CRL4DCAF1 in vivo (Figure 6E). In fact, progressive
deletion from the C terminus resulted in increased, as
opposed to decreased, binding of Merlin to the ligase.
Since the isolated FERM domain of Merlin accumu-
lates in the nucleus to a larger extent than the wild-
type protein, whereas the C-terminal portion of Merlin
including the a-helical and C-terminal domain remains
in the cytoplasm (Figure S5B),
it is possible that
increased nuclear accumulation facilitates the interac-
tion of
tumor-derived truncations mutants with
CRL4DCAF1.
its increased
ability to bind to CRL4DCAF1 in vivo, the FERM domain
of Merlin did not suppress CRL4DCAF1 ligase activity
in vivo as efﬁciently as wild-type Merlin (Figure 6F),
indicating that the a-helical and C-terminal domains
contribute to Merlin’s inhibitory activity. These results
suggest that the tumor-derived truncation mutants
of Merlin that retain the FERM domain are able to
interact with CRL4DCAF1 but fail to suppress its activity.
The observation that several distinct tumor-derived mutations
impair Merlin’s ability to translocate into the nucleus, to bind to
DCAF1, or to inhibit CRL4DCAF1 activity provides strong genetic
evidence that Merlin suppresses tumorigenesis by inhibiting
CRL4DCAF1.

Interestingly,

in spite of

products, certain nonsense mutations delete only the C-terminal
domain—a structural perturbation that may affect the ability of
Merlin to maintain a closed conformation. To examine whether
tumor-derived nonsense mutations affect the ability of Merlin
to interact with or to suppress CRL4DCAF1, we examined two

486 Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

Figure 7. Silencing of DCAF1 Suppresses
the Tumorigenic Potential of Merlin-
Deﬁcient Cells
(A) Meso-33 cells were infected with lentiviral
vectors encoding two distinct shRNAs targeting
DCAF1 (sh-1 and sh-2) or a control shRNA
(sh-Contr.) and subjected to immunoblotting.
(B) FC-1801 cells treated as in (A). Cells infected
with sh-1 were also infected with a retroviral vector
encoding a shRNA-resistant version of DCAF1 or
with empty vector. Immunoblotting was as indi-
cated.
(C) Meso-33 cells infected with the indicated lenti-
viral vectors were subjected to soft agar assay.
The graph illustrates the total number (±SEM) of
colonies present in each well after 2 weeks of
culture. Representative images are shown.
(D and E) Two million FC-1801 cells infected with
the indicated lentiviral vectors were injected
subcutaneously in nude mice.
(D) shows the
increase in volume (±SEM) over time of tumors
generated by cells infected with lentiviruses
encoding a control shRNA (sh-Control) or two
distinct shRNAs targeting DCAF1 (sh-1 and
sh-2). (E) shows the increase in volume (±SEM) over time of tumors generated by cells infected with sh-1 and either a retroviral vector encoding a shRNA-resistant
version of DCAF1 or empty vector. Data were obtained from the same experiment. Note the different scale of the y axes of the two graphs.
(F) Primary Schwann cells from two normal individuals (NF2+/+) and Schwannoma cells from two NF2 patients (NF2 / ) were infected with lentiviruses encoding
a shRNA targeting DCAF1 (sh-2) or a control shRNA (sh-Co.), deprived of growth factors, restimulated with mitogens in the presence of BrdU, and subjected to
anti-BrdU staining. The graph shows the percentage (±SEM) of BrdU+ cells.
See also Figure S6.

Inactivation of DCAF1 Suppresses the Tumorigenic
Potential of Mesothelioma and Schwannoma Cells
To test whether CRL4DCAF1 is required for NF2-dependent tumor-
igenesis, we silenced DCAF1 in Meso-33 and FC-1801 cells
(Figures 7A and 7B). Knockdown of DCAF1 inhibited the ability
of both mesothelioma and Schwannoma cells to grow in soft
agar (Figure 7C and Figure S6A).
In contrast, depletion of
DCAF1 did not affect the ability of Ras-V12 or v-Src transformed
cells to express elevated levels of Cyclin D1 and p-Rb and to prolif-
erate under adherent conditions or in soft agar (Figures S6B and
S6C), suggesting that inactivation of CRL4DCAF1 speciﬁcally
inhibits the malignant properties of Merlin-deﬁcient tumor cells.

Meso-33 cells as well as other Merlin-deﬁcient mesothelioma
cell lines did not give rise to tumors upon subcutaneous or intra-
pleural injection in mice. In contrast, the FC-1801 cells, which
express robust levels of DCAF1, gave rise to sizeable tumors in
less than 4 weeks upon subcutaneous injection in nude mice
(Figure 7D). Silencing of DCAF1 with two distinct shRNAs in-
hibited tumor growth in vivo by approximately 75% at day 24.
This effect was highly speciﬁc, as moderate overexpression
of a shRNA-resistant form of DCAF1 rescued the ability of
FC-1801 cells expressing one of the two shRNAs targeting
DCAF1 to give rise to subcutaneous tumors (Figure 7E). In fact,
the tumors generated by these cells grew at a much faster
pace as compared to those generated by parental FC-1801 cells
(by approximately 2-fold, compare Figures 7D and 7E, data are
from the same experiment), suggesting that elevated levels of
DCAF1 can promote tumorigenesis.

To explore the relevance of our ﬁndings to the pathogenesis of
NF2, we examined whether DCAF1 affects the ability of primary
human Schwannoma cells derived from NF2 patients to prolif-

erate in vitro. Silencing of DCAF1 suppressed the ability of these
cells to progress through G1 and enter into S phase in response
to mitogens. In contrast, knockdown of DCAF1 did not signiﬁ-
cantly affect the proliferation of control human Schwann cells
(Figure 7F). Together, these results indicate that CRL4DCAF1 is
necessary for NF2-dependent hyperproliferation, anchorage-
independent growth, and tumorigenesis.

DISCUSSION

The mechanism by which Merlin suppresses tumorigenesis has
remained elusive since the discovery of the NF2 gene. This study
reveals that the closed, growth-inhibitory form of Merlin translo-
cates to the nucleus, binds to the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4DCAF1,
and suppresses its ability to ubiquitylate target proteins. Multiple
converging lines of evidence indicate that Merlin’s inhibition of
CRL4DCAF1 activity is required to induce growth arrest and
suppress tumorigenesis. Notably, analysis of several tumor-
derived mutants indicates that some display impaired nuclear
translocation, others fail to interact with DCAF1, and still others
bind to DCAF1 but do not suppress CRL4DCAF1 E3 ligase activity.
Furthermore, silencing of DCAF1 reverses the consequences of
Merlin inactivation in normal cells and suppresses the ability of
Merlin-deﬁcient tumor cells to grow in soft agar and in nude
mice. These ﬁndings indicate that entry into the nucleus and inhi-
bition of CRL4DCAF1 are integral components of the mechanism
by which Merlin suppresses tumorigenesis.

The mechanisms through which antimitogenic signals induce
Merlin to inhibit CRL4DCAF1 are likely to be complex. Our results
suggest that these signals promote, largely through inhibition of
the closed form of Merlin, which
PAK, accumulation of

Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 487

export

signal

nuclear

(Kressel

translocates into the nucleus. Merlin does not contain a classical
importin-a nuclear localization sequence but has a C-terminal
CRM1-dependent
and
Schmucker, 2002). Mutational analysis suggests that the FERM
domain is necessary and sufﬁcient for nuclear entry, whereas
the C-terminal coiled-coil domain inhibits this process unless it
is folded back and interacts with the FERM domain. In addition
or instead, unfolding of the C-terminal helical domain may expose
the nuclear export signal and thereby facilitate Merlin’s exit from
the nucleus. Interestingly, other FERM domain proteins, such as
the isoforms H and R of band 4.1 and FAK, appear to shuttle in
and out of the nucleus through similar conformational transitions
(Gascard et al., 1999; Lim et al., 2008; Luque et al., 1998).

Upon entering the nucleus, the closed form of Merlin binds to
the C-terminal segment of DCAF1. Our results indicate that
Merlin is not a substrate of CRL4DCAF1 but exerts its antimito-
genic function by blocking DCAF1-dependent recruitment or
ubiquitylation of CRL4DCAF1 substrates. Since subdomain A of
the FERM domain of Merlin consists of an ubiquitin-like fold
(Shimizu et al., 2002), Merlin may function as an inhibitory pseu-
dosubstrate for CRL4DCAF1. Reconstitution of CRL4DCAF1 ligase
activity in vitro will be necessary to directly test this model. Irre-
spective of the speciﬁc mechanism by which Merlin inhibits
CRL4DCAF1, several
lines of evidence support the conclusion
that this inhibitory interaction restrains cell proliferation. First,
inactivation of Merlin enables normal cells to exit from contact
inhibition and to undergo cell cycle progression, while depletion
of DCAF1 suppresses both effects. Second, enforced expres-
sion of a Merlin-insensitive mutant of DCAF1 counteracts the
antimitogenic effect of Merlin. Third, depletion of DCAF1 sup-
presses hyperproliferation in Merlin-deﬁcient Schwannoma
and mesothelioma cells but inhibits their normal counterpart to
a lesser extent, consistent with the hypothesis that loss of Merlin
activates oncogenic signaling through CRL4DCAF1. Finally,
silencing of DCAF1 suppresses the ability of primary human
Schwannoma cells from NF2 patients to proliferate in vitro, sug-
gesting that deregulated CRL4DCAF1 activity contributes to the
pathogenesis of NF2.

CRL4 ligases have been implicated in chromatin remodeling,
DNA replication, and the response to DNA damage (Lee and
Zhou, 2007; O’Connell and Harper, 2007). For example,
CRL4DDB2 promotes the ubiquitylation of several histones and
the DNA repair components DDB2 and XPC, restricting the
threshold of DNA damage response and inhibiting UV-induced
skin carcinogenesis, CRL4CSA mediates ubiquitylation of CSB,
a SWI2/SNF2 ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling enzyme,
and CRL4DET1-Cop1 promotes ubiquitylation and proteasome-
mediated degradation of the transcription factor c-Jun (reviewed
in Lee and Zhou, 2007 and O’Connell and Harper, 2007; Liu et al.,
2009). Although the physiological substrates of CRL4DCAF1 have
not been identiﬁed, our results suggest that CRL4DCAF1 broadly
regulates gene expression. In fact, expression of Merlin and
depletion of DCAF1 cause similar changes in the expression of
several hundred genes, suggesting that Merlin controls a wide
gene expression program through inhibition of CRL4DCAF1.
Notably, this program includes the inhibition of genes involved
in promoting progression through each phase of the cell cycle
as well as the upregulation of genes involved in growth arrest

488 Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

and apoptosis. Parenthetically, we speculate that knockdown
of DCAF1 may cause an accumulation of Merlin-deﬁcient cells
in G1 because loss of Merlin speciﬁcally deregulates this phase
of the cell cycle. In addition, we have observed that Merlin
controls, through CRL4DCAF1, the expression of genes involved
in receptor tyrosine kinase and adhesion signaling, intracellular
trafﬁcking, and a subset of Hippo pathway target genes. The
ability of CRL4DCAF1 to regulate these genes may explain some
of the effects that Merlin has been reported to exert on receptor
tyrosine kinase and adhesion signaling (Ammoun et al., 2008;
Curto et al., 2007; Kissil et al., 2003; Lallemand et al., 2009;
Okada et al., 2005; Poulikakos et al., 2006; Shaw et al., 2001).
The observation that re-expression of Merlin and depletion of
DCAF1 induce a gene expression program of similar breadth,
speciﬁcity, and scope reinforces the model
that Merlin
suppresses tumorigenesis through inhibition of CRL4DCAF1.

The analysis of

tumor-derived mutations,

in particular
missense mutations, has provided considerable insight into the
function of important tumor suppressors, such as P53, RB,
PTEN, and APC. We have studied six pathogenic missense
mutations mapping to the FERM domain of Merlin and found
that each of them impairs the ability of Merlin to accumulate in
the nucleus and/or bind to DCAF1. Both types of defects disrupt
the association of Merlin with CRL4DCAF1. In contrast, severe
truncation mutants, such as 341X, display increased accumula-
tion in the nucleus and interaction with CRL4DCAF1 in vivo but fail
to suppress ligase activity. Among the missense mutations,
L64R, F62S, and L64P, located in subdomain A, disrupt binding
to DCAF1 in vitro, whereas L141P and A211D, mapping to sub-
domain B, do not. Furthermore, E270G, which removes a single
charge from the surface of subdomain C, drastically reduces
binding to DCAF1 in vitro. These results implicate subdomains
A and C in interaction with DCAF1 and suggest that mutations
in other portions of the protein, such as subdomain B and the
helical segment, may affect nuclear localization determinants
or disrupt the closed conformation that is required for nuclear
accumulation. The observation that many pathogenic NF2 muta-
tions disrupt, and several others are predicted to disrupt, the
ability of Merlin to interact with or to suppress CRL4DCAF1
provides strong genetic evidence that Merlin suppresses tumor-
igenesis by inhibiting this E3 ligase.

In conclusion, our results indicate that NF2-dependent tumor-
igenesis arises from the inability of mutant Merlin to enter into the
nucleus and to suppress CRL4DCAF1-dependent gene expres-
sion. This delineated tumor-suppressor pathway bears antithetic
resemblance to the Wnt/b-catenin pathway, where an intercel-
lular signal hijacks the cytoskeletal component b-catenin to
promote oncogenic gene expression in the nucleus (Clevers,
2006). Identiﬁcation of the substrate(s) of CRL4DCAF1 and eluci-
dation of the mechanism through which this ligase exerts its
pro-proliferative and anti-apoptotic role should help to generate
targeted therapies for NF2 mutant tumors.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Materials and Standard Protocols
Cells, antibodies, vectors, and other materials are described in the Extended
Experimental Procedures. The protocols used for immunoprecipitation, GST

pull down, subcellular fractionation, and immunoblotting are outlined in the
Extended Experimental Procedures.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

TAP and Mass Spectrometry
Cos7 cells transiently expressing FH-tagged Merlin or Merlin-L64P were lysed
in RIPA buffer and subjected to TAP using the FLAG HA Tandem Afﬁnity
Puriﬁcation Kit (Sigma TP0010). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE,
visualized with Gelcode (Pierce), and subjected to MALDI-reTOF-MS/MS.
Alternatively, gel stacks were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS. See details in
the Extended Experimental Procedures.

Immunoﬂuorescent Staining
Cells were ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 min and incubated in
permeabilization buffer (PDT: 0.3% sodium deoxycholate and 0.3% Triton
X-100 in PBS) for 30 min on ice. Fixation and permeabilization with organic
solvents, such as methanol or acetone, or ﬁxation with paraformaldehyde
followed by permeabilization with 0.5% Triton X-100 alone for 20 min did not
allow efﬁcient detection of Merlin in the nucleus. After ﬁxation and permeabi-
lization, cells were incubated overnight at 4C with primary antibodies diluted
in PDT. After washing with PDT, cells were incubated with secondary anti-
bodies diluted in PDT for 2 hr at 4C. Cells were washed with PDT, rinsed
with PBS, and mounted in Gelvatol. When indicated, nuclei were stained
with DAPI.

Ubiquitylation Assay
Cos7 cells were transfected with indicated plasmids and, when indicated,
treated with 25 mM MG132 for 6 hr. Lysates were incubated with either anti-
Flag beads or control mouse IgG beads. Eluted products were subjected to
immunoblotting. Detailed procedures are described in the Extended Experi-
mental Procedures.

BrdU Incorporation Assay
Cells were synchronized in G0 by growth factor deprivation or growth to high
density and then stimulated with mitogens for 24 hr in the presence of BrdU.
Anti-BrdU staining was used to measure progression through G1 and entry
in S phase. See details in the Extended Experimental Procedures.

Gene Expression and Silencing
Retroviral and lentiviral vectors encoding recombinant proteins or shRNAs
were generated as previously described (Pylayeva et al., 2007). Sequences
for shRNAs and detailed procedures are described in the Extended Experi-
mental Procedures.

DNA Microarray Analysis
FC-1801 cells were left untreated or transduced with lentiviruses encoding
sh-control, sh-DCAF1, Merlin-WT, Merlin-L64P, or a combination of viruses
encoding sh-DCAF1 and Merlin-WT and were plated in triplicate at subconﬂu-
ent density in complete medium. Complementary DNAs (cDNAs) were hybrid-
ized to GeneChip Mouse Genome 430a 2.0 Array chips (Affymetrix). Raw data
are available in Gene Expression Omnibus (accession number GSE19305).
Data analysis is described in the Extended Experimental Procedures.

Soft Agar and Tumorigenicity Assay
For soft agar assay, cells were trypsinized, resuspended in complete medium,
and plated in 0.34% low melting temperature agarose (FMC Bioproducts) in
complete medium. Meso-33 cells were seeded at 2 3 104 and FC-1801 at
6 3 104 per well in 6-well Ultra Low Cluster Plates (Costar). For tumorigenicity
assay, 2 3 106 FC-1801 cells were suspended in calcium/magnesium-free
PBS and injected subcutaneously into the right ﬂank of nude mice. Tumor
volumes were determined by caliper measurement.

ACCESSION NUMBERS

The DNA microarray dataset reported in this paper has been deposited in the
Gene Expression Omnibus of NCBI with the accession number GSE19305.

Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, six
ﬁgures, and one table and can be found with this article online at doi:10.
1016/j.cell.2010.01.029.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank J. Brugge, S. Jhanwar, and D. Lim for cell lines, M. Pagano for
constructs, L. Fabrizio and M. Yaneva for help with mass spectrometry, and
members of the Giancotti laboratory for discussions. This work was supported
by the Baker Street Foundation and National Institutes of Health (NIH) Cancer
Center Support Grant P30 CA08748. W.L. is recipient of a Young Investigator
Award from the Children’s Tumor Foundation. P.Z. was supported by NIH
grant R01 CA098210.

Received: January 22, 2009
Revised: August 7, 2009
Accepted: January 16, 2010
Published: February 18, 2010

REFERENCES

Ahronowitz, I., Xin, W., Kiely, R., Sims, K., MacCollin, M., and Nunes, F.P.
(2007). Mutational spectrum of the NF2 gene: a meta-analysis of 12 years of
research and diagnostic laboratory ﬁndings. Hum. Mutat. 28, 1–12.

Ammoun, S., Flaiz, C., Ristic, N., Schuldt, J., and Hanemann, C.O. (2008).
Dissecting and targeting the growth factor-dependent and growth
factor-independent extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway in human
schwannoma. Cancer Res. 68, 5236–5245.

Bretscher, A., Edwards, K., and Fehon, R.G. (2002). ERM proteins and merlin:
integrators at the cell cortex. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3, 586–599.

Cho, E., Feng, Y., Rauskolb, C., Maitra, S., Fehon, R., and Irvine, K.D. (2006).
Delineation of a Fat tumor suppressor pathway. Nat. Genet. 38, 1142–1150.

Clevers, H. (2006). Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in development and disease.
Cell 127, 469–480.

Curto, M., Cole, B.K., Lallemand, D., Liu, C.H., and McClatchey, A.I. (2007).
Contact-dependent inhibition of EGFR signaling by Nf2/Merlin. J. Cell Biol.
177, 893–903.

Gascard, P., Nunomura, W., Lee, G., Walensky, L.D., Krauss, S.W., Takakuwa,
Y., Chasis, J.A., Mohandas, N., and Conboy, J.G. (1999). Deciphering the
nuclear import pathway for the cytoskeletal red cell protein 4.1R. Mol. Biol.
Cell 10, 1783–1798.

Gutmann, D.H., Hirbe, A.C., and Haipek, C.A. (2001). Functional analysis of
neuroﬁbromatosis 2 (NF2) missense mutations. Hum. Mol. Genet. 10, 1519–
1529.

Hamaratoglu, F., Willecke, M., Kango-Singh, M., Nolo, R., Hyun, E., Tao, C.,
Jafar-Nejad, H., and Halder, G. (2006). The tumour-suppressor genes NF2/
Merlin and Expanded act through Hippo signalling to regulate cell proliferation
and apoptosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 8, 27–36.

Hrecka, K., Gierszewska, M., Srivastava, S., Kozaczkiewicz, L., Swanson,
S.K., Florens, L., Washburn, M.P., and Skowronski, J. (2007). Lentiviral Vpr
usurps Cul4-DDB1[VprBP] E3 ubiquitin ligase to modulate cell cycle. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 11778–11783.

Huang, J., and Chen, J. (2008). VprBP targets Merlin to the Roc1-Cul4A-DDB1
E3 ligase complex for degradation. Oncogene 27, 4056–4064.

James, M.F., Han, S., Polizzano, C., Plotkin, S.R., Manning, B.D., Stemmer-
Rachamimov, A.O., Gusella, J.F., and Ramesh, V. (2009). NF2/merlin is a
novel negative regulator of mTOR complex 1, and activation of mTORC1 is
associated with meningioma and schwannoma growth. Mol. Cell. Biol. 29,
4250–4261.

Jin, H., Sperka, T., Herrlich, P., and Morrison, H.
(2006a). Tumorigenic
transformation by CPI-17 through inhibition of a merlin phosphatase. Nature
442, 576–579.

Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc. 489

Jin, J., Arias, E.E., Chen, J., Harper, J.W., and Walter, J.C. (2006b). A family of
diverse Cul4-Ddb1-interacting proteins includes Cdt2, which is required for S
phase destruction of the replication factor Cdt1. Mol. Cell 23, 709–721.

Kaempchen, K., Mielke, K., Utermark, T., Langmesser, S., and Hanemann,
C.O. (2003). Upregulation of the Rac1/JNK signaling pathway in primary
human schwannoma cells. Hum. Mol. Genet. 12, 1211–1221.

Kissil, J.L., Johnson, K.C., Eckman, M.S., and Jacks, T. (2002). Merlin phos-
phorylation by p21-activated kinase 2 and effects of phosphorylation on merlin
localization. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 10394–10399.

Kissil, J.L., Wilker, E.W., Johnson, K.C., Eckman, M.S., Yaffe, M.B., and Jacks,
T. (2003). Merlin, the product of the Nf2 tumor suppressor gene, is an inhibitor
of the p21-activated kinase, Pak1. Mol. Cell 12, 841–849.

Kressel, M., and Schmucker, B. (2002). Nucleocytoplasmic transfer of the NF2
tumor suppressor protein merlin is regulated by exon 2 and a CRM1-depen-
dent nuclear export signal in exon 15. Hum. Mol. Genet. 11, 2269–2278.

Lallemand, D., Curto, M., Saotome, I., Giovannini, M., and McClatchey, A.I.
(2003). NF2 deﬁciency promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis by destabiliz-
ing adherens junctions. Genes Dev. 17, 1090–1100.

Lallemand, D., Manent, J., Couvelard, A., Watilliaux, A., Siena, M., Chareyre,
F., Lampin, A., Niwa-Kawakita, M., Kalamarides, M., and Giovannini, M.
(2009). Merlin regulates transmembrane receptor accumulation and signaling
at the plasma membrane in primary mouse Schwann cells and in human
schwannomas. Oncogene 28, 854–865.

Lee, J., and Zhou, P. (2007). DCAFs, the missing link of the CUL4-DDB1
ubiquitin ligase. Mol. Cell 26, 775–780.

Lim, S.T., Chen, X.L., Lim, Y., Hanson, D.A., Vo, T.T., Howerton, K., Larocque,
N., Fisher, S.J., Schlaepfer, D.D., and Ilic, D. (2008). Nuclear FAK promotes cell
proliferation and survival through FERM-enhanced p53 degradation. Mol. Cell
29, 9–22.

Liu, L., Lee, S., Zhang, J., Peters, S.B., Hannah, J., Zhang, Y., Yin, Y., Koff, A.,
Ma, L., and Zhou, P. (2009). CUL4A abrogation augments DNA damage
response and protection against skin carcinogenesis. Mol. Cell 34, 451–460.

Lo´ pez-Lago, M.A., Okada, T., Murillo, M.M., Socci, N., and Giancotti, F.G.
(2009). Loss of the tumor suppressor gene NF2, encoding merlin, constitutively
activates integrin-dependent mTORC1 signaling. Mol. Cell. Biol. 29, 4235–
4249.

Luque, C.M., Lallena, M.J., Alonso, M.A., and Correas, I. (1998). An alternative
domain determines nuclear localization in multifunctional protein 4.1. J. Biol.
Chem. 273, 11643–11649.

Maddika, S., and Chen, J. (2009). Protein kinase DYRK2 is a scaffold that
facilitates assembly of an E3 ligase. Nat. Cell Biol. 11, 409–419.

McCall, C.M., Miliani de Marval, P.L., Chastain, P.D., 2nd, Jackson, S.C., He,
Y.J., Kotake, Y., Cook, J.G., and Xiong, Y. (2008). Human immunodeﬁciency
virus type 1 Vpr-binding protein VprBP, a WD40 protein associated with the

DDB1-CUL4 E3 ubiquitin ligase, is essential for DNA replication and embryonic
development. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28, 5621–5633.

McClatchey, A.I., and Fehon, R.G. (2009). Merlin and the ERM proteins—
regulators of receptor distribution and signaling at the cell cortex. Trends
Cell Biol. 19, 198–206.

McClatchey, A.I., and Giovannini, M. (2005). Membrane organization and
tumorigenesis—the NF2 tumor suppressor, Merlin. Genes Dev. 19, 2265–
2277.

Muranen, T., Gro¨ nholm, M., Renkema, G.H., and Carpe´ n, O. (2005). Cell cycle-
dependent nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of the neuroﬁbromatosis 2 tumour
suppressor merlin. Oncogene 24, 1150–1158.

O’Connell, B.C., and Harper, J.W. (2007). Ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS):
what can chromatin do for you? Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 19, 206–214.

Okada, T., Lopez-Lago, M., and Giancotti, F.G. (2005). Merlin/NF-2 mediates
contact inhibition of growth by suppressing recruitment of Rac to the plasma
membrane. J. Cell Biol. 171, 361–371.

Okada, T., You, L., and Giancotti, F.G. (2007). Shedding light on Merlin’s
wizardry. Trends Cell Biol. 17, 222–229.

Poulikakos, P.I., Xiao, G.H., Gallagher, R., Jablonski, S., Jhanwar, S.C., and
Testa, J.R. (2006). Re-expression of the tumor suppressor NF2/merlin inhibits
invasiveness in mesothelioma cells and negatively regulates FAK. Oncogene
25, 5960–5968.

Pylayeva, Y., Guo, W., and Giancotti, F.G. (2007). Analysis of integrin signaling
in genetically engineered mouse models of mammary tumor progression.
Methods Enzymol. 426, 439–461.

Rong, R., Tang, X., Gutmann, D.H., and Ye, K. (2004). Neuroﬁbromatosis
2 (NF2) tumor suppressor merlin inhibits phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase through
binding to PIKE-L. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 18200–18205.

Schrecengost, R.S., Riggins, R.B., Thomas, K.S., Guerrero, M.S., and Bouton,
A.H. (2007). Breast cancer antiestrogen resistance-3 expression regulates
breast cancer cell migration through promotion of p130Cas membrane local-
ization and membrane rufﬂing. Cancer Res. 67, 6174–6182.

Shaw, R.J., Paez, J.G., Curto, M., Yaktine, A., Pruitt, W.M., Saotome, I.,
O’Bryan, J.P., Gupta, V., Ratner, N., Der, C.J., et al. (2001). The Nf2 tumor
suppressor, merlin, functions in Rac-dependent signaling. Dev. Cell 1, 63–72.

Shimizu, T., Seto, A., Maita, N., Hamada, K., Tsukita, S., Tsukita, S., and
Hakoshima, T. (2002). Structural basis for neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Crystal
structure of the merlin FERM domain. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 10332–10336.

Tang, X., Jang, S.W., Wang, X., Liu, Z., Bahr, S.M., Sun, S.Y., Brat, D.,
Gutmann, D.H., and Ye, K.
(2007). Akt phosphorylation regulates the
tumour-suppressor merlin through ubiquitination and degradation. Nat. Cell
Biol. 9, 1199–1207.

Xiao, G.H., Beeser, A., Chernoff, J., and Testa, J.R. (2002). p21-activated
kinase links Rac/Cdc42 signaling to merlin. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 883–886.

490 Cell 140, 477–490, February 19, 2010 ª2010 Elsevier Inc.

