CONFERENCE REPORT

Update from the 2013 International
Neuroﬁbromatosis Conference
Scott R. Plotkin,1* Anne C. Albers,2 Dusica Babovic-Vuksanovic,3 Jaishri O. Blakeley,4
Xandra O. Breakeﬁeld,5 Courtney M. Dunn,2 D. Gareth Evans,6 Michael J. Fisher,7
Jan M. Friedman,8 Marco Giovannini,9 David H. Gutmann,2 Michel Kalamarides,10
Andrea I. McClatchey,11 Ludwine Messiaen,12 Helen Morrison,13 David B. Parkinson,14
Anat O. Stemmer-Rachamimov,11 Catherine D. Van Raamsdonk,8 Vincent M. Riccardi,15
Tena Rosser,16 Aaron Schindeler,17 Miriam J. Smith,6 David A. Stevenson,18 Nicole J. Ullrich,19
Thijs van der Vaart,20 Brian Weiss,21 Brigitte C. Widemann,22 Yuan Zhu,23 Annette C. Bakker,24
and Alison C. Lloyd25**
1Department of Neurology and Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
2Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
3Department of Medical Genetics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
4Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
5Neuroscience Center, Center for Molecular Imaging and Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts
6Center for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
7Division of Oncology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
8Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
9Center for Neural Tumor Research, House Research Institute, Los Angeles, California
10Department of Neurosurgery, Hopital Pitie´-Salpeˆtrie´re, Paris, France
11Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
12Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama
13Leibniz Institute for Age Research, Jena, Germany
14Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Plymouth, Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth, UK
15The Neuroﬁbromatosis Institute, La Crescenta, California
16Department of Neurology, Children’s Hospital, Los Angeles, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California
17Kids’ Research Institute, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, University of Sydney, Westmead, Australia
18Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah
19Departments of Neurology and Pediatric Oncology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
20ENCORE – NF1 Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
21Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio
22Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
23Gilbert Neuroﬁbromatosis Institute, Children’s National Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia

Conflict of interest: none
Grant sponsor: National Institutes of Health Grant Award; Grant
number: 1R13NS084619-01.

Correspondence to:
Scott R. Plotkin, MD, PhD, Massachusetts General Hospital, Yawkey 9E,
55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114
E-mail: splotkin@partners.org



Correspondence to:

Alison C. Lloyd, PhD, MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT
E-mail: alison.lloyd@ucl.ac.uk
Article first published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com): 24 September 2014
DOI 10.1002/ajmg.a.36754

Ó 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

2969

2970

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

24Children’s Tumor Foundation, New York, New York
25MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London, UK

Manuscript Received: 23 April 2014; Manuscript Accepted: 14 August 2014

INTRODUCTION

The 2013 Neuroﬁbromatosis (NF) Conference took place at the
Portola Hotel and Spa, Monterey, CA, from June 8–11, 2013. This
international meeting is sponsored annually by the Children’s
Tumor Foundation (CTF), with the goal of bringing together
NF researchers and clinicians from disparate ﬁelds of expertise.
The conference agenda included a range of preclinical topics with a
focus on signaling pathways and mouse models and a number of
clinical topics, including a symposium on the interaction of aca-
demics, government, and industry in NF clinical trials.

Neuroﬁbromatosis is a group of inherited genetic disorders–
NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis–that
together affect about
100,000 persons in the US. NF1 is the most common, with an
estimated birth prevalence of 1:3,000 [Friedman, 1999; Lammert
et al., 2005]; for NF2 and schwannomatosis, the estimated birth
prevalence is 1:25,000 and 1:40,000, respectively [Antinheimo
et al., 2000; Evans et al., 2005]. NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis
have in common that they predispose affected individuals to
develop Schwann cell tumors such as neuroﬁbromas and schwan-
nomas. At a lower frequency, they also predispose to the develop-
ment of a number of other benign and malignant tumor types, as
well as some developmental abnormalities including learning dis-
abilities (in NF1). The disorders arise from mutations in different
genes, each of which plays a key role in regulating cellular function.
The NF1 gene on human chromosome 17 encodes an intracellular
signaling molecule that functions as a GTPase activating protein for
Ras proteins, whereas the NF2 gene on human chromosome 22
encodes a cytoskeletal-membrane linking protein with reported
roles in the suppression of several different growth-associated
signaling pathways. The biology of schwannomatosis remains
understudied despite the identiﬁcation of germline SMARCB1
mutations in schwannomatosis patients in 2007.

NEUROFIBROMATOSIS 1
Basic Science

Neurobiology. Approximately 30–70% of individuals with
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) have learning disabilities, repre-
senting the most signiﬁcant cause of lifetime morbidity associated
with this disease. Moreover, recent ﬁndings indicate that signaling
proteins within the Ras and the extracellular-signal regulated kinase
(ERK) subfamily of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK)
pathway are mutated and hyperactivated in a number of human
genetic syndromes (known as RASopathies) associated with vary-
ing levels of cognitive dysfunction substantiating the view that these
pathways are important in regulating brain function [Rauen, 2013].
Yuan Zhu (University of Michigan) presented evidence that bi-
allelic, but not monoallelic, inactivation of Nf1 in developing neural
stem cells increased the number of glial lineage cells but by distinct
mechanisms depending on the region of the brain. In the dorsal

How to Cite this Article:
Plotkin SR, Albers AC, Babovic-Vuksanovic
D, Blakeley JO, Breakeﬁeld XO, Dunn CM,
Evans DG, Fisher MJ, Friedman JM,
Giovannini M, Gutmann DH, Kalamarides
M, McClatchey AI, Messiaen L, Morrison
H, Parkinson DB, Stemmer-Rachamimov
AO, Van Raamsdonk CD, Riccardi VM,
Rosser T, Schindeler A, Smith MJ,
Stevenson DA, Ullrich NJ, van der Vaart T,
Weiss B, Widemann BC, Zhu Y, Bakker
AC, Lloyd AC. 2014. Update from the 2013
International Neuroﬁbromatosis
Conference.

Am J Med Genet Part A 164A:2969–2978.

forebrain Nf1 loss in neural stem and progenitor cells altered their
fate-speciﬁcation resulting in increased numbers of glial cells in the
corpus callosum at the expense of neurogenesis in the olfactory
bulb. In contrast, in the ventral forebrain, overproduction of glial
cells resulted from increased proliferation of glial-restricted pro-
genitors. Importantly, both of these glial defects appeared to be
caused by hyperactivation of Ras/ERK signaling, as a MEK inhibitor
rescued the deﬁcits. Yuan Wang (University of Michigan) pre-
sented data on the effects of biallelic loss of the Nf1 gene in the
cerebellum of mice and provided further evidence for the impor-
tance of the ERK pathway showing that hyperactivity of ERK
underlies the defects seen in both neurons and glia of these
mice, disrupting cerebellum structure and causing motor defects.
William Snider (University of North Carolina) performed both
loss-of-function and gain-of-function studies on MEK1/2 in de-
veloping neural stem cells and post-mitotic neurons and showed
that while loss of MEK1 and MEK2 impaired the generation of glial
cells, hyperactive MEK/ERK signaling promoted gliogenesis during
development. These results provide further genetic evidence that
supports the observations of the Zhu group and others that accurate
regulation of Ras signaling through the MEK/ERK pathway is
critical for normal brain development.

Alcino Silva (University of California, Los Angeles) described the
possible mechanisms by which loss of one allele of Nf1 can cause
deﬁcits in long-term potentiation (LTP) and learning in adult
mice. Dr. Silva also presented evidence that mutations in SHP2
(identiﬁed in Noonan syndrome) cause similar deﬁcits in LTP and
learning. However, he emphasized that what appeared to be a
similar phenotype occurred via distinct mechanisms, as the genetic
mutations caused their effects in distinct cell types.

Freda Miller (University of Toronto, Canada) and her colleagues
investigated signaling proteins within the Ras pathway and their

PLOTKIN ET AL.

2971

activating mutations in embryonic neural stem cells of the murine
cortex, and arrived at two major conclusions. First, each protein,
including SHP2, B-Raf, and Ras, plays an important role in
regulating the genesis of neurons and astrocytes from developing
neural precursors. Second, that when these proteins are hyper-
activated, as in the Rasopathies, they deregulate cell genesis by
distinct mechanisms.

Debra Mayes (Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center)
presented an analysis of the histological and behavioral changes of
mice with hyperactive RAS signaling in oligodendrocytes. She
hypothesized that upregulation of nitrous oxide plays a critical
role in the phenotypes, which could be reversed with antioxidant
treatment.

Tumor models. Thomas De Raedt (Brigham and Women’s
Hospital) presented work characterizing a more severe NF1 phe-
notype associated with microdeletions of the NF1 region. He
identiﬁed an additional gene within the deletion and, in a mouse
model, recapitulated a more severe NF1 phenotype when this gene
was lost in conjunction with the NF1 gene. Nancy Ratner (Cin-
cinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center) presented further
work using the DhhCre; NF1ﬂ/ﬂ
mouse model to test the require-
ment of speciﬁc signaling pathways for tumor growth. The studies
veriﬁed the MEK/ERK pathway as a therapeutic target and identi-
ﬁed STAT-3 as a potential new target. In studies of NF1-associated
low grade gliomas, David Gutmann (Washington University)
presented evidence that human tumors are monoclonal and
have no other mutations other than loss of NF1 gene expression
[Gutmann et al., 2013]. However, in a genetically engineered
mouse optic glioma model, loss of Nf1 gene expression in glial
cells alone is not sufﬁcient to drive tumorigenesis but requires
signals from Nf1þ/ 
microglia in the surrounding microenviron-
ment [Pong et al., 2013].

Luis Parada (UT Southwestern) presented work on a novel
glioma mouse model in which stem cells are labeled and can be
ablated following ganciclovir treatment. A stem cell population
was found to be labeled in glioblastomas in these mice and was
relatively quiescent. Following treatment of the tumor however,
these stem-like cells differentially proliferated and were respon-
sible for the regrowth of the tumor. These results reinforce the
importance of targeting the stem-like cells found in many tumors.
Dinorah Friedmann-Morvinski (The Salk Institute) presented a
different model of glioblastoma in which tumors were induced
from fully differentiated cortical neurons rather than from stem
cells, demonstrating that the cell-of–origin may not always be
obvious.

MPNST is the primary cause of early mortality in NF1 patients
[Evans et al., 2011]. Using a Sleeping Beauty genetic screen,
Adrienne Watson (University of Minnesota) identiﬁed Wnt sig-
naling as a driver of Schwann cell tumorigenesis. Induction of Wnt
signaling was sufﬁcient to induce a transformed phenotype in
human Schwann cells, while inhibition of both Wnt signaling
and mTOR synergistically induced apoptosis of MPNST cell lines.
Rebecca Dodd (Duke University) described a mouse model of soft
tissue sarcoma in which Nf1 and lnk4a were knocked out by the
injection of a Cre-expressing adenovirus into either muscle or
sciatic nerve. Treatment with a MEK inhibitor decreased sarcoma
growth in these mice.

Clinical Research

Cognitive issues and clinical trials. Up to two-thirds of indi-
viduals with NF1 demonstrate signs of cognitive dysfunction,
ranging from deﬁcits in attention, visual-spatial memory and
executive function, to language problems, learning disabilities,
and academic underachievement. Nicole Ullrich (Boston Child-
ren’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School) summarized the major
challenges in clinical trial design for neurocognitive interventions,
including trial design, selection of ideal outcome measures, selec-
tion of the appropriate drug and duration for intervention, dose-
ﬁnding and appropriate inclusion criteria.

Maria Ribeiro (Coimbra University, Portugal) presented data
using magnetic resonance spectroscopy to measure brain metab-
olites such as the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA in the visual
cortex of children and adolescents with NF1. Mouse models have
implicated increased release of GABA in the pathophysiology of
cognitive issues [Cui et al., 2008]. Children with NF1 have lower
measured levels of unbound GABA, which might reﬂect depletion
of GABA from synaptic vesicles [Violante et al., 2013]. Within the
NF1-group, higher overall GABA-levels correlated with slower
reaction times.

Thijs van der Vaart (Erasmus MC, The Netherlands) reported on
the ﬁnal results of the NF1-SIMCODA trial, a 12-month random-
ized placebo-controlled trial in 84 NF1-children aged 8–16 years.
Earlier work had shown positive effects of lovastatin, a cholesterol-
lowering drug, in a mouse model of NF1 [Li et al., 2005]. The NF1-
SIMCODA trial aimed to detect beneﬁcial effects of simvastatin on
cognitive and behavioral problems in children with NF1. The
current randomized controlled trial (RCT) was based on a previous
12-week pilot RCT with 61 NF1-children in the same age range, in
which only one secondary outcome measure, the IQ-subtest “object
assembly”, demonstrated a positive effect of simvastatin over place-
bo [Krab et al., 2008]. The results of NF1-SIMCODA were disap-
pointing, showing no beneﬁt of simvastatin over placebo for treating
cognitive and behavioral problems [van der Vaart et al., 2013].

Kristina Hardy (Children’s National Medical Center) presented
data on the use of a computerized training program, CogMed, in
children with NF1. CogMed has been proposed as a neurocognitive
intervention in an upcoming clinical trial through the NF Clinical
Trials Consortium.

Recognizing that clinical trials for NF1 learning disability are
currently underway, the Response Evaluation in Neuroﬁbromato-
sis and Schwannomatosis (REiNS) group has been working to
recommend a standardized set of outcome measures in clinical
trials for NF. Karin Walsh (Children’s National Medical Center)
summarized the progress of the REiNS working group on neuro-
cognitive outcome measurements. One concern of commonly
utilized neuropsychological measures is that they are not designed
to detect change over time. The ideal outcome measures for
cognitive interventions should measure constructs of interest
that are relevant to individuals with NF1, should detect change
over time, and should be generalizable.

Optic pathway glioma. Peter de Blank (Rainbow Babies &
Children’s Hospital, Case Western Reserve University) retrospec-
tively evaluated the ophthalmologic records and diffusion tensor
imaging measurements of the optic pathway in children with NF1

2972

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

and optic pathway gliomas. He found that a decrease in fractional
anisotropy of the optic radiations was associated with abnormal
visual acuity and could be a predictor of visual acuity loss in the
following year [de Blank et al., 2013].

Autism spectrum disorder. Susan Huson (Oxford, UK) pre-
sented a study evaluating the prevalence of autistic features in a large
population of children 4–16 years of age with NF1. In this popula-
tion-based study, she found that approximately 30% of subjects met
the diagnostic criteria for an autistic spectrum disorder [Garg
et al., 2013]. These ﬁndings build on previous reports suggesting
that autistic symptoms are common in NF1 patients but contrasts
with a prior report in adult NF1 patients. [van Eeghen et al., 2013;
Walsh et al., 2013].

Clinical efﬁciency. Amanda Bergner (Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine) presented the results of a pilot project evaluating the use
of a dedicated adult intake clinic at the Johns Hopkins Compre-
hensive NF Center in improving the efﬁciency of care. The intake
clinic signiﬁcantly reduced patient wait time, allowed for more
effective time to be spent with NF providers, and generated new
revenue for the clinic.

NF1 Clinical Trials Update
Brian Weiss (Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center)
presented the results from a 2-stratum phase II clinical trial of
the mTOR inhibitor sirolimus for plexiform neuroﬁbroma (PNF)
in subjects with NF1. This trial speciﬁcally sought to determine
whether sirolimus either: (a) increases time to progression (TTP) in
progressive PNF (stratum 1) or; (b) results in objective radiograph-
ic responses in inoperable PNFs in the absence of documented
radiographic progression at trial entry (stratum 2). Disease status
was evaluated using volumetric MRI analysis at regular intervals;
pain reduction and quality of life (QOL) outcomes were also
assessed. No patients on stratum 2 experienced a radiographic
response. [Weiss et al., 2013] In contrast, patients in stratum 1 had
an estimated median TTP of 15.4 months, compared to 11.9
months in a control group from a completed NCI-sponsored study
with near identical eligibility criteria.

Brigitte Widemann (National Cancer Institute) reported the
preliminary results of an ongoing phase 1 trial of selumetinib,
a MEK inhibitor, in children 3–18 years of age with NF1 and
inoperable PNFs. Selumetinib is administered orally BID on a
continuous dosing schedule. The maximally tolerated dose will
be determined based on toxicities observed in the ﬁrst three courses.
Disease status is evaluated using volumetric MRI analysis at regular
intervals. Nine subjects had enrolled to date (median age 15 years;
range, 5–18 years). No dose limiting toxicities (DLTs) were
observed at the 20 mg/m2 dose, but one of three initial subjects
developed a DLT at 30 mg/m2 which was reversible and asymp-
tomatic. This dose level has since been expanded to six subjects, with
no additional DLTs to date. Decreases in PNF volume have been
observed in all subjects who have undergone at least one restaging

MRI, and partial response ( 20% shrinkage in tumor volume) has

been achieved in four of the six subjects. Chronic dosing of
selumetinib has been tolerated by children with NF1 and PNF,
and enrollment of this study is ongoing.

David Viskochil (University of Utah) presented the results of a
phase II trial of chemotherapy in sporadic and NFI-associated high-
grade malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs). Ifos-
famide and doxorubicin followed by 2 cycles of ifosfamide and
etoposide were used. The objective response rate was lower in NF1
than in sporadic MNST patients, which is consistent with retro-
spective literature reports.

NEUROFIBROMATOSIS 2
Basic Science

NF2 signaling. Merlin interacts with the E3 ubiquitin ligase
CRL4-DCAF1 in the nucleus and inhibits its function [Li
et al., 2010]. Filippo Giancotti (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center) described a functional link between Merlin, CRL4-DCAF1,
and LATS in human Schwann cells. These results provide a mecha-
nism for Merlin’s activation of Lats and the Hippo tumor suppres-
sor pathway in the nucleus of Schwann cells. In addition, they
indicate that YAP/TEAD inhibitors, which are undergoing preclin-
ical testing, may be effective for the treatment of NF2.

Duojia Pan (Johns Hopkins University) discussed recent efforts
in targeting the Hippo pathway as a potential strategy against NF2.
He presented ﬁndings showing that loss of NF2 mimics inactivation
of Hippo signaling in the liver, the lens of the eye, and ependymal
cells, suggesting that NF2 is a physiological regulator of Hippo
signaling in multiple mammalian tissues. Disruption of the YAP-
TEAD complex, the nuclear effector of the Hippo pathway, potently
suppresses hepatomegaly/tumorigenesis resulting from Nf2 inacti-
vation in the mouse liver. Screening of a library of drugs approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) identiﬁed
verteporﬁn as a small molecule that inhibits TEAD-YAP association
and YAP-induced liver overgrowth, providing proof of principle
for YAP inhibitors as molecular-targeted therapeutics for NF2 [Liu-
Chittenden et al., 2012].

Joe Kissil (The Scripps Research Institute) detailed the identiﬁ-
cation of a novel Merlin-interacting protein–angiomotin (Amot)–
associated with tight and adherens junctions and an interactor of
several small G-protein modulators. Amot directly associates with
Yap, a transcriptional activator regulated by the Hippo pathway.
Moreover, Amot is required for hepatic “oval cell” response and
tumorigenesis in response to toxin-induced injury or Nf2 loss in
a liver-speciﬁc Amot knockout mouse. In these studies, Amot
appears to regulate Yap at multiple levels, both in the cytoplasm
and in the nucleus. These studies implicate Amot as a critical
downstream effector of Merlin and the Hippo/Yap pathway.

Dominique Lallemand (Curie Institute, France) reported the use
of a combination of proteomic approaches to evaluate the expres-
sion, activity, and link to tumor cell proliferation of several of the
signaling pathways regulated by Merlin in a large series of human
schwannoma biopsies. They found that Her3, Her2, PDGFR-b, and
Axl are the most frequently activated receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs) in schwannomas and could represent key therapeutic
targets. Using Reverse Phase Protein Array, they showed that the
expression of the Ki67 proliferation marker is strongly associated
with levels of Yap, activated Her3, and PDGFR-b. Also, the
expression of PDGFR-b and Her3 can be stimulated by Yap in

PLOTKIN ET AL.

2973

schwannoma cells in culture suggesting that a signaling network
under the control of Yap may be involved in tumor growth. Finally,
they observed remarkable heterogeneity in the expression of all the
proteins assessed by immunohistochemistry on tumor sections,
indicating that the response to targeted treatments will likely be
variable from patient to patient.

Alizee Boin (Curie Institute, Paris, France) presented data
indicating that Merlin and YAP directly interact, with the possibility
that Merlin sequesters YAP in the cytosol, preventing it from trans-
activating expression. Lastly, Alexander Schulz (Leibniz Institute,
Germany) presented data showing how loss of Merlin in PNS axons
leads to reduced expression of the myelin regulator, neuregulin 1
type III. They are currently studying the effects upon PNS myeli-
nation and the implications for the polyneuropathies seen in
patients with NF2.

Preclinical Science

NF2 mouse models. Andrea McClatchey (Massachusetts Gen-
eral Hospital/Harvard Medical School) started off this session by
presenting her studies of the origin of the Alb-Cre;Nf2ﬂox/ﬂox
model
of liver progenitor expansion and tumorigenesis. Surprisingly, this
analysis uncovered a novel, proliferation-independent function
for Merlin during liver development.

Michel Kalamarides (Hopital Pitie´-Salpeˆtrie´re, Paris, France)
presented an update on mouse models of human meningioma [Peyre
et al., 2013] showing an important role of PDGF-b for the initiation
and malignant progression of meningiomas associated with NF2 gene
inactivation. Two recent papers showed that recurrent mutations in
SMO and AKT1 are mutually exclusive with NF2 loss in meningioma
initiation [Brastianos et al., 2013; Clark et al., 2013]. The lab’s current
strategy to reproduce these genetic events in mice was presented.

Charles Yates (Indiana University School of Medicine) described
a genetically engineered NF2 mouse model with excision of the Nf2
gene driven by Cre expression under control of a tissue-restricted
3.9 kb Periostin promoter element. By 10 months of age, 100% of
these Postn-Cre;Nf2ﬂox/ﬂox
mice develop spinal, peripheral, and
cranial nerve tumors that are histologically identical to human
schwannomas. In addition, the development of cranial nerve VIII
tumors in these mice may correlate with functional impairments in
hearing and balance, as measured by auditory brainstem response
and vestibular testing. Embryonic analyses suggest an early
Schwann cell progenitor tumor cell of origin.

Screening and Compound Testing
Cristina Fernandez-Valle (University of Central Florida) discussed
the high-throughput screening of a 1280 compound library
(LOPAC) using Merlin-null mouse Schwann cells in order to
identify probes that reduced cell viability. Dr. Fernandez-Valle
identiﬁed two compounds from an initial 40 “hits” that selectively
reduced viability of Merlin-null mouse Schwann cells as compared
to normal mouse Schwann cells. In a joint project, Cenix Bioscience
validated a number of compounds from the drug screen as well as
those in clinical trials for NF2. This demonstrated the validity of
the cell line and high-throughput screening approach to identify
candidate drugs for human studies.

Marco Giovannini (House Research Institute) reported on
efﬁcacy testing of HSP90 inhibitors for NF2. The antiproliferative
activity of NXD30001 was tested in NF2-deﬁcient cell lines and in
human primary schwannoma and meningioma cultures in vitro,
and in two allograft models and in one Nf2 transgenic model in vivo
[Tanaka et al., 2013]. They found that NXD30001 induced degra-
dation of client proteins and suppressed proliferation of NF2-
deﬁcient cells. In addition, differential expression analysis using
a global transcriptome approach identiﬁed subsets of genes impli-
cated in cell proliferation, cell survival, vascularization, and
Schwann cell differentiation whose expression was altered by
NXD30001 treatment. Overall, results showed that NXD30001
in NF2-deﬁcient schwannoma suppressed multiple pathways nec-
essary for tumorigenesis.

Dina Stepanova (Fox Chase Cancer Center) reported that Nf2
null mouse cells exhibit higher levels of acetyl CoA and fatty acid
synthase (Fasn) and that the Fasn inhibitor, cerulenin, selectively
inhibits cell proliferation in xenografts. In humans, the treatment of
NF2 null vestibular tumors with anti-VEGF therapy (bevacizumab)
alone has shown promise. Using a mouse xenograft model, Lei Xu
(Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School)
showed promising results using a combination of radiotherapy
and anti-VEGF therapy.

Clinical Research
Rosalie Ferner (Guy’s and St. Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, UK)
presented the results of her multi-center longitudinal study of
quality of life (QOL) in 288 patients with NF2 using the NF2
Impact on QOL (NFTI-QOL) questionnaire [Hornigold et al.,
2012]. This measure was quick and easy to administer, and
demonstrated good reliability and ability to detect signiﬁcant
QOL changes over time in this patient population.

Vanessa Merker (Massachusetts General Hospital) analyzed
prospective data from the NF2 Natural History Consortium Study,
using new endpoint measures recommended by the Response
Evaluation in NF and Schwannomatosis (REiNS) committee.
Vestibular schwannomas were evaluated for volumetric progres-
sion and hearing was assessed with word recognition scores. The
median time to tumor progression was 14 months. A signiﬁcant
number of patients experienced tumor progression and hearing
decline over 3 years [Plotkin et al., 2014].

NF2 Clinical Trials Update
Jaishri Blakely (Johns Hopkins University) presented the results of
a multi-institutional study of bevacizumab, a VEGF-A antibody,
in subjects >12 years of age with NF2 and symptomatic vestibular
schwannomas (VS). Subjects were given bevacizumab every 3 weeks
for 1 year, with hearing evaluations performed during treatment
and twice after completion of treatment. The primary endpoint was
a statistically-signiﬁcant increase in word recognition score (WRS)
compared with baseline. Brain MRI, whole body MRI, and QOL
outcomes were also assessed. Fourteen subjects (median age
30 years; range, 14–79 years) were enrolled. No subjects had
progressive hearing loss while on treatment. Thirty-six percent
of (5/14) subjects had signiﬁcant improvement in WRS maintained

2974

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

for three consecutive months, and improvement was maintained
off bevacizumab for those subjects. Four of ﬁve subjects with an
improved WRS also had signiﬁcant reduction in tumor volume on
MRI. These prospective data conﬁrm that bevacizumab is well
tolerated in this patient population and that bevacizumab can
reverse hearing loss due to NF2-related VS in select patients,
independent of tumor volume.

Michel Kalamarides (Hopital Pitie´-Salpeˆtrie´re, Paris, France)
presented the intermediate results of a prospective trial of the
mTOR inhibitor everolimus for progressive VS in NF2 patients.
The rationale for the trial was based on preclinical results in a NF2
genetically engineered mouse schwannoma model and encouraging
and consistent results in an index patient [Giovannini et al., 2014].
To date, no tumor shrinkage has been observed. However, prelimi-
nary analysis suggests that mTORC1 inhibition may delay time to
tumor progression. In the second year of the trial, patients who
experience tumor growth after discontinuation of everolimus will
be allowed to restart the drug. This design is intended to determine
whether stable disease on everolimus represents a true clinical
response to treatment.

Matthias Karajannis (New York University) reported the results
of a separate clinical trial using everolimus in ten patients with NF2
and progressive vestibular schwannomas. No objective improvement
in hearing or imaging response was seen [Karajannis et al., 2014].

SCHWANNOMATOSIS
Preclinical Science
Xandra Breakeﬁeld (Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard
Medical School) described her collaboration with Gary Brenner
and Giulia Fulci to develop an AAV1-PO-ICE vector that has a
Schwann cell-speciﬁc promoter driving caspase-1. Intratumoral
injection of the vector causes regression of schwannomas and a
reduction in schwannoma-induced pain in NF2-derived human
xenograft mice in sciatic nerve. This effect may occur via a process
of pyroptosis and therefore has the potential to control growth of
tumors that are not directly exposed to the vector.

Larry Sherman (Oregon Health and Science University) dis-
cussed the underlying mechanisms of pain in schwannomatosis. He
described a SMARCB1 conditional knockout mouse with nerves
that showed a similar expression proﬁle and morphology to wild
type cells, but which were quicker to respond to painful stimuli. An
expression array from cultured dorsal root ganglia of these mice
showed elevated VR1 capsaicin receptors (TRPV1) suggesting that
this pathway could be considered for therapeutic intervention.

Clinical research. Miriam Smith (University of Manchester,
England) presented exome sequencing data showing that multiple
spinal meningiomas can be inherited as a distinct genetic condition,
caused by mutations in the chromatin remodeling complex
subunit SMARCE1. Theo Hulsebos (Academic Medical Center,
Netherlands) presented an analysis of mutant SMARCB1 protein
expression in schwannomas from schwannomatosis patients,
showing that mutant forms of SMARCB1 can be found in these
tumors and that the type of mutation inﬂuences the amount of
protein present. However, the type of mutation does not inﬂuence
the presence of the typical mosaic pattern of staining in tissue

preparations. Alvaro Pinto (Massachusetts General Hospital) pre-
sented his research correlating SMARCB1 mutation analysis
and SMARCB1 immunohistochemical expression patterns in
syndromic and sporadic schwannomas. He found a discrepancy
between the high rate of altered, mosaic SMARCB1 expression in
syndromic schwannomas (familial schwannomatosis, sporadic
schwannomatosis, NF2) and low rates of mutations in the
SMARCB1 gene, suggesting other mechanisms may play a role in
tumor development. In addition, despite a high rate of mosaic
pattern of SMARCB1 expression in NF2 tumors, SMARCB1 muta-
tions were not present in any of the NF2-associated tumors.

Judith Eelloo (Central Manchester University Hospitals Foun-
dation Trust, UK) presented a case report of a patient with
SMARCB1-associated schwannomatosis with three independent
malignancies (lymphoma, neuroendocrine tumor, and sarcoma).
This further highlighted the clinical overlap between syndromes
and stressed the importance of seeking care in an expert center as
well as the need for on-going genetic and phenotypic characteriza-
tion of schwannomatosis. Amanda Bergner presented the progress
of the International Schwannomatosis Database (ISD). The ISD
is a medically curated, anonymous database of schwannomatosis
patients, and was designed as a resource to identify people who
would be suitable candidates for clinical trials or research studies.
The ISD is being contributed to by 10 academic centers around the
globe and recently, a remote patient entry mechanism was added to
allow patients not afﬁliated with an enrolling center to participate
(www.schwannomatosis.com).

NOVEL SESSIONS AT THE 2013 CONFERENCE

The 2013 conference incorporated novel sessions including educa-
tional sessions, small group sessions, and an industry/academia/
government symposium.

Clinical Phenotypes: What do They Tell Us?
NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis are characterized by wide clinical
variability. Making a clinical diagnosis can be challenging due to the
overlap in tumor types encountered in the neuroﬁbromatoses and
in the clinical presentation with a variety of other conditions.

Ludwine Messiaen (University of Alabama, Birmingham) dis-
cussed clinical and molecular characteristics of skin hyper pigmen-
tation in NF1 and in Legius syndrome. In addition, an array of other
conditions associated with multiple cafe-au-lait macules (CALM)
were reviewed, including NF2, McCune-Albright syndrome, ring
chromosomes (ch. 7, 11, 12, 15, 17, 22), LEOPARD syndrome,
constitutive mismatch repair deﬁciency, Cowden, Fanconi anemia,
tuberous sclerosis complex, Silver-Russell, and piebaldism. She
noted that the NIH diagnostic criteria for NF1 are not speciﬁc,
as some patients with pigmentary signs only (CALM and skinfold
freckling) have Legius syndrome, due to mutations in SPRED1,
instead of NF1.

Gareth Evans (Saint Mary’s Hospital, United Kingdom) dis-
cussed the lack of sensitivity of the current NIH diagnostic consen-
sus criteria for NF1 patients with “spinal neuroﬁbromatosis”. These
patients present with multiple spinal tumors but few, if any,
CALMs, skinfold freckling, or cutaneous neuroﬁbromas [Burkitt

PLOTKIN ET AL.

2975

Wright et al., 2013]. Dr. Evans recommended testing of both NF1
and SMARCB1 genes in blood and, in selected cases, in tumor
biopsies in order to distinguish between NF1, mosaic NF2, and
schwannomatosis.

Anat Stemmer-Rachamimov (Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School) discussed that hybrid tumors are periph-
eral nerve sheath tumors that have mixed pathological features of
two or more types of peripheral nerve sheath tumors and are
therefore difﬁcult to classify. However, their presence in a patient
is highly suggestive of one of the syndromic forms of neuroﬁbro-
matosis [Harder et al., 2012].

Dusica Babovic-Vuksanovic (Mayo Clinic) presented a recently
published series of patients with multiple orbital neuroﬁbromas,
painful peripheral nerve tumors, distinctive face, and marfanoid
habitus [Babovic-Vuksanovic et al., 2012]. Four unrelated patients
have been described with this condition, and this is thought to be a
new syndrome, as none of the known genes associated with
predisposition to develop neuroﬁbromas or schwannomas were
mutated in any of these patients.

Small Group Sessions

NF-related neuropathy. Neuropathies are a signiﬁcant prob-
lem in many patients with NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis. Susan
Huson (NF Centre, Manchester, UK) reviewed the clinical aspects
of neuropathy in NF2, including length dependant peripheral
neuropathy and focal amyotrophy/mononeuropathy [Trivedi
et al., 2000; Sperfeld et al., 2002]. In the latter group, the diagnosis
can be made only after exclusion of a causative tumor. Gareth Evans
(personal communication) identiﬁed 77/396 (19%) NF2 patients in
the UK registry with amyotrophy/mononeuropathy; the most
common symptom is sudden unilateral facial weakness (40/77)
followed by foot drop (23/77); 8.6% (34/396) of patients have a
peripheral neuropathy.

In another study of NF2 peripheral neuropathy [Sperfeld
et al., 2002], 7/15 patients were found to have a clinically
detectable neuropathy and a further three had nerve conduction
abnormalities. Sural nerve biopsies in NF2 neuropathy cases have
shown diffuse Schwann cell proliferation and small endoneurial
tumorlets of schwannomas and perineuriomas associated with a
reduction in nerve ﬁber density. Electron microscopy demon-
strated de-differentiated Schwann cells isolated, or in complexes,
and multiple interdigitating cell processes compatible with mer-
lin malfunction [Sperfeld et al., 2002]. Three hypotheses were
suggested as to the cause of the neuropathy: nerve compression by
multiple tumorlets, an unknown local toxic effect of abnormal
endoneurial cells, or the inability of NF2 Schwann cells to adhere
to nerve sheath axons. Support for the compression hypothesis
came from a MRI study of peripheral nerves in NF2 patients that
demonstrated accumulation of non- compressive fascicular
lesions with the clinical severity being proportional to the number
of lesions [Baumer et al., 2013].

Helen Morrison (Leibniz Institute for Age Research, Germany)
highlighted that NF2-neuropathy is likely of multifactorial origin.
She reported a novel merlin-speciﬁc function in maintaining axonal
integrity and proposed that reduced axonal nf2 gene dosage inﬂu-
ences NF2-associated polyneuropathy. Genetically engineered mice

that speciﬁcally lack neuronal merlin display abnormal axons and
these mice suffer from polyneuropathy-like symptoms of axonal
origin. This ﬁnding is of clinical interest because, in addition to the
observed Schwann cell tumorlets, reduced merlin expression in
axons may contribute to NF2-polyneuropathy [Schulz et al., 2013].
The clinical and biological aspects of NF1 associated neuropa-
thies were reviewed by Rosalie Ferner (Guy
NHS
Foundation Trust, UK). NF1 neuropathy is a length-dependent,
predominantly axonal sensorimotor neuropathy. It occurs less
frequently than the NF2 neuropathy and the symptoms and neu-
rological signs are usually mild and non–progressive. The patho-
genesis of NF1 neuropathy has not been determined but there is a
putative abnormality in signaling between Schwann cells, ﬁbro-
blasts, and perineurial cells.

s and St. Thomas

0

0

Neuropathy associated with schwannomatosis was reviewed by
Gareth Evans (University of Manchester, UK). Typically, schwan-
nomatosis is characterized by painful schwannomas with minimal
deﬁcit in motor or sensory function. Tumor morphology is discrete
rather than invasive and therefore peripheral neuropathy and
amyotrophy are rare. The main clinical challenge is treating neu-
ropathic pain.

Musculoskeletal biology and metabolism in NF. While the
skeletal complications associated with NF1 are well described,
several research groups have begun to explore the prevalence
and impact of muscle weakness. Reductions in the muscle com-
partment in NF1 individuals have been documented by peripheral
quantitative computed tomography, which initiated a number of
studies examining muscle performance.

David Stevenson (University of Utah) described studies in
children with NF1 showing signiﬁcant reductions in total motor
composite scores and strength. In addition, preliminary data from
16 individuals with NF1 suggest that energy expenditure/meta-
bolism may also be abnormal in NF1 muscles. He theorized that
impaired muscle function may be a feature common to RASopa-
thies, suggesting an underlying importance of RAS signaling in
muscle function [Stevenson et al., 2012]. These clinical ﬁndings
were supported by hand-held dynamometry results from the lab of
Joshua Burns (Children’s Hospital, Westmead, Sydney, Australia)
showing mean reductions of 30–45% in strength in a range of
muscle movements. Juliana de Souza (Federal University of Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil) presented data showing that a range
of muscle outcomes in NF1 patients were affected (aerobic capacity
[de Souza et al., 2013], handgrip strength, 6 minute walk, respira-
tory muscle force) and were not affected (cardiac function,
myocardial mass and pulmonary function). As researchers and
clinicians increasingly recognize that weakness and reduced muscle
tone are features of NF1, research has turned to exploring the
beneﬁts of physical therapy and discovering the underlying molec-
ular mechanism.

Kate Quinlan (University of Sydney, Australia) described how
mouse models were used to understand metabolic changes associ-
ated with a-actinin deﬁciency, a common inherited polymorphism
[Quinlan et al., 2010] and then documented an underlying meta-
bolic deﬁciency in NF1 mouse models. [Sullivan et al., 2014] in the
MyoD:Nf1-/- mice lacking Nf1 expression in muscles, a neonatal
lethal phenotype with intramyocellular fat inclusions was observed.
Examination of the Prx1:Nf1-/-
mice, which lack Nf1 expression in

2976

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

the developing limbs, showed reduced muscle mass and strength
[Kossler et al., 2011], and increased muscle triglycerides.

Integrative Management of Children With NF1
The Washington University NF Center described a multidisciplin-
ary approach to the management of children with NF1. A patient
coordinator assists in scheduling same day appointments, especially
for families who travel long distances. A physical therapist completes
standardized testing of general development in children younger
than eight years, and gross and ﬁne motor skills for older children.
Based on these and other assessments performed during the clinic
visit, individualized recommendations for home activities are pro-
vided. In addition, an occupational therapist integrates haptic
technology into daily activities and school routines to improve
achievement in children with NF1. A pediatric neuropsychologist
performs early screening of academic skills in children with NF1.

Multiple Phases of Neuroﬁbroma Progression
In this session, the group led by Vincent Riccardi (Neuroﬁbroma-
tosis Institute, La Crescenta, CA) discussed the initiation and
progression of neuroﬁbromas and characterized the stages of
progression. The main discussion centered around whether loss
of the second NF1 allele in Schwann cells was always the initiating
event in neuroﬁbroma formation and the role of macrophages,
pericytes and CD34þ cells in tumor progression.

Using Genetically Engineered Mouse Models for
Preclinical Drug Screening
Chaired by David Gutmann (Washington University), the discus-
sion leveraged the expertise of investigators versed in clinical trial
design and execution as well as those leading preclinical small-
animal model discovery and evaluation efforts. The panel empha-
sized the successes that have directly resulted from generating and
intelligently using genetically-engineered mouse (GEM) strains.
Important concerns raised included the timely access of drugs in the
clinical pipeline to preclinical GEM researchers and the need to
collect biospecimens from individuals participating in human
clinical trials. In addition, members of the panel emphasized the
importance of matching GEM models with speciﬁc subtypes of NF-
associated clinical features to best reﬂect the inherent heterogeneity
of these conditions as well as the need to obtain detailed pharma-
cokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and long-term toxicity data from
GEM preclinical studies relevant to the treatment of both adults and
children with NF1 and NF2.

Industry/Academia/Government Symposium
In this session, leaders from industry, governmental agencies, and
academia discussed the pathways to accelerate the development of
effective therapies for NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis. Salvatore
LaRosa (Children’s Tumor Foundation) described three CTF-
sponsored preclinical initiatives: (1) NF Therapeutics Consortium
(formerly the NF Preclinical Consortium, also funded by the
Neuroﬁbromatosis Therapeutic Accelerations Program), a collab-

orative effort amongst leading NF mouse model laboratories fo-
cusing on the evaluation of new or repurposed drugs for NF tumors;
(2) Synodos, a new pre-clinical effort to fund new approaches to the
diagnosis and treatment of NF2-related vestibular schwannomas
and meningiomas; and (3) Drug Discovery Initiative, which since
its launch in 2006 has provided >$1.4 million in funding for rapid
screening of new drugs for manifestations of NF.

Roger Packer (Children’s National Medical Center) reviewed the
current and future clinical trials of the DOD NF Clinical Trials
Consortium, which has been expanded to include 13 sites. He also
discussed some of the clinical and therapeutic challenges the
consortium has faced, including selection of appropriate outcome
measures and study design, and the limitations imposed based on
the geographic location of the consortium members.

Helen Chen (CTEP, National Cancer Institute) reviewed the
CTEP program, which sponsors clinical trials to evaluate new anti-
cancer agents. CTEP has a broad list of agents in clinical develop-
ment including agents targeting speciﬁc signaling pathways, apo-
ptosis, and the cell cycle. In addition to supplying drug, CTEP
provides data infrastructure and regulatory support for clinical
trials. In the past, CTEP has sponsored several clinical trials directed
at NF1-related plexiform neuroﬁbromas and NF2-related vestibu-
lar schwannomas. Dr. Chen commented on the challenges in
selecting drug combinations including the potential for increased
toxicity and the challenge in deﬁning the optimal dose and schedule
of the agents.

Gregory Reaman (Center for Drug Evaluation and Research,
FDA) reviewed the Orphan Drug Act, which promotes the devel-
opment of products that demonstrate promise for the diagnosis
and/or treatment of rare diseases. He commented that while orphan
products are held to the same approval standards as products for
common diseases by requiring substantial evidence of safety and
effectiveness for approval, regulations allow for “ﬂexibility” and
“scientiﬁc judgment” in how this is achieved. He also discussed the
FDA Safety and Innovation Act and the Prescription Drug User Fee
Act, both of which aim to bring critical new medicines to the market
for patients and to support industry in their pursuit of innovative
treatments for rare diseases.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank all speakers and attendees who contributed to the 2013
Children’s Tumor Foundation Neuroﬁbromatosis Meeting and to
this summary, and to the staff of the Children’s Tumor Foundation
for the outstanding organization of the meeting. The 2013 NF
Conference was supported in part by National Institutes of Health
Grant Award 1R13NS084619-01 to Dr. Scott Plotkin.

REFERENCES

Antinheimo J, Sankila R, Carpen O, Pukkala E, Sainio M, Jaaskelainen J.
2000. Population-based analysis of sporadic and type 2 neuroﬁbroma-
tosis-associated meningiomas and schwannomas. Neurology 54:71–76.

Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Messiaen L, Nagel C, Brems H, Scheithauer B,
Denayer E, Mao R, Sciot R, Janowski KM, Schuhmann MU, Claes K, Beert
E, Garrity JA, Spinner RJ, Stemmer-Rachamimov A, Gavrilova R, Van
CF, Mautner V, Legius E. 2012. Multiple orbital neuroﬁbromas, painful

PLOTKIN ET AL.

2977

peripheral nerve tumors, distinctive face and marfanoid habitus: A new
syndrome. Eur J Hum Genet 20:618–625.

Baumer P, Mautner VF, Baumer T, Schuhmann MU, Tatagiba M,
Heiland S, Kaestel T, Bendszus M, Pham M. 2013. Accumulation of
non-compressive fascicular lesions underlies NF2 polyneuropathy.
J Neurol 260:38–46.

Brastianos PK, Horowitz PM, Santagata S, Jones RT, McKenna A, Getz G,
Ligon KL, Palescandolo E, Van HP, Ducar MD, Raza A, Sunkavalli A,
Macconaill LE, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Louis DN, Hahn WC,
Dunn IF, Beroukhim R. 2013. Genomic sequencing of meningiomas
identiﬁes oncogenic SMO and AKT1 mutations. Nat Genet 45:285–
289.

Burkitt Wright EM, Sach E, Sharif S, Quarrell O, Carroll T, Whitehouse
RW, Upadhyaya M, Huson SM, Evans DG. 2013. Can the diagnosis of
NF1 be excluded clinically? A lack of pigmentary ﬁndings in families with
spinal neuroﬁbromatosis demonstrates a limitation of clinical diagnosis.
J Med Genet 50:606–613.

Clark VE, Erson-Omay EZ, Serin A, Yin J, Cotney J, Ozduman K, Avsar T, Li
J, Murray PB, Henegariu O, Yilmaz S, Gunel JM, Carrion-Grant G,
Yilmaz B, Grady C, Tanrikulu B, Bakircioglu M, Kaymakcalan H,
Caglayan AO, Sencar L, Ceyhun E, Atik AF, Bayri Y, Bai H, Kolb LE,
Hebert RM, Omay SB, Mishra-Gorur K, Choi M, Overton JD, Holland
EC, Mane S, State MW, Bilguvar K, Baehring JM, Gutin PH, Piepmeier
JM, Vortmeyer A, Brennan CW, Pamir MN, Kilic T, Lifton RP, Noonan
JP, Yasuno K, Gunel M. 2013. Genomic analysis of non-NF2 meningio-
mas reveals mutations in TRAF7, KLF4, AKT1, and SMO. Science 339:
1077–1080.

Cui Y, Costa RM, Murphy GG, Elgersma Y, Zhu Y, Gutmann DH,
Parada LF, Mody I, Silva AJ. 2008. Neuroﬁbromin regulation of
ERK signaling modulates GABA release and learning 1. Cell 135:549–
560.

de Blank PM, Berman JI, Liu GT, Roberts TP, Fisher MJ. 2013. Fractional
anisotropy of the optic radiations is associated with visual acuity loss
in optic pathway gliomas of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Neuro Oncol
15:1088–1095.

de Souza JF, Araujo CG, de Rezende NA, Rodrigues LO. 2013. Exercise
capacity impairment in individuals with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Am J
Med Genet A 161A:393–395.

Evans DG, Moran A, King A, Saeed S, Gurusinghe N, Ramsden R. 2005.
Incidence of vestibular schwannoma and neuroﬁbromatosis 2 in the
North West of England over a 10-year period: Higher incidence than
previously thought. Otol Neurotol 26:93–97.

Harder A, Wesemann M, Hagel C, Schittenhelm J, Fischer S, Tatagiba M,
Nagel C, Jeibmann A, Bohring A, Mautner VF, Paulus W. 2012. Hybrid
neuroﬁbroma/schwannoma is overrepresented among schwannomato-
sis and neuroﬁbromatosis patients. Am J Surg Pathol 36:702–709.

Hornigold RE, Golding JF, Leschziner G, Obholzer R, Gleeson MJ, Thomas
N, Walsh D, Saeed S, Ferner RE. 2012. The NFTI-QOL: A Disease-Speciﬁc
Quality of Life Questionnaire for Neuroﬁbromatosis 2. J Neurol Surg B
Skull Base 73:104–111.

Karajannis MA, Legault G, Hagiwara M, Giancotti FG, Filatov A, Derman
A, Hochman T, Goldberg JD, Vega E, Wisoff JH, Golﬁnos JG, Merkelson
A, Roland JT, Allen JC. 2014. Phase II study of everolimus in children and
adults with neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 and progressive vestibular schwan-
nomas. Neuro Oncol 16:292–297.

Kossler N, Stricker S, Rodelsperger C, Robinson PN, Kim J, Dietrich C,
Osswald M, Kuhnisch J, Stevenson DA, Braun T, Mundlos S, Kolanczyk
M. 2011. Neuroﬁbromin (Nf1) is required for skeletal muscle develop-
ment. Hum Mol Genet 20:2697–2709.

Krab LC, de Goede-Bolder A, Aarsen FK, Pluijm SM, Bouman MJ, van der
Geest JN, Lequin M, Catsman CE, Arts WF, Kushner SA, Silva AJ, de
Zeeuw CI, Moll HA, Elgersma Y. 2008. Effect of simvastatin on cognitive
functioning in children with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: A randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 300:287–294.

Lammert M, Friedman JM, Kluwe L, Mautner VF. 2005. Prevalence of
neuroﬁbromatosis 1 in German children at elementary school enroll-
ment. Arch Dermatol 141:71–74.

Li W, Cui Y, Kushner SA, Brown RA, Jentsch JD, Frankland PW, Cannon
TD, Silva AJ. 2005. The HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor lovastatin reverses
the learning and attention deﬁcits in a mouse model of neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1. Curr Biol 15:1961–1967.

Li W, You L, Cooper J, Schiavon G, Pepe-Caprio A, Zhou L, Ishii R,
Giovannini M, Hanemann CO, Long SB, Erdjument-Bromage H, Zhou
P, Tempst P, Giancotti FG. 2010. Merlin/NF2 suppresses tumorigenesis
by inhibiting the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4(DCAF1) in the nucleus. Cell
140:477–490.

Liu-Chittenden Y, Huang B, Shim JS, Chen Q, Lee SJ, Anders RA, Liu JO,
Pan D. 2012. Genetic and pharmacological disruption of the TEAD-YAP
complex suppresses the oncogenic activity of YAP. Genes Dev 26:1300–
1305.

Peyre M, Stemmer-Rachamimov A, Clermont-Taranchon E, Quentin S, El-
Taraya N, Walczak C, Volk A, Niwa-Kawakita M, Karboul N, Giovannini
M, Kalamarides M. 2013. Meningioma progression in mice triggered by
Nf2 and Cdkn2ab inactivation. Oncogene 32:4264–4272.

Evans DG, O’Hara C, Wilding A, Ingham SL, Howard E, Dawson J, Moran
A, Scott-Kitching V, Holt F, Huson SM. 2011. Mortality in neuroﬁbro-
matosis 1: In North West England: An assessment of actuarial survival in a
region of the UK since 1989. Eur J Hum Genet 19:1187–1191.

Plotkin SR, Merker VL, Muzikansky A, Barker FG, Slattery W III. 2014.
Natural history of vestibular schwannoma growth and hearing decline in
newly diagnosed neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 patients. Otol Neurotol 35:
e50–e56.

Friedman JM. 1999. Epidemiology of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Am J Med

Genet 89:1–6.

Garg S, Lehtonen A, Huson SM, Emsley R, Trump D, Evans DG, Green J.
2013. Autism and other psychiatric comorbidity in neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1: Evidence from a population-based study. Dev Med Child Neurol
55:139–145.

Giovannini M, Bonne NX, Vitte J, Chareyre F, Tanaka K, Adams R, Fisher
LM, Valeyrie-Allanore L, Wolkenstein P, Goutagny S, Kalamarides M.
2014. mTORC1 inhibition delays growth of neuroﬁbromatosis type 2
schwannoma. Neuro Oncol 16:493–504.

Pong WW, Higer SB, Gianino SM, Emnett RJ, Gutmann DH. 2013.
Reduced microglial CX3CR1 expression delays neuroﬁbromatosis-1
glioma formation 2. Ann Neurol 73:303–308.

Quinlan KG, Seto JT, Turner N, Vandebrouck A, Floetenmeyer M,
Macarthur DG, Raftery JM, Lek M, Yang N, Parton RG, Cooney GJ,
North KN. 2010. Alpha-actinin-3 deﬁciency results in reduced glycogen
phosphorylase activity and altered calcium handling in skeletal muscle.
Hum Mol Genet 19:1335–1346.

Rauen KA. 2013. The RASopathies. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet

14:355–369.

Gutmann DH, McLellan MD, Hussain I, Wallis JW, Fulton LL, Fulton RS,
Magrini V, Demeter R, Wylie T, Kandoth C, Leonard JR, Guha A,
Miller CA, Ding L, Mardis ER. 2013. Somatic neuroﬁbromatosis type
1 (NF1) inactivation characterizes NF1-associated pilocytic astrocytoma.
Genome Res 23:431–439.

Schulz A, Baader SL, Niwa-Kawakita M, Jung MJ, Bauer R, Garcia C, Zoch
A, Schacke S, Hagel C, Mautner VF, Hanemann CO, Dun XP, Parkinson
DB, Weis J, Schroder JM, Gutmann DH, Giovannini M, Morrison H.
2013. Merlin isoform 2 in neuroﬁbromatosis type 2-associated poly-
neuropathy. Nat Neurosci 16:426–433.

2978

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

Sperfeld AD, Hein C, Schroder JM, Ludolph AC, Hanemann CO. 2002.
Occurrence and characterization of peripheral nerve involvement in
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Brain 125:996–1004.

cognitive deﬁcits and behavioural problems in patients with neuroﬁbro-
matosis type 1 (NF1-SIMCODA): A randomised, placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet Neurol 12:1076–1083.

Stevenson DA, Allen S, Tidyman WE, Carey JC, Viskochil DH, Stevens A,
Hanson H, Sheng X, Thompson BA, Okumura MJ, Reinker K, Johnson B,
Rauen KA. 2012. Peripheral muscle weakness in RASopathies. Muscle
Nerve 46:394–399.

van Eeghen AM, Pulsifer MB, Merker VL, Neumeyer AM, van Eeghen EE,
Thibert RL, Cole AJ, Leigh FA, Plotkin SR, Thiele EA. 2013. Understand-
ing relationships between autism, intelligence, and epilepsy: A cross-
disorder approach. Dev Med Child Neurol 55:146–153.

Sullivan K, El-Hoss J, Quinlan KG, Deo N, Garton F, Seto JT, Gdalevitch M,
Turner N, Cooney GJ, Kolanczyk M, North KN, Little DG, Schindeler A.
2014. NF1 is a critical regulator of muscle development and metabolism
1. Hum Mol Genet 23:1250–1259.

Violante IR, Ribeiro MJ, Edden RA, Guimaraes P, Bernardino I, Rebola J,
Cunha G, Silva E, Castelo-Branco M. 2013. GABA deﬁcit in the visual
cortex of patients with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: Genotype-phenotype
correlations and functional impact. Brain 136:918–925.

Tanaka K, Eskin A, Chareyre F, Jessen WJ, Manent J, Niwa-Kawakita M,
Chen R, White CH, Vitte J, Jaffer ZM, Nelson SF, Rubenstein AE,
Giovannini M. 2013. Therapeutic potential of HSP90 inhibition for
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. Clin Cancer Res 19:3856–3870.

Trivedi R, Byrne J, Huson SM, Donaghy M. 2000. Focal amyotrophy in

neuroﬁbromatosis 2. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 69:257–261.

van der Vaart T, Plasschaert E, Rietman AB, Renard M, Oostenbrink R,
Vogels A, de Wit MC, Descheemaeker MJ, Vergouwe Y, Catsman-
Berrevoets CE, Legius E, Elgersma Y, Moll HA. 2013. Simvastatin for

Walsh KS, Velez JI, Kardel PG, Imas DM, Muenke M, Packer RJ, Castella-
nos FX, Acosta MT. 2013. Symptomatology of autism spectrum disorder
in a population with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Dev Med Child Neurol
55:131–138.

Weiss B, Widemann BC, Wolters P, Dombi E, Vinks AA, Cantor A, Korf B,
Perentesis J, Gutmann DH, Schorry E, Packer R, Fisher MJ. 2013.
Sirolimus for non-progressive NF1-associated plexiform neuroﬁbromas:
An NF clinical trials consortium phase II study. Pediatr Blood Cancer
61:982–986.

