American Journal of Pathology, Vol. 158, No. 2, February 2001
Copyright © American Society for Investigative Pathology

Tumorigenic Properties of Neurofibromin-Deficient
Neurofibroma Schwann Cells

David Muir,* Debbie Neubauer,* Ingrid T. Lim,*
Anthony T. Yachnis,† and Margaret R. Wallace‡
From the Divisions of Neurology * and Genetics,‡ the Department
of Pediatrics, and the Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine,† University of Florida Brain Institute and College of
Medicine, Gainesville, Florida

Dermal and plexiform neurofibromas are peripheral
nerve sheath tumors that arise frequently in neurofi-
bromatosis type 1. The goal of the present study was
to examine the tumorigenic properties of neurofibro-
min-deficient human Schwann cells (SCs) that were
found to represent a subset of SCs present in approx-
imately half of the total neurofibromas examined.
Highly enriched SC cultures were established from 10
dermal and eight plexiform neurofibromas by selec-
tive subculture using glial growth factor-2 and lami-
nin. These cultures had low tumorigenic potential in
classical in vitro assays yet several unique preneo-
plastic properties were frequently observed, includ-
ing delayed senescence, a lack of density-limited
growth, and a strong propensity to spontaneously
form proliferative cell aggregates rich in extracellular
matrix. Western blot analysis failed to detect full-
length neurofibromin in any of the neurofibroma SC
cultures, indicating that neurofibromin-deficient SCs
had a substantial growth advantage. Immunohisto-
chemical staining of the originating tumors showed
the majority were comprised principally of neurofi-
bromin-negative SCs, whereas the remainder contained
both neurofibromin-negative and neurofibromin-posi-
tive SCs. Lastly, engraftment of neurofibromin-deficient
SC cultures into the peripheral nerves of scid mice con-
sistently produced persistent neurofibroma-like tumors
with diffuse and often extensive intraneural growth.
These findings indicate that neurofibromin-deficient
SCs are involved in neurofibroma formation and, by
selective subculture, provide a resource for the devel-
opment of an in vivo model to further examine the role
of these mutant SCs in neurofibroma histogenesis.
(Am J Pathol 2001, 158:501–513)

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common autosomal
dominant condition with a high frequency of peripheral
nerve sheath tumors called neurofibromas. Dermal neu-
rofibromas usually develop during adolescence and
adulthood. These small tumors involve terminal nerves

and may be numerous, yet have no apparent risk of
malignant transformation. In contrast, plexiform neurofi-
bromas are usually congenital, typically involve deep or
“named” nerves, can become very large, and may cause
serious functional impairment. Because plexiform tumors
often occur on critical nerves and are not discrete
masses, surgical removal is rarely complete and recur-
rence is associated with increased morbidity and fatality.
A recent study suggests that plexiform neurofibromas
develop in the majority of NF1 patients.1 Additionally,
plexiform tumors may progress to malignancy, which
occurs in an estimated 6% of NF1 patients.2

Unlike schwannomas, which consist predominantly of
Schwann cells (SCs), neurofibromas show marked cellu-
lar heterogeneity. Nevertheless, SCs are the major cell
type amplified in neurofibromas and typically comprise
40 to 80% of the tumor cells. Additionally, there is a
substantial population of interspersed fibroblastic or per-
ineurial cells, along with various vascular and inflamma-
tory elements embedded in an extensive extracellular
matrix.3 Because of this cellular heterogeneity, the histo-
genesis of neurofibromas has been controversial. Al-
though there is increasing evidence for a SC origin, some
studies suggest the contribution of SCs and fibroblastic
cells.4 – 6 On the other hand, an emerging view proposes
that all of the major cellular elements of neurofibromas
are of SC lineage and that the fibroblastic/perineurial-like
elements may be immature or variant SCs.7–10

NF1 is caused by disruptive mutations in the NF1 gene,
which encodes the GAP-related protein neurofibromin.
Thus, all cells in an NF1 individual are initially haplo-
insufficient for neurofibromin activity(s). However, consis-
tent with the tumor suppressor gene two-hit model, it
seems that loss of function of the remaining NF1 allele is
associated with neurofibroma formation, as first observed
by our lab as loss of heterozygosity.11 Although there are
several approaches to animal models of NF1, presently
none exist in which neurofibromas can be readily in-
duced using defined human cell populations deficient in
neurofibromin. Gene targeting has been used to con-
struct mouse strains harboring mutations in the Nf1
gene.12,13 The mouse knockout model, similar to the

Supported by the National Institutes of Health (grants R01NS34780 and
R29NS31550) and the U.S. Department of Defense (grants DAMD17-98-
1-8609 and DAMD17-00-1-0549).

Accepted for publication October 4, 2000.
Address reprint requests to David Muir, Pediatric Neurology, Box
100296, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida
32610. E-mail: muir@ufbi.ufl.edu.

501

502 Muir et al
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

human NF1 condition, involves only a single constitu-
tional mutation and homozygous mice (Nf1⫺/⫺) die dur-
ing gestation. Despite the high level of conservation be-
tween mouse and human neurofibromin, it is clear that
Nf1 knockout mice are not prone to the formation of
neurofibromas. Thus, the inadequacy of the heterozy-
gous mouse model may be attributed to a low mutation
rate of the remaining wild-type Nf1 allele within the rela-
tively short murine life span. Original studies by Martuza
and co-workers14 demonstrated the growth of minced
human neurofibromas in the subrenal capsule and sciatic
nerve of immunodeficient mice that retained their mor-
phological features and genomic identities. Thus, the use
of defined neurofibroma cell populations in animal mod-
els will greatly enhance efforts to understand the histo-
genesis of neurofibromas.

Neurofibroma SCs have invasive and angiogenic prop-
erties, suggesting that these are genetically altered cells
with tumorigenic properties.15,16 Additionally, cytoge-
netic studies show that plexiform neurofibromas harbor
genetically abnormal SCs and strongly implicate these
cells as the central component in the development of
these potentially progressive tumors.17 Recently, somatic
loss of heterozygosity was found in SCs, but not fibro-
blasts cultured from a neurofibroma, suggesting that ge-
netic alterations of the NF1 gene in SCs are involved in
the development of neurofibromas.18 In a more compre-
hensive study, Rutkowski and co-workers19 further dem-
onstrated that neurofibroma-derived SCs typically lacked
NF1 mRNA whereas fibroblasts isolated from neurofibro-
mas expressed the NF1 transcript. In the present study,
SCs subcultured from numerous neurofibromas were ex-
amined for neurofibromin expression and tumorigenic
properties in vitro and after intraneural engraftment. Our
findings strongly implicate neurofibromin-deficient SCs in
the histogenesis of at least a subset of neurofibromas.

MaterialsandMethods
SC Culture

NormalAdultNerveSCs

All specimens included in this study were obtained in
accordance with protocols approved by the University of
Florida Institutional Review Board. Human SCs were iso-
lated from normal adult sural nerves by modifications of
methods described previously.20,21 Briefly, segmented
nerve fascicles were cultured for 10 days in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum, 5% calf serum, 2 ␮m forskolin, 25 ng/ml
human recombinant glial growth factor-2 (GGF-2), and
antibiotics (expansion medium). The tissue was then dis-
sociated for 18 hours in medium 15% calf serum, 1.25
U/ml Dispase (Collaborative Research Inc., Bedford,
MA), 300 U/ml collagenase (type XI; Sigma Chemical
Co., St. Louis, MO) and antibiotics. The digested tissue
was dispersed by trituration, passed through a 30-␮m
mesh nylon screen, and centrifuged (200 ⫻ g, 10 min-
utes). The cell pellet was resuspended (50 segments/2

ml) in medium containing N2 supplements22 and 2 ml of
the cell suspension was spread across the surface of a
75-cm2 flask precoated sequentially with polyornithine
(0.1 mg/ml) and laminin (10 ␮g/ml) (prepared as de-
scribed by Muir23). After a 6-hour incubation, the medium
was supplemented by the gentle addition of expansion
medium (10 ml). The cultures were grown to near conflu-
ency and the SCs were isolated by differential detach-
ment using mild trypsinization and gentle shaking. The
highly enriched cultures were expanded in expansion
medium in dishes coated with laminin only. All cultures
were withdrawn from treatment with forskolin and GGF-2
before storage or use.

NeurofibromaSCs

All patients met recognized diagnostic criteria for
NF124 and tumor specimens were characterized as neu-
rofibromas by histopathological study. Patient ages
ranged from 4 to 69 years (the majority were young to
middle-aged adults) and the reasons for surgery in-
cluded cosmetic, functional deficit, and tissue donation
on NF1-related fatality. These factors were unrelated to
the tissue culture outcome and phenotype. Any capsular
material was removed and viable tumor isolated from
surgically resected neurofibromas. Tumor tissue (1 cm2)
was finely minced and incubated at 37°C overnight in 10
ml of L-15 medium containing 15% calf serum, 1.25 U/ml
Dispase, 300 U/ml collagenase, and antibiotics. The tis-
sue was dispersed by trituration and strained through a
30-␮m mesh nylon screen. The filtrate was diluted with
L-15 and centrifuged (400 ⫻ g, 5 minutes). The cell pellet
was resuspended in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s me-
dium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 5% calf
serum, and antibiotics (standard medium), and cells
were seeded into tissue culture flasks (⬇106 cells/75
cm2. After 4 days, cultures were detached with trypsin/
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and passaged 1:4. Half
of the passaged cells were grown in standard culture
conditions; these were later harvested and stored in liq-
uid nitrogen. The other half of the cells were seeded in
flasks precoated with laminin (10 ␮g/ml) and grown in
standard medium containing GGF-2 (25 ng/ml). GGF-2
treatment caused rapid proliferation of Schwann-like cells
(SLCs). During subsequent passage, SLCs were en-
riched further by differential detachment using mild
trypsinization and shaking. For the specified cultures, the
combination of preferential laminin attachment, differen-
tial detachment, and selective mitogen treatment with
GGF-2 yielded highly enriched (95 to 99.5%) SLC cul-
tures within 3 to 4 passages. All tumorigenic and protein
expression assays were performed using cultures at pas-
sage 3 to 4 that had been withdrawn from GGF-2 for at
least 2 days. GGF-2 was generously provided by M.
Marchionni (Cambridge Neuroscience, Cambridge, MA).

Anchorage and Serum Requirements

The growth of SLC-enriched cultures was assessed in
serum-free and unattached conditions. Early (passage 2

Neurofibromin-Deficient Human Schwann Cells

503
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

Table 1. Characteristics of Neurofibroma-Derived Schwann Cell Cultures

SC Culture

Culture type*

S-100/p75†

NFn SC culture‡

NFn tumor§

Derived from dermal

neurofibromas

Derived from plexiform

SC⫹(cNF89.1)
SC⫹(cNF93.1a)
SC⫹(cNF93.1b)
SC⫹(cNF96.5f)
SC⫹(cNF96.5g)
SC⫹(cNF97.2a)
SC⫹(cNF97.2b)
SC⫹(cNF98.4a)
SC⫹(cNF98.4d)
SC⫹(cNF99.1)

neurofibromas

SC⫹(pNF92.1)
SC⫹(pNF94.5)
SC⫹(pNF95.1)
SC⫹(pNF95.5)
SC⫹(pNF95.6)
SC⫹(pNF95.11b)
SC⫹(pNF97.9)
SC⫹(pNF98.3)

type-2
type-4
type-4
type-2
type-2
type-2
type-2
type-2
type-2
type-2

type-3¶
type-2
type-2
type-3
type-3¶
type-3¶
type-4
type-3

⫹/⫹
v/v
v/v
⫹/⫹
⫹/⫹
⫹/⫹
⫹/⫹
⫹/⫹
⫹/⫹
⫹/⫹

⫹/⫺
⫹/⫹
⫹/⫹
⫹/⫾
⫹/⫾
⫹/⫹
v/v
⫹/⫹

⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺

⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺
⫺

n.d.
⫺/⫹
⫺/⫹
⫺/⫹
⫺/⫺
⫺/⫺
⫺/⫺
⫺/⫺
⫺/⫺
⫺/⫺

⫺/⫺
⫹/⫺
⫺/⫺
⫺/⫹
⫹/⫺
⫹/⫺
⫺/⫺
⫺/⫹

*Growth classification specified in Results.
†Immunocytochemical expression of SC antigens, S-100 (cytoplasmic), and p75NGFR.
‡Expression of neurofibromin (⫹ or ⫺) by NF1 SC culture determined by Western blot.
§Neurofibromin immunoreactivity for originating tumor as described in Results.
¶Proliferate without GGF2.
v, varied with density; ⫾, heterogeneous.

to 4) cultures were maintained in standard medium and
detached from the culture dish with 0.5 mmol/L ethyl-
enediaminetetraacetic acid in phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS). To examine anchorage dependency, cells were
seeded in poly(HEMA)-coated culture wells at a density
of 105 cells/well in Joklik medium (to minimize cell aggre-
gation) supplemented with 10% serum. To examine se-
rum dependency, cells were seeded in culture wells
coated with laminin-1 (10 ␮g/ml) at a density of 105
cells/well and grown in serum-free N2 medium supple-
mented with 1% heat-inactivated bovine serum albumin.
Cell viability was assessed at 0, 24, and 72 hours using a
Trypan blue dye-exclusion assay. Counting chambers of
a hemocytometer were filled with the cell suspension and
viable cells (dye-excluding) as well as nonviable cells
(dye-absorbing) were counted.

Growth in Soft Agarose

Anchorage-independent colony formation was deter-
mined by growing cells in soft agarose as described by
Neugut and Weinstein.25 A thin base-layer of 0.9% aga-
rose was allowed to solidify for 1 hour in culture wells. A
single-cell suspension in standard medium containing
0.4% agarose was layered over the solid agarose base
and allowed to solidify. The cultures were grown for 2 to
8 weeks and viable colonies consisting of ⬎25 cells were
scored by phase-contrast microscopy. Percent colony
formation was calculated as: (number of viable colonies/
total viable cells seeded) ⫻ 100%.

Subcutaneous Engraftment

All animal procedures were performed in accordance
with approved IACUC protocols. NF1 SC cultures were
tested for their ability to form tumors after subcutaneous
injection in immunodeficient nude mice. Cells grown on
laminin in medium containing GGF-2 were harvested by
trypsinization and resuspended in Hanks’ balanced salt
solution. Numerous subcutaneous injections were made
using 2 ⫻ 106 cells/site. Mice were examined for devel-
opment of palpable tumors for at least 3 months. There-
after, animals were euthanized and the injection sites
were surgically exposed and examined for signs of tumor
formation. Because there were no signs of tumor growth
no histology was performed.

Nerve Engraftment

Human neurofibroma-derived SC cultures (Table 1) from
cryopreserved stocks were grown on laminin for 4 days in
medium supplemented with GGF-2. Dissociated cells
were collected, rinsed thoroughly, and resuspended as a
dense slurry in Hanks’ solution. Young adult scid mice
were anesthetized and sciatic nerves of both legs were
exposed at mid-thigh. A cell suspension (5 ⫻ 105 in 4 ␮l)
was gradually injected intrafascicularly in both nerves
through a fine needle (35 gauge) attached to a Hamilton
syringe. The site was closed in layers with sutures and
the revived mouse returned to specific pathogen-free
housing. At 1 to 8 weeks after implantation, the animals
were sacrificed under anesthesia and the nerves (n ⫽ 4

504 Muir et al
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

for each culture) were removed and fixed by immersion in
4% paraformaldehyde. Nerve segments were embedded in
paraffin and sectioned for immunohistochemical staining.

Immunohistochemistry
NeurofibromaCultures

Monolayer cultures were examined for immunoreactiv-
ity with antibodies to the SC antigens S-100 (DAKO,
Carpinteria, CA) (1/300) and the low-affinity nerve growth
factor receptor (p75) (4 ␮g/ml, hybridoma 200-3-G6-4;
American Tissue Culture Collection, Rockville, MD). Cul-
tures grown on laminin-coated chamber slides were fixed
with 2% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer
(pH 7.2) for 20 minutes, then washed with PBS containing
0.5% Triton X-100. Nonspecific antibody binding was
blocked with PBS containing 0.1% Triton and 10% normal
serum (blocking buffer) for 1 hour. Primary antibodies
were diluted in blocking buffer and applied to wells for 2
to 4 hours at 37°C. Bound antibodies were labeled with
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 hour
at 37°C and chromogenic development was accom-
plished with 3,3⬘-diaminobenzidine-(HCl)4 (0.05%) and
hydrogen peroxide (0.03%) in PBS. Bromodeoxyuridine
(BrdU) incorporation in vitro and immunolabeling of BrdU-
DNA were performed as described previously.26

NerveGrafts

Sciatic nerves engrafted with neurofibroma-derived SC
cultures were fixed by immersion in 4% paraformalde-
hyde in 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer (pH 7.2), sectioned in
paraffin, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin for rou-
tine light microscopic examination. To identify trans-
planted human neurofibroma-derived SCs, nerve sec-
tions were immunostained with polyclonal anti-GST␲
(DAKO) (1/100) (a human-specific antiserum to the ubiq-
uitous cellular protein, glutathione S-transferase) and a
monoclonal antibody to p75 (4 ␮g/ml, hybridoma 200-3-
G6-4) (a primate-specific antibody to the low-affinity
nerve growth factor receptor). Deparaffinized sections
were pretreated with methanol containing 1% hydrogen
peroxide for 30 minutes to quench endogenous peroxi-
dase activity. Nonspecific antibody binding was blocked
with 10% normal serum in PBS containing 0.3% Triton
X-100 for 60 minutes at 37°C. Primary antibodies were
diluted in blocking buffer and applied to sections over-
night at 4°C. Bound antibodies were labeled with biotin-
ylated secondary antibodies for 4 hours at 37°C followed
by the avidin-biotin-peroxidase reagent (DAKO) for 2
hours. Chromogenic development was accomplished
with 3,3⬘-diaminobenzidine-(HC1)4 (0.05%) and hydro-
gen peroxide (0.03%) in PBS.

NeurofibromaTissueSpecimens

Portions of the primary tumor used for cell culture were
fixed by immersion in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 mol/L
phosphate buffer (pH 7.2), sectioned in paraffin, and

stained with hematoxylin and eosin for routine light mi-
croscopic examination. Sections were immunostained for
neurofibromin with the NF1GRP(N) antibody (1 ␮g/ml)
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz, CA) raised
against a peptide corresponding to residues 509 to 528
of the predicted NF1 gene product. The specificity of
antibody to this neurofibromin peptide was reported pre-
viously.27 Serial sections were immunolabeled with poly-
clonal anti-S-100 (1:300, DAKO). Immunoperoxidase la-
beling with the avidin-biotin-peroxidase reagent was
performed as described above, except to enhance neu-
rofibromin staining, antigen retrieval was achieved by
pretreating sections in 0.1% trypsin for 20 minutes at
37°C.
Immunostained sections were lightly counter-
stained with hematoxylin. Negative controls used no pri-
mary antibody. Additionally, for the NF1GRP(N) antibody,
preadsorption with a 10-fold molar excess of peptide
antigen (SC-67P, Santa Cruz) was used to achieve com-
plete blocking of neurofibromin immunoreactivity.

Western Immunoblotting

SC cultures were scraped from dishes and cell pellets
were homogenized in ice-cold extraction buffer consist-
ing of 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 250 mmol/L NaCl, 1%
Nonidet P-40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, and com-
plete protease inhibitors (Boehringer-Mannheim, India-
napolis, IN). The soluble fraction was collected by cen-
trifugation (10,000 ⫻ g, 20 minutes) and then was made
2 mol/L in urea. The extract was concentrated and frac-
tionated by ultrafiltration using a 100-kd cut-off mem-
brane. Total protein content of the high molecular mass
retentate was determined using Bradford Reagent (Bio-
Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Samples were mixed
with sodium dodecyl sulfate-containing electrophoresis
sample buffer containing 2 mol/L urea and 5% 2-ME and
then heated to 80°C for 2 hours. Samples (100 ␮g) were
electrophoresed on 4 to 15% polyacrylamide gels and
electroblotted to nitrocellulose sheets in transfer buffer
containing 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate. Blots were
rinsed in water and fixed in 25% isopropanol/10% acetic
acid. Nitrocellulose sheets were washed with 0.05 mol/L
Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) containing 1.5% NaCl and 0.1% Triton
X-100 and then blocked in the same buffer with the
addition of 5% dry milk (blocking buffer). The blots were
incubated for 2 hours with anti-NF1GRP(N) antibody (1
␮g/ml) in blocking buffer. Bound antibody was detected
by peroxidase conjugated swine anti-rabbit IgG (affinity
purified, DAKO) diluted 1/2,000 in blocking buffer. Immu-
noreactive bands were developed by chemiluminescent
methods (Pierce Chemical Co., Rockford, IL) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Relative molecular
mass was determined using prestained markers includ-
ing myosin (205 kd). Control samples were similarly pro-
cessed from cell pellets obtained from normal human
nerve SC cultures and SC cultures derived from embry-
onic homozygous Nf1 knockout mice.12

Neurofibromin-Deficient Human Schwann Cells

505
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

Figure 1. Subculture of neurofibroma-derived SCs. A: A typical primary neurofibroma culture containing mainly SLCs and FLCs. Seeded on tissue culture plastic,
phase-bright SLCs (arrowhead) grew exclusively on patches of underlying FLCs (asterisk). B: SLCs proliferated in response to GGF-2 and formed dense cell
aggregates (culture tumors, t) demonstrating their lack of contact-inhibited grow and continued association with the FLC sublayer. C: SLCs preferentially attached
to a laminin substratum, which circumvented the association of SLC to the FLC layer and allowed expansion of the SLCs. D: A highly enriched SLC population
was subcultured by growth on laminin in the presence of GGF-2 within three to four passages. Original magnification, ⫻200.

Results
Culture of Normal Human Nerve SCs

SCs do not proliferate in response to standard serum-
supplemented medium and, until recently, methods for
isolating normal human SCs were mostly unreliable.
Based on recent advances,20,21 we investigated various
means to enrich and expand SCs from adult human nerve
segments. Successful enrichment of SC cultures and
depletion of fibroblastic cells was readily achieved by
treatment with the SC mitogens GGF-2 and forskolin com-
bined with differential cell detachment and preferential
growth on a laminin-coated substratum. After 3 to 4 pas-
sages under these conditions, hundreds of millions of
SCs were obtained nearly free of fibroblast contamination
from several centimeters of adult tibial nerve. These cul-
tures were homogeneous and contained highly elon-
gated SCs that stained intensely for S-100 and p75,
recognized markers for cells committed to a SC lin-
eage.28 The specificity of S-100 as a marker for cultured
human SCs is shown in Figure 3A. After enrichment and
expansion, SC division rapidly decreased in the absence
of GGF-2 and forskolin. Growth on a laminin substratum
was required at all stages to improve attachment and to
minimize cell attrition. SC expansion was limited to ⬃10
population doublings before senescence regardless of

mitogen stimulation, confirming the earlier findings by
Rutkowski and colleagues.29

Culture of Neurofibroma SCs

Our goal was the enrichment and characterization of
SLCs from dermal and plexiform neurofibromas. Mono-
layer cultures of neurofibromas were initiated by enzyme
dissociation under standard culture conditions. The most
frequent primary culture obtained from dermal and plex-
iform neurofibromas contained a sublayer of fibroblast-
like cells (FLCs) admixed with numerous (20 to 60%)
spindle-shaped SLCs (Figure 1). Numerous procedures
to enrich and expand SLCs from the primary cultures
were tested. It is notable that enrichment of SLCs was not
improved by combined treatment with GGF-2 and agents
that elevate cAMP. In particular, forskolin caused consid-
erable heterogeneity in the SC population and hampered
the development of the SLC cultures described below.
Thus, unlike normal SC cultures, neurofibroma cultures
were treated only with GGF-2 and were not exposed to
forskolin.

Categorical responses to SC enrichment procedures
(see Materials and Methods) emerged for the neurofi-
broma cultures. We defined four culture types based on
prevalent cell morphologies, growth under standard cul-

506 Muir et al
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

Figure 2. Neurofibroma SCs aggregated and formed culture tumors. Aggre-
gates of SLCs, such as those shown in Figure 1B, were collected from early
neurofibroma cultures and sectioned. A: H&E staining of culture tumors
revealed areas of high cell density and cell-sparse regions of dense extracel-
lular matrix similar to those seen in neurofibromas. B: Immunolabeling with
laminin demonstrated a rich basement membrane network throughout the SC
aggregates. Scale bar, 50 ␮m.

ture conditions, growth response to GGF-2 and laminin,
and the onset of senescence. Findings were based on 40
robust cultures, 24 from dermal and 16 from plexiform
neurofibromas.

A first type of neurofibroma culture (type-1) was distin-
guished by a poor response to the SC enrichment treat-
ment with GGF-2 and laminin. These cultures (from der-
mal and plexiform tumors) were rapidly dominated by
FLCs that often displayed abnormal growth characteris-
tics (eg, rapid and protracted proliferation and loss of
density-limited growth). The SLCs (immunopositive for
S-100 and p75) failed to proliferate sufficiently and be-
came increasingly diluted with repeated passage.
Type-1 cultures accounted for 14 of 24 dermal and eight
of 16 plexiform cultures, were deemed intractable to SLC
enrichment, and were excluded from the analyses to
follow.

A second subset, type-2 neurofibroma cultures, were
amenable to enrichment of the SLCs. In most of these
cultures the SLCs proliferated rapidly in the presence of
GGF-2 and soon formed confluent islands on top of un-
derlying FLCs (Figure 1A). Cultured on native tissue cul-
ture plastic, the SLCs attached exclusively to the FLCs.
Despite the limited surface area of the underlying the
FLCs, proliferation by the SLCs continued in the pres-
ence of GGF-2. As a result, the SLCs formed dense
cellular masses or culture tumors (Figures 1B and 2A),
indicating the absence of contact inhibition (density-limited
growth) by neurofibroma SLCs. Immunolabeled sections of
these culture tumors showed an extensive laminin-rich ex-
tracellular matrix (Figure 2B). These observations potentially
relate to the adhesive mechanisms involved in the growth
and development of neurofibromas.30

Growth on a laminin substratum, which circumvented
the adhesion of the SLCs to the FLCs, was necessary for
the subsequent enrichment and expansion of the SLCs
(Figure 1C). Once outnumbered by the mitogen-driven
SLCs, the FLCs were effectively diminished by differential
detachment. Thereafter, the SLC population was readily
enriched and expanded in large numbers within 3 to 4
passages (Figure 1D). Type-2 SLC cultures stained for
S-100 and p75 and generally resembled highly spindled
SCs obtained from normal nerve (Figure 3, A and B).
However, purified SLCs from some neurofibromas, par-
ticularly those from plexiform tumors, were stubby and

less elongated (Figure 3C). The SLCs derived from der-
mal neurofibromas had a limited proliferative capacity
similar to that of normal adult SCs (10 doublings) and
became senescent thereafter. By comparison, the plexi-
form SLCs were less restricted and often were passaged
⬎20 times before showing signs of senescence. All
type-2 SLC-enriched neurofibroma cultures grew very
slowly when withdrawn from GGF-2, but were stable for
months on a laminin substratum. SLC-enriched type-2
cultures accounted for eight of 24 dermal and two of 16
plexiform cultures.

A third type of neurofibroma culture was obtained ex-
clusively from plexiform tumors and contained SLCs with
several preneoplastic properties. Type-3 SLCs expanded
rapidly without close association with the FLC sublayer
and were easily enriched to near homogeneity. Five
type-3 cultures were established from plexiform tumors;
SLCs in two cultures had a stubby, spindle shape
whereas the other three cultures were multipolar or po-
lygonal (Figure 3D). In each culture, nearly all cells were
stained for S-100, whereas p75 expression varied. Three
multipolar/polygonal
type-3 cultures grew particularly
well (doubling times 2 to 4 days) in response to serum
and GGF did not further increase their growth rates.
These cultures also showed protracted expansion (⬎20
to 50 passages). The occurrence of these preneoplastic
properties is almost certainly indicative of genetic abnor-
malities originating in vivo because growth factor-inde-
pendent proliferation and expansion beyond 10 pas-
sages were never observed in cultures of normal human
SCs (also see Rutkowski et al29). Furthermore, the three
GGF-independent type-3 cultures were derived from siz-
able recurrent plexiform neurofibromas.

A fourth subset of neurofibroma culture, at low density,
were pleomorphic,
lacy and phase-pale, and stained
faintly, or not at all, for S-100 and p75. However, with
increasing density they became elongated spindle cells
and grew in parallel arrays. Remarkably, when grown to
confluency, these cultures formed dense ridges of S-100-
expressing SLCs (not shown). The appearance of these
S-100-positive SLCs did not decrease after numerous
passages but, instead, continued to increase in number
with increasing culture density. These cultures were ex-
panded extensively (⬎50 passages) before showing
signs of senescence. These observations suggest that
these cultures contained a poorly differentiated cell type
capable of giving rise to a reversibly differentiated SLC
component. This type of pleomorphic property also was
observed in several neurofibrosarcoma cultures (not
shown).

In summary, 40 primary cultures were established from
24 dermal and 16 plexiform neurofibromas and subcul-
tured for enrichment of SLCs. Twenty-two of 40 cultures
did not respond to SLC enrichment or were predomi-
nantly fibroblastic (type-1). Ten dermal and eight plexi-
form tumor cultures yielded enriched SLC cultures
(type-2, -3, and -4) suitable for additional genetic and
biological studies (listed in Table 1). The type-2 and
type-3 cultures (eight from dermal and seven from plex-
iform tumors) were the focus of subsequent studies.

Neurofibromin-Deficient Human Schwann Cells

507
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

Figure 3. Morphology and S-100 immunostaining of nerve and neurofibroma-derived SC cultures. A: A primary culture established from normal adult human
nerve, like those from neurofibromas, contained a mixture of S-100-positive SCs (arrowheads) and fibroblastic cells (arrows). SCs showed intense cytoplasmic
S-100 immunoreactivity, while faint (if any) staining was visible in the nuclei of fibroblastic cells (contrast-enhanced image). After enrichment and expansion of
SLCs from neurofibromas, the resulting SC cultures immunostained positive for S-100 yet often differed in morphology and growth properties (B–D). B: Type-2
cultures from dermal neurofibromas most often showed highly elongated spindle-shape cells similar to normal SCs. C: Type-2 and some type-3 cultures from
plexiform neurofibromas generally contained multipolar and stubby spindled cells. D: Type-3 cultures were obtained exclusively from plexiform tumors and
contained elongated but primarily polygonal cells. Original magnification, ⫻200.

Neurofibromin Expression by SCs in
Neurofibromas

Before neurofibroma specimens were prepared for cell
culture, representative specimens of tumor were fixed
and processed for routine histology and immunohisto-
chemistry. Paraffin sections were immunostained with an
anti-neurofibromin peptide antiserum. Neurofibromin im-
munoreactivity in normal control tissues was similar to
that reported by other laboratories.31 In neurofibromas
the SC elements were identified by their nuclear charac-
teristics (elongated, wavy nuclei with pointed ends) and
positive immunoreactivity for S-100 protein (Figure 4).
Four basic patterns of neurofibromin immunoexpression
in S-100-positive regions were observed: 1) neurofibro-
min-negative (⫺/⫺); 2) predominantly neurofibromin-neg-
ative with focal areas of distinct positive staining (⫺/⫹); 3)
predominantly immunoreactive tumor with focal areas of
distinct negativity (⫹/⫺); and 4) neurofibromin-positive
(⫹/⫹). Immunoreactivity patterns for the surgical resec-

tion specimens corresponding to the SC cultures from
which they were derived are summarized in Table 1. The
majority (14 of 17) of the neurofibromas that gave rise to
SC cultures were predominately neurofibromin-negative
(designated ⫺/⫺ and ⫺/⫹ in Table 1). Moreover, more
than one-half of these tumors were completely negative
(⫺/⫺), showing no neurofibromin immunostaining in any
SC elements (Figure 4A). Furthermore, even in the few
(⫹/⫺),
predominately neurofibromin-positive tumors
many individual SCs were negative for neurofibromin
(Figure 4C). In areas of positive immunoreactivity, tumor
cells showed discrete, granular staining in the perinu-
clear cytoplasm and in delicate elongated processes. In
tumors with positively and negatively stained regions, the
regions of neurofibromin nonreactivity were histologically
similar to immunoreactive areas. Overall, neurofibromin
immunoexpression in most neurofibromas that gave rise
to a SC culture was very low (see Discussion). The finding
of both positive and negative areas of neurofibromin im-
munoreactivity in some neurofibromas could not be at-

508 Muir et al
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

Figure 4. Neurofibromin immunoreactivity of SCs in neurofibromas. Tumor sections were immunoperoxidase stained for neurofibromin (A and C) and S-100 (B).
A: Most neurofibromas that gave rise to SC cultures were either mainly or completely devoid of neurofibromin-positive SCs. Vascular elements (arrows) and sweat
glands (asterisk) stained for neurofibromin and served as internal positive controls. B: A serial section of the neurofibroma shown in A showing strong and diffuse
immunoreactive for the SC marker protein, S-100. C: A neurofibroma containing intermixed populations of neurofibromin-positive (arrowheads) and
neurofibromin-negative SCs (arrows). In areas of positive immunoreactivity, tumor cells showed discrete, granular staining in the perinuclear cytoplasm and in
delicate elongated processes. SC elements were identified by their nuclear characteristics (elongated, wavy nuclei with pointed ends) and positive immunore-
activity for S-100 protein. Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. Original magnifications: ⫻200 (A and B), ⫻400 (C).

tributed to artifacts of fixation, tissue preparation, or re-
gional differences in antibody concentration. Dermal and
vascular elements were uniformly positive for neurofibro-
min in both immunoreactive and nonreactive regions of a
given tumor (Figure 4). Also, tumors that were negative or
that contained areas of neurofibromin nonreactivity were
all strongly and widely immunoreactive for S-100 protein
(Figure 4B).

Neurofibromin Expression by NF1 SC Cultures

We hypothesized that the abnormal growth properties of
NF1 SC cultures, particularly the type-3 cultures, are the
result of a severe deficiency in neurofibromin expression.
Normal SCs and type-2, -3, and -4 NF1 SC cultures were
examined for the expression of neurofibromin by Western
immunoblotting. Results are shown in Figure 5. Antibody

Neurofibromin-Deficient Human Schwann Cells

509
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

Figure 5. Western immunoblot analysis of the SC cultures for neurofibromin expression. Culture cell pellets were extracted and a high molecular mass fraction
was obtained by ultrafiltration (⬎100 kd). Samples (100 ␮g of total protein) were electrophoresed and transferred to nitrocellulose sheets. The blots were stained
for neurofibromin using antibody NF1GRP(N) and chemiluminescent detection. Antibody specificity was demonstrated on extracts of SC-enriched cultures from
embryonic Nf1 knockout mice. Full-length neurofibromin was absent from homozygous cultures (Nf1⫺/⫺) (lane 1), whereas heterozygous cultures (Nf1⫹/⫺)
⫽ 240 to 260 kd neurofibromin bands
(lane 2) expressed a predominant immunoreactive band-pair with a Mr
produced by normal human SCs (lane 3). A band at 140 kd appeared in each sample that, although undefined, indicated the consistency of total protein loaded
in each lane. Full-length neurofibromin was absent in extracts of the 10 dermal SC cultures (lanes 4 to 13) and eight plexiform SC cultures (lanes 14 to 20 and
22). Also shown is the original mixed primary culture pNF95.11b (lane 21) from which the type-3 SC culture, SC⫹(pNF95.11b), was derived (lane 22) and the
type-1 culture, pNF95.11a (an earlier specimen from the same patient).

⫽ 225 to 250 kd, slightly smaller than the Mr

specificity was examined on extracts of SC-enriched cul-
tures from embryonic Nf1 knockout mice. Full-length neu-
rofibromin was absent
from homozygous cultures
(Nf1⫺/⫺)
(lane 1), whereas heterozygous cultures
(Nf1⫹/⫺) (lane 2) expressed a predominant immunoreac-
tive band-pair with a Mr ⫽ 225 to 250 kd (slightly smaller
than that produced by human cells). A band at 140 kd
appeared in each sample that, although undefined, indi-
cated the consistency of total protein loaded in each
lane. Extracts of normal human SC cultures (lane 3) con-
tained a predominant neurofibromin-immunoreactive
band-pair with a Mr ⫽ 240 to 260 kd. In contrast, full-
length neurofibromin was absent in extracts of the 10
dermal SC cultures (lanes 4 to 13) and eight plexiform SC
cultures (lanes 14 to 20 and 22). As an example, we also
show the mixed primary culture pNF95.11b (lane 21) from
which the SC culture, SC⫹(pNF95.11b) (lane 22), was
derived. The first passage of the culture pNF95.11b con-
tained an admixture of cells (including numerous FLCs
and perhaps diverse SC lineages). A modest band-pair
corresponding to full-length neurofibromin was observed
in this culture extract (lane 21), indicating the genetic
heterogeneity in this early culture. This finding is consis-
tent with the pattern of neurofibromin immunostaining
(⫹/⫺) observed in the originating tumor sections (Table
1). However, neurofibromin expression was undetectable
in the derived type-3 SC culture (lane 22). The
pNF95.11b cultures were established from a resection of
a recurrent plexiform neurofibroma. Two years earlier, we
established a culture from a specimen obtained from the
initial resection. This culture, pNF95.11a, was type-1
(dominated by FLCs and intractable to SC enrichment)
and expressed abundant neurofibromin (lane 23). Neu-

rofibromin content in this culture extract was presumably
contributed by the large population of fibroblasts, but we
cannot exclude the contribution by NF1 heterozygous
SCs. From these results we conclude that neurofibromin-
deficient SCs have the best long-term growth advantages
and that our subculture methods to enrich for SCs from
neurofibromas are highly selective for neurofibromin-de-
ficient SCs.

Properties of NF1 SC Cultures in Classical
Tumorigenic Assays

Neoplastic and tumorigenic properties of type-2 and -3
neurofibroma SC cultures were examined in several clas-
sical tests, including assays of serum and anchorage
dependence, colony formation in soft agarose, and sub-
cutaneous tumor formation in immunodeficient mice. The
proliferative properties (normal and abnormal) of these
cultures were described in a previous section. Although
not all of the NF1 SC cultures listed in Table 1 were tested
repeatedly, findings of tumorigenic properties were con-
sistent for all type-2 and -3 cultures from dermal and
plexiform tumors. Notably, all type-2 and type-3 NF1 SC
cultures showed properties similar to normal human SCs.
First, the survival of the NF1 SC cultures and normal SCs
was not highly growth factor-dependent, as 85 to 95% of
cells remained viable in serum-free medium for at least
72 hours (compared to 95% survival of the highly tumor-
igenic RN22 schwannoma and C6 glioma cell
lines).
Proliferation was not observed in any of the SC cultures in
the absence of serum. Second, the survival of the SC
cultures was anchorage-dependent. Under nonadherent

510 Muir et al
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

conditions the percentage of viable normal SCs dropped
below 40% after 72 hours. Similarly the survival of NF1 SC
cultures was 20 to 40% after 72 hours in suspension
culture (compared to ⬎95% in the RN22 and C6 lines).
Colony formation in soft agarose is an indicator of high
tumorigenicity and anchorage-independent growth,
properties of transformed cells and some, but not all solid
tumor cultures. Suspended as single cells in soft aga-
rose, 72% of RN22 and 88% of C6 cells proliferated and
rapidly formed colonies that become visible to the eye
within 2 weeks. In contrast, multicellular foci of normal SC
or NF1 SC cultures were rarely observed and none
reached the 25-cell colony criterion, even after cultured
for 2 months in agarose.

NF1 SC cultures showed no subcutaneous tumori-
genic growth. Millions of cells per site were injected
subcutaneously in nude mice. No palpable tumors were
found after 3 months and there were no subcutaneous
foci visible in postmortem examinations. Taken together,
these observations indicate that the neurofibroma SC
cultures, even the type-3 cultures, had low tumorigenic
potential in these classical assays.

Neurofibroma SC Cultures Grafted in the
Mouse Nerve

The tumorigenic growth of selected neurofibroma SC
cultures was examined as xenografts in the sciatic nerves
of adult immunodeficient scid mice. Each NF1 culture
was engrafted into four nerves and six nerves were en-
grafted with an equal number of normal human SCs.
Engrafted nerves were examined by immunostaining with
an antibody specific to human glutathione S-transferase
(Figure 6). First, transplantation of normal SCs resulted in
transient occupancy (Figure 6C) and survival appeared
to be severely limited because in four of six of the nerves
glutathione S-transferase labeling was absent after 8
weeks. In contrast, all neurofibroma SC cultures (seven of
seven) showed persistent and diffuse intraneural growth
throughout the same period. Typically, neurofibroma SCs
emanated from glutathione S-transferase-positive foci
and grew in extensive longitudinal streams that intermin-
gled with the host nerve elements (Figure 6A). Tumor cell
migration also was associated with the nerve sheaths.
Some NF1 SC cultures developed sizable masses that
displaced nerve elements and caused significant re-
gional enlargement of the nerve diameter (Figure 6B).
Tumor masses varied in size for the different culture
grafts, but additional work is required to quantitate the size
and distribution of the tumor grafts. It will also be important
to determine whether growth rates of the cultures, grafts,
and originating tumors are related. Nevertheless, all obser-
vations indicated that tumor development in the mouse
nerve, like that of human neurofibromas, was relatively slow
and benign. There were only sporadic signs of functional
impairment associated with the largest tumors and no
mortality was associated with the transplants for up to 8
weeks. These results demonstrate reliable and sustained
tumor growth by neurofibroma-derived human SCs im-
planted in the mouse nerve.

Figure 6. Tumor growth by human NF1 SC cultures xenografted into the
nerves of scid mice. SC cultures from neurofibromas were transplanted into
the nerves of immunodeficient mice. The growth and distribution of en-
grafted cells was traced by immunostaining with an antibody specific to
human glutathione S-transferase. NF1 SC xenografts 4 weeks (A) and 8
weeks (B) after engraftment in the mouse sciatic nerve developed sizable
masses and substantially increased the nerve diameter. NF1 SCs invaded
along the longitudinal nerve axis between axons and along the epineurial
sheath. Even the most extensive graft of normal SCs showed meager growth
after 8 weeks, whereas most normal SC grafts failed to survive (C). Sections
were counterstained with hematoxylin. Original magnification, ⫻100.

Discussion
In general, neurofibroma SCs, like their counterparts in
normal nerves, fail to proliferate in vitro in the absence of
specific mitogens.5,7 Past efforts to establish models for
human neurofibromas have relied on tissue explants and
primary cultures of limited cell number with marked cel-
lular heterogeneity. Only very recently have SCs been
isolated from neurofibromas.17–19 The lack of human neu-
rofibroma-derived SC cultures and the low tumorigenic
potential of neurofibroma cells in animal models has ham-
pered the study of these prevalent tumors. Here we re-
port the subculture of SCs from 10 dermal and eight
plexiform NF1 tumors. All 18 of these NF1 SC cultures
were found to be neurofibromin-deficient. Interestingly,
many of the originating tumors contained both neurofi-
bromin-negative and neurofibromin-positive SCs, indicat-
ing that SCs that lack functional NF1 alleles have a dis-
tinct growth advantage in vitro. This advantage has been
exploited by our subculture enrichment procedures using
GGF-2 (without forskolin) and laminin.

Loss of NF1 gene expression has been reported in
malignant and benign SC tumors and pheochromocyto-
mas from patients with NF1.32,33 Based on the two-hit

hypothesis of tumor suppressor genes such as NF1, it is
expected that neurofibromas should contain a supernu-
merary population of neurofibromin-deficient cells that
are tumorigenic. Recent findings of cytogenetic alter-
ations, loss of heterozygosity, and the absence of NF1
mRNA expression in SCs cultured from neurofibromas
strongly implicate SCs as the major neoplastic elements
of dermal and plexiform neurofibromas.17–19 In addition,
in the present study we found that SCs isolated from
numerous neurofibromas lack neurofibromin expression,
confirming that NF1 is inactivated in these SCs. Despite
these persuasive findings,
immunohistochemical evi-
dence for a dominant population of neurofibromin-defi-
cient cells has been highly ambiguous and scarcely re-
ported. In an earlier study of numerous NF1 tumors, we
concluded that a majority of neurofibromas consist
mainly of SCs that express neurofibromin.34 This antithet-
ical observation was based on a large number of random
archival specimens and, moreover, held true for a signif-
icant proportion of neurofibrosarcomas as well. However,
on closer scrutiny, to examine the two-hit hypothesis at
the single-cell level, it became evident that neurofibro-
min-negative SCs were present in most, if not all, neuro-
fibromas. In the present study we focused on an inde-
pendent group of neurofibromas from which SC
subculture was successful. In most of the tumors in this
group, neurofibromin labeling of tumoral elements was
particularly sparse or absent. The remainder contained
mixed populations of neurofibromin-negative and neuro-
fibromin-positive SCs. The neurofibromin antibody used
in these studies was raised against a peptide corre-
sponding to amino acids 509 to 528 of the predicted NF1
gene product. Directed against an N-terminal epitope,
the antibody should bind to known neurofibromin splice
variants as well as highly truncated (abnormal) forms.
These results provide strong evidence that neurofibro-
min-negative cells of SC lineage contribute centrally to
the formation of at
least a significant subset of both
dermal and plexiform neurofibromas. Nevertheless, there
was notable variability in neurofibromin expression by
SCs within many of the neurofibromas. The presence of
neurofibromin expressing (NF1 heterozygous) SCs sug-
gests they too may perpetuate tumor formation, perhaps
driven by the paracrine influence of the neurofibromin-
deficient cell population. In this regard, Gutmann and
co-workers35 reported that neurofibromin expression by
SCs in benign tumors may be down-regulated by factors
produced within the tumor. Thus, paracrine influences
may represent a novel mechanism for
inactivating
growth-suppressing genes and allowing for increased
cell proliferation in tumors even in nonclonal cells. It is
interesting that proliferation of neurofibromin-deficient
SCs in response to GGF-2 was not enhanced by forsko-
lin. Because forskolin increases SC expression of growth
factor receptors including the GGF receptors erbB2 and
erbB3,36,37 this suggests that neurofibroma SCs express
high levels of GGF receptors. Hyperexpression of erbB
receptors has been reported in NF1 tumors and an in-
verse expression pattern of erbB2 and neurofibromin was
shown for human SCs.38,39 Additionally, SCs can express
GGF and, at doses submaximal for proliferation, GGF-2

Neurofibromin-Deficient Human Schwann Cells

511
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

increases and directs the migration of SCs.40 – 42 Taken
together, these findings raise the possibility that GGF
may function in an autocrine/paracrine mechanism that
supports the continued growth of SCs in neurofibromas.
Despite considerable advances in the molecular ge-
netics of NF1, the histogenesis of neurofibromas remains
enigmatic. Dermal and plexiform neurofibromas contain a
variety of cell types including SCs, perineurial cells, and
fibroblasts. It is commonly held that despite their cellular
complexity the histological features of neurofibromas are
monotonously consistent.43 In contradistinction, our stud-
ies of numerous neurofibromas and their derivative cell
cultures indicate there are several levels of cellular and
genetic diversity in this class of benign peripheral nerve
sheath tumor. Cytogenetic abnormalities were identified
in one of five of the dermal (our unpublished observation)
and four of six of the plexiform SC cultures.17 There were
no consistent chromosomal regions involved in the ab-
normal karyotypes, suggesting that originating tumors
are heterogeneous and may bear a variety of primary
and/or secondary genetic changes. Additionally, the two
plexiform cultures that displayed no cytogenetic rear-
rangements showed GGF-independent growth, suggest-
ing that they either contain underlying genetic abnormal-
ities not yet detected, or have expression abnormalities
because of epigenetic influence. Clearly, neurofibromin
deficiency did not confer GGF-2-independent growth on
all of the developed SC cultures. Despite some differ-
ences in morphology, GGF-2 dependence, and karyo-
type, all NF1 SC cultures showed similarly low tumori-
genic potential
in vitro assays.
However, the neurofibroma SC cultures showed a strong
propensity to aggregate and form culture tumors. A sim-
ilar growth pattern was observed for suspension cultures
whereby NF1 SCs readily grew in aggregates reminis-
cent of tumor spheroids (an in vitro model for tumorigenic
growth). Neurofibroma culture tumors contained an ex-
tensive laminin-rich extracellular matrix similar to that ob-
served in neurofibromas.30 These observations attest to a
tumorigenic property of neurofibromin-deficient SC cul-
tures that may be related to the adhesive mechanisms
involved in the growth and development of neurofibro-
mas. Sheela and co-workers15 first demonstrated that
NF1 SCs are angiogenic and invasive. In subsequent
studies, which included two of the NF1 SC cultures used
in the present report, we also concluded that NF1 SCs
have a high invasive potential and a loss of negative
autocrine growth control.16 Despite these tumorigenic
properties, our NF1 SC cultures, as well as the neurofi-
broma cultures used by Sheela and colleagues,15 failed
to form subcutaneous tumors in immunodeficient mice.
Taken together, these findings imply that NF1 SCs have a
tumorigenic potential that was not fully expressed in the in
vivo model systems used previously.

in several classical

Inceptive studies demonstrated the growth of

im-
planted human neurofibroma tissue or SC preparations
into the sciatic nerves of immunodeficient mice and the
potential of this xenograft model for studying the tumori-
genesis in NF1.14,44 In the present study neurofibroma-
like tumors resulted from the transplantation of neurofi-
bromin-deficient NF1 SC cultures into the nerves of scid

512 Muir et al
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

mice. Extensive migration was consistently observed and
many tumors were sizeable and substantially enlarged in
the mouse nerve. There were apparent differences in the
growth by the different transplanted NF1 SC cultures but
overall tumor expansion was slow, suggesting that the
growth rate of the developed tumors may reflect that of
human neurofibromas. Additional studies are required to
determine whether the growth patterns of the engrafted
SC tumors correlate with those of the originating human
tumors. This intraneural engraftment model is the first to
achieve tumorigenic growth in vivo by human neurofibro-
min-deficient SCs and provides the means to study the
histogenesis of neurofibromas in a relevant cellular envi-
ronment. A further enhancement to this NF1 tumor model
will be to transplant these neurofibroma SCs in the nerves
of immunodeficient mice that are also heterozygous for
Nf1. This highly relevant model of neurofibroma will also
provide the opportunity to observe the interactions and
contributions of engrafted (NF1⫺/⫺) cells and (Nf1⫺/⫹)
nerve elements with the same genetic background as
those found in NF1 patients.

Acknowledgments
We thank the patients and the contributing physicians,
especially Drs. Parker Mickle, Mark Scarborough, Su-
zanne Spanier, Dean Glassman, Linda Haig, Thomas
Eskin, Max Langham, and James Garbern. The present
studies benefited from foundation work performed by Dr.
Amyn Rojiani, Dr. Mumtaz Rojiani, Jerome Elam, and
Eduardo Kellenberger. We thank Dr. Mark Marchionni
and Cambridge Neuroscience for helping to launch this
project with generous provisions of recombinant human
GGF-2.

References

1. Tonsgard JH, Kwak SM, Short P, Dachman AH: CT imaging in adults
with neurofibromatosis-1—Frequent asymptomatic plexiform lesions.
Neurology 1998, 50:1755–1760

2. Gutmann DH, Collins FS: Neurofibromatosis type 1. The Metabolic
and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease. Edited by CR Scriver, AL
Beaudet, WS Sly, D Valle. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1995, pp 677– 696
3. Peltonen J, Jaakkola S, Lebwohl M, Renvall S, Risteli L, Virtanen I,
Uitto J: Cellular differentiation and expression of matrix genes in type
1 neurofibromatosis. Lab Invest 1988, 59:760 –771

4. Erlandson RA, Woodruff JM: Peripheral nerve sheath tumors: an

electron microscopic study of 43 cases. Cancer 1982, 49:273–287

5. Krone W, Mao R, Muhleck OS, Kling H, Fink T: Cell culture studies on
neurofibromatosis (von Recklinghausen). Characterization of cells
growing from neurofibromas. Ann NY Acad Sci 1986, 486:354 –370
6. Atit RP, Crowe MJ, Greenhalgh DG, Wenstrup RJ, Ratner N: The Nf1
tumor suppressor regulates mouse skin wound healing, fibroblast
proliferation, and collagen deposited by fibroblasts. J Invest Dermatol
1999, 112:835– 842

7. Sobue G, Sonnenfeld K, Rubenstein AE, Pleasure D: Tissue culture
studies of neurofibromatosis: effects of axolemmal fragments and
cyclic adenosine 3⬘,5⬘-monophosphate analogues on proliferation of
Schwann-like and fibroblast-like neurofibroma cells. Ann Neurol 1985,
18:68 –73

8. Nakamura T, Hara M, Kasuga T: Early lesion of N-nitroso-N-ethylurea-
induced hamster neurofibromatosis model. Cancer Res 1991, 51:
434 – 438

9. Kharbanda K, Dinda AK, Sarkar C, Karak AK, Mathur M, Roy S: Cell

culture studies on human nerve sheath tumors. Pathology 1994,
26:29 –32

10. Feany MB, Anthony DC, Fletcher CDM: Nerve sheath tumours with
hybrid features of neurofibroma and schwannoma: a conceptual
challenge. Histopathology 1998, 32:405– 410

11. Colman SD, Williams CA, Wallace MR: Benign neurofibromas in type
1 neurofibromatosis (NF1) show somatic deletions of the NF1 gene.
Nat Genet 1995, 11:90 –92

12. Brannan CI, Perkins AS, Vogel KS, Ratner N, Nordlund ML, Reid SW,
Buchberg AM, Jenkins NA, Parada LF, Copeland NG: Targeted dis-
ruption of the neurofibromatosis type-1 gene leads to developmental
abnormalities in heart and various neural crest-derived tissues.
Genes Dev Rev 1994, 8:1019 –1029

13. Jacks T, Shih TS, Schmitt EM, Bronson RT, Bernards A, Weinberg RA:
Tumour predisposition in mice heterozygous for a targeted mutation
in Nf1. Nat Genet 1994, 7:353–361

14. Lee JK, Sobel RA, Chiocca EA, Kim TS, Martuza RL: Growth of human
acoustic neuromas, neurofibromas and schwannomas in the subre-
nal capsule and sciatic nerve of the nude mouse. J Neurooncol 1992,
14:101–112

15. Sheela S, Riccardi VM, Ratner N: Angiogenic and invasive properties

of neurofibroma Schwann cells. J Cell Biol 1990, 111:645– 653

16. Muir D: Differences in proliferation and invasion by normal, trans-
formed and NF1 Schwann cell cultures are influenced by matrix
metalloproteinase expression. Clin Exp Metastasis 1995, 13:303–314
17. Wallace MR, Rasmussen SA, Lim IT, Gray B, Zori RT, Muir D: Culture
of cytogenetically abnormal Schwann cells from benign and malig-
nant NF1 tumors. Genes Chromosom Cancer 2000, 27:117–123

18. Kluwe L, Friedrich R, Mautner VF: Loss of NF1 allele in Schwann cells
but not in fibroblasts derived from an NF1-associated neurofibroma.
Genes Chromosom Cancer 1999, 24:283–285

19. Rutkowski JL, Wu K, Gutmann DH, Boyer PJ, Legius E: Genetic and
cellular defects contributing to benign tumor formation in neurofibro-
matosis type 1. Hum Mol Genet 2000, 9:1059 –1066

20. Rutkowski JL, Tennekoon GI, McGillicuddy JE: Selective culture of
mitotically active human Schwann cells from adult sural nerves. Ann
Neurol 1992, 31:580 –586

21. Casella CTB, Bunge RP, Wood PM: Improved method for harvesting
human Schwann cells from mature peripheral nerve and expansion in
vitro. Glia 1996, 17:327–338

22. Bottenstein JE, Sato GH: Growth of a rat neuroblastoma cell line in
serum-free supplemented medium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1979,
76:514 –517

23. Muir D: Metalloproteinase-dependent neurite outgrowth within a syn-
thetic extracellular matrix is induced by nerve growth factor. Exp Cell
Res 1994, 210:243–252

24. Gutmann DH, Aylsworth A, Carey JC, Korf B, Marks J, Pyeritz RE,
Rubenstein A, Viskochil D: The diagnostic evaluation and multidisci-
plinary management of neurofibromatosis 1 and neurofibromatosis 2.
JAMA 1997, 278:51–57

25. Neugut AI, Weinstein IB: Use of agarose in the determination of

anchorage-independent growth. In Vitro 1979, 15:351–358

26. Muir D, Varon S, Manthorpe M: An enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay for bromodeoxyuridine incorporation using fixed microcultures.
Anal Biochem 1990, 185:377–382

27. Gutmann DH, Wood DL, Collins FS: Identification of the neurofibro-
matosis type 1 gene product. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991, 88:
9658 –9662

28. Zorick TS, Lemke G: Schwann cell differentiation. Curr Opin Cell Biol

1996, 8:870 – 876

29. Rutkowski JL, Kirk CJ, Lerner MA, Tennekoon GI: Purification and
expansion of human Schwann cells in vitro. Nat Med 1995, 1:80 – 83
30. Leivo I, Engvall E, Laurila P, Miettinen M: Distribution of merosin, a
laminin-related tissue-specific basement membrane protein, in hu-
man Schwann cell neoplasms. Lab Invest 1989, 61:426 – 432

31. Daston MM, Scrable H, Nordlund M, Sturbaum AK, Nissen LM, Ratner
N: The protein product of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene is ex-
pressed at highest abundance in neurons, Schwann cells, and oligo-
dendrocytes. Neuron 1992, 8:415– 428

32. Takahashi K, Suzuki H, Hatori M, Abe Y, Kokubun S, Sakurai M,
Shibahara S: Reduced expression of neurofibromin in the soft tissue
tumours obtained from patients with neurofibromatosis type 1. Clin
Sci 1995, 88:581–585

33. Gutmann DH, Cole JL, Stone WJ, Ponder BA, Collins FS: Loss of

Neurofibromin-Deficient Human Schwann Cells

513
AJP February 2001, Vol. 158, No. 2

neurofibromin in adrenal gland tumors from patients with neurofibro-
matosis type I. Genes Chromosom Cancer 1994, 10:55–58

34. Rojiani AM, Rojiani MV, Wallace MR, Johnson J, Muir D: Expression of
the NF1 gene product in peripheral nerve sheath tumors from NF1
patients. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1999, 58:524

35. Gutmann DH, Silos-Santiago I, Geist RT, Daras M, Rutkowski JL: Lack
of NF1 expression in a sporadic schwannoma from a patient without
neurofibromatosis. J Neurooncol 1995, 25:103–111

36. Weinmaster G, Lemke G: Cell-specific cyclic AMP-mediated induc-

tion of the PDGF receptor. EMBO J 1990, 9:915–920

37. Cheng LL, Esch FS, Marchionni MA, Mudge AW: Control of Schwann
cell survival and proliferation: autocrine factors and neuregulins. Mol
Cell Neurosci 1998, 12:141–156

38. Rowley PT, Kosciolek B, Bader JL: Oncogene expression in neurofi-

bromatosis. Ann NY Acad Sci 1986, 486:327–332

39. Schlegel J, Muenkel K, Trenkle T, Fauser G, Ruschoff J: Expression of
the ERBB2/neu and neurofibromatosis type 1 gene products in reac-

tive and neoplastic schwann cell proliferation. Int J Oncol 1998,
13:1281–1284

40. Raabe TD, Clive DR, Neuberger TJ, Wen D, DeVries GH: Cultured
neonatal Schwann cells contain and secrete neuregulins. J Neurosci
Res 1996, 46:263–270

41. Carroll SL, Miller ML, Frohnert PW, Kim SS, Corbett JA: Expression of
neuregulins and their putative receptors, ErbB2 and ErbB3, is in-
duced during Wallerian degeneration. J Neurosci 1997, 17:1642–
1659

42. Mahanthappa NK, Anton ES, Matthew WD: Glial growth factor 2, a
soluble neuregulin, directly increases Schwann cell motility and indi-
rectly promotes neurite outgrowth. J Neurosci 1996, 16:4673– 4683
43. Riccardi VM: Neurofibromatosis: Phenotype, Natural History, and
Pathogenesis, ed 2. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992
44. Appenzeller O, Kornfeld M, Atkinson R, Snyder RD: Neurofibromato-
sis xenografts. Contribution to pathogenesis. J Neurol Sci 1986,
74:69 –77

