CLINICAL REPORT

Vestibular Schwannomas Occur in Schwannomatosis
and Should not be Considered an Exclusion Criterion
for Clinical Diagnosis
Miriam J. Smith,1 Anjana Kulkarni,2 Cecilie Rustad,3 Naomi L. Bowers,1 Andrew J. Wallace,1
Susan E. Holder,2 Arvid Heiberg,3 Richard T. Ramsden,1 and D. Gareth Evans1*
1Department of Genetic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre (MAHSC), University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK
2North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, NWLH NHS Trust, Harrow, UK
3Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway

Received 17 December 2010; Accepted 17 October 2011

Schwannomatosis is a recently delineated inherited condition
that has clinical overlap with neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2).
Diagnostic criteria have been developed to distinguish schwan-
nomatosis from NF2, but the existence of mosaic NF2, which may
closely mimic schwannomatosis, makes even these criteria prob-
lematic. In particular, it is not clear why there is a relative sparing
of the cranial nerves from schwannomas in schwannomatosis.
We have identiﬁed two individuals with schwannomatosis and a
unilateral vestibular schwannoma (VS), where a diagnosis of NF2
has been excluded. A third case with an identiﬁed SMARCB1
mutation was reported by two radiologists to have a VS, but this
was later conﬁrmed as a jugular schwannoma. These cases
question whether the current exclusion of a VS from the clinical
diagnosis of schwannomatosis is justiﬁed.
Ó 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Key words: vestibular schwannoma; schwannomatosis; NF2;
diagnostic criteria

INTRODUCTION

The tumor suppressor syndromes schwannomatosis and neuro-
ﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2) both predispose individuals to schwan-
nomas. Despite their phenotypic similarities, schwannomatosis has
been shown to be a distinct entity from NF2 [MacCollin et al., 2003],
mainly due to the absence of a vestibular schwannoma (VS).
Recently a proportion of schwannomatosis families and a minority
of sporadic schwannomatosis patients were shown to be due to
mutations in the SMARCB1 gene, which is centromeric to the NF2
gene on chromosome 22q [Hulsebos et al., 2007; Boyd et al., 2008;
Hadﬁeld et al., 2008; Sestini et al., 2008].

Almost all non-mosaic NF2 patients develop bilateral VS [Evans
et al., 1992], while current diagnostic criteria for schwannomatosis
speciﬁcally exclude the presence of schwannomas on vestibular
nerves [MacCollin et al., 2005]. However, mosaic NF2 patients,

How to Cite this Article:
Smith MJ, Kulkarni A, Rustad C, Bowers NL,
Wallace AJ, Holder SE, Heiberg A, Ramsden
RT, Evans DG. 2012. Vestibular
schwannomas occur in schwannomatosis and
should not be considered an exclusion
criterion for clinical diagnosis.
Am J Med Genet Part A 158A:215–219.

affected in only one portion of the body, may never develop VS and
may be confused with schwannomatosis if no NF2 mutation is
identiﬁed.

It is currently unclear why the cranial nerves are left relatively
unaffected by schwannomas in schwannomatosis. Here, we report
on two individuals with a positive clinical diagnosis of schwanno-
matosis who have also developed a unilateral VS. A third case with
deﬁnite schwannomatosis and a germline SMARCB1 mutation was
initially thought to have a VS. This questions the current thinking
that VS do not occur in schwannomatosis.

Grant sponsor: NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre.
MJ Smith, A Kulkarni, and C Rustad equally contributed to this work.
*Correspondence to:
D. Gareth Evans, M.D., FRCP, Department of Genetic Medicine
Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre (MAHSC), St Mary’s
Hospital University of Manchester Manchester M13 9WL.
E-mail: gareth.evans@cmft.nhs.uk
Published online 21 November 2011 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com).
DOI 10.1002/ajmg.a.34376

Ó 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

215

216

CLINICAL REPORTS
Patient 1

A 53-year-old man was seen with a history of subcutaneous and
spinal schwannomas and a unilateral VS. He presented at the age of
24 with shooting pains in his right arm. A subcutaneous tumor
affecting his right upper arm was surgically removed and conﬁrmed
on histology to be a schwannoma. At around age 32, he developed
shooting pains in his right leg. Subsequent investigations at Dus-
seldorf University clinic identiﬁed a spinal ‘‘neuroﬁbroma’’. This
was removed at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neuro-
surgery, London, the same year. Five years later, he developed
tinnitus in his right ear and a right VS was diagnosed by imaging.
This tumor was subsequently removed at the Stadt-Krankenhaus,
Hanover. This was a successful operation with no hearing impair-
ment, although he was left with a degree of persistent tinnitus. At age
43, he developed back pain due to nerve entrapment. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) showed a new spinal schwannoma in his
right conus region, which was removed at the National Hospital for
Neurology and Neurosurgery in 2001.

family. Notably, his

He was promptly referred to the genetics clinic for genetic
counseling in view of his history and the putative diagnosis of
NF2 in his
father had had a spinal
‘‘neuroﬁbroma’’ removed at the National Hospital for Neurology
and Neurosurgery at the age of 55, although the pathology report
clearly states ‘‘schwannoma’’. He was left with lower limb weakness
but did not have any spinal tumor recurrences. He also had a history
of subcutaneous lumps being removed from the face at 21 and 24
years of age, and from the upper right arm at 49 years of age. Surgery
for a subcutaneous lump in the left wrist at age 63 identiﬁed another
schwannoma. VS has not been diagnosed in this man at the age of
80. He is able to talk on the telephone and recently had whole body
MRI after a diagnosis of melanoma, and there were no cranial
tumors. The index patient’s paternal uncle and his two brothers also
had subcutaneous and spinal schwannomas, but none of these
family members had developed a VS at the ages of 76, 47, and 48.
One son of the affected uncle was found to have two thoracic
schwannomas at age 51, again with no VS or other intracranial
tumor. Our patient’s main concern at the time was regarding the
risk to his daughter and son, aged 5 years and 14 months, respec-
tively. On examination, the children did not have clinical signs of
the condition. Furthermore, his daughter had had a recent audio-
metry test, which was reported to be normal. Ophthalmological
assessment of the children and their father was arranged. No lens
opacities or fundus abnormalities were noted in either the father or
the children.

It was proposed that the family may have a diagnosis of schwan-
nomatosis rather than NF2. Previous linkage analysis using intra-
genic and ﬂanking markers showed tight linkage to the NF2 gene
[Evans et al., 1997]. However, full mutation analysis with sequenc-
ing and multiple ligation dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA)
did not identify any mutations. The SMARCB1 gene has also been
fully sequenced and undergone dosage analysis by MLPA, but no
abnormalities were found. To conﬁrm this result, fresh blood
samples were obtained from the patient for further mutation
analysis. Conﬁrmatory tumor tissue analysis could not be
performed.

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

Notably, the patient had no previous screening for his condition.
In line with guidance at the time, it was felt that he should have
regular surveillance for the development of recurrences or new
vestibular and spinal schwannomas. He was therefore referred to
the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery for annual
neurological review and craniospinal imaging every 3 years. Sub-
sequent MRI of his brain and spine showed no evidence of residual
or recurrent VS but showed three new spinal lesions; the ﬁrst lesion
was a rounded extra-medullary enhancing mass on the left, postero-
lateral to the cord at C4/5; a second small lesion posterior at the
conus and possibly related to the cauda equina at the level of L2;
and, a third slightly larger lesion related to the right L5 nerve root.
The appearances were in keeping with multiple schwannommas
although at the time our patient was free of symptoms other than
the known unchanged tinnitus in his right ear. He was therefore
kept under annual review by the neurosurgeons with no immediate
plans for surgical intervention.

He was reviewed in the genetics clinic in 2005, together with his
two children, aged 10 and 6 years. He remained clinically well, his
only new symptom of note being intermittent shooting pains in his

right hand. On examination, he had a ﬁrm 1 2 cm subcutaneous

mass in the right posterior triangle of his neck.

In 2006, repeat imaging demonstrated a tiny enhancing nodule
within the right internal acoustic meatus, thought to be recurrence
of his right VS. Furthermore, the spinal lesion at C4/5 had increased
in size and there was a T8/9 lesion not seen on the previous
study. The spinal schwannoma at C4/5 was removed in 2007
and subsequent spinal imaging in 2008 has shown no further
change in the multiple schwannomas affecting our patient’s
spine.

Patient 2
A 55-year-old man ﬁrst presented to the genetics clinic with a long
history of painful subcutaneous tumors in his right forearm. He ﬁrst
noticed the lumps aged 17 and the ﬁrst schwannoma was removed
from the right ulnar nerve at age of 18. The second schwannoma was
removed from the left middle ﬁnger at age 23. There then followed a
period of quiescence until the age of 53 when pain recurred around
the right wrist and hand. MRI scan showed several schwannomas
from the left elbow to wrist on the line of the ulnar nerve. Four
further schwannomas were removed at this time from the ulnar
nerve and one from the median nerve. Clinical examination at age
55 showed evidence of bilateral schwannomas along the ulnar
nerves but no other obvious cutaneous or subcutaneous tumors.
Ophthalmic examination showed no evidence of lens opacities on
slit lamp examination. An NF2 cranial MRI protocol was performed
with 3 mm cuts through the internal auditory meatuses with
gadolinium enhancement. A small left-sided intracanalicular VS
measuring about 10 mm in diameter was identiﬁed as well as a small
presumed schwannoma at T5 on spinal imaging. Five years later this
had grown to 17 mm and was already causing hearing loss. The
tumor was removed through a trans-labyrinthine approach and
noted to arise on the inferior vestibular nerve. Histology conﬁrmed
it to be a benign VS. Follow-up imaging at age 62 showed no
evidence of tumor recurrence, no right-sided VS and no other
intracranial tumors. The T5 spinal lesion had not grown in 8 years.

SMITH ET AL.

217

The patient had no family history of nerve related tumors. Initial
NF2 mutation analysis by direct sequencing on blood lymphocyte
DNA failed to identify a mutation. DNA from one of his peripheral
nerve schwannomas was examined for all 17 NF2 exons by single
strand conformation polymorphism analysis. Microsatellite anal-
ysis of the intragenic marker, NF2CA3, and ﬂanking marker,
NF2S275, showed no evidence of loss of heterozygosity (LOH).
Subsequently fresh tumor from the VS became available and
analysis of DNA extracted from this tumor identiﬁed a c.241-
2A > C splicing mutation in exon 3. This mutation was not present
in lymphocyte DNA or his previous schwannoma. Microsatellite
analysis showed signiﬁcant LOH at both markers, but dosage
analysis with MLPA showed no deletions in NF2. These results
are consistent with either mitotic recombination (MR) or loss of the
normal chromosome 22 with reduplication of the chromosome
carrying the NF2 mutation. Microarray analysis conﬁrmed that this
was due to MR [Hadﬁeld et al., 2010]. SMARCB1 mutation analysis
failed to identify a mutation.

Family 3
A male with a known family history of neurogenic tumors under-
went surgery for an intraspinal tumor at age 65. Histology deter-
mined the tumor to be a schwannoma. Cerebral MRI at the same age
was reported to show a unilateral right-sided VS measuring

13.5 14.5 16.5 mm in the cerebello-pontine angle (see Fig. 1).

He had previously undergone surgery for excision of a schwannoma
under the right coracoid process at age 43. In addition, at age 65, he
had multiple intraspinal lesions as well as right and left cauda equina
lesions. He has signiﬁcant pain in his left leg, but surgery has not
been advised thus far. His hearing was slightly reduced on the right
side. A second cranial MRI scan was also reported to show a VS, but
this had not grown.

presentation, aged 15, she had a 3-year history of progressive
fatigue, impaired balance, increasing headaches and emesis. Cranial
CT and subsequent MRI showed a large tumor in the right
cerebello-pontine angle and marked supratentorial hydrocephalus.
The tumor, which was partially excised, arose from the trigeminal
nerve. Histopathologically it was judged to be a schwannoma. Six
further schwannomas were identiﬁed in the following 13 years
including a further intracranial tumor close to the right optic nerve.
Her last cerebral MRI in 2007 (aged 28) showed no evidence of a VS,
nor has she developed symptoms suggestive of such a lesion.

Family history identiﬁed a sister who had two schwannomas
removed at age 26, one from her neck and one from her wrist.
Furthermore, her sister underwent surgery for a brain tumor at age
27. The pathologist concluded that histology was compatible with a
malignant tumor of neurogenic origin. She died at age 30 of
complications related to the brain tumor. Her other sibling, a
32-year-old brother, was healthy. The paternal grandmother had
a tumor, which was histologically reported to be a neurinoma,
removed from her throat at age 31, in 1950. She developed a brain
tumor, which was resected 6 years later. It has not been possible to
retrieve the histological report, but the national cancer registry
noted that the lesion was a ganglionic neurinoma. She died at age 42.
After the daughter visited the clinic in 2005 her father and
brother were offered surveillance based on the diagnosis of NF2.
A blood sample from the daughter was sent for NF2 gene testing,
but no mutation or LOH was detected. She was re-referred to the
clinic at age 31, as she was concerned that her 5-year-old son could
develop NF2. At this visit, schwannomatosis was suspected and
analysis of the SMARCB1 gene was requested. Sequence analysis in a
blood specimen identiﬁed a truncating mutation, c.34C > T
(p.Gln12X) in exon 1 of SMARCB1, conﬁrming the clinical suspi-
cion of schwannomatosis. The mutation was detected in blood from
the father, but not in the healthy brother.

His daughter, was given a presumptive diagnosis of NF2 when
she was ﬁrst seen in the genetics clinic in 2005, at age 26. At initial

Recent review of the right cerebello-pontine angle tumor, after
discovery of the SMARCB1 mutation in the father by the authors,

FIG. 1. a,b: Axial and coronal views of the right cerebello-pontine angle schwannoma in Patient 3.

218

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

has shown that this is more likely to be a jugular schwannoma with
extension of the tumor down the jugular foramen but not into the
internal auditory meatus.

In view of the concern over the potential mis-diagnosis of NF2 in
schwannomatosis cases with SMARCB1 mutations, we reviewed 34
patients with SMARCB1 mutation positive schwannomatosis in the
Manchester schwannomatosis database. Eight of these (23%) had
evidence of an intracranial tumor consistent with a schwannoma,
including all four members of Family 3. Five of these tumors arose in
the cerebello-pontine angle.

DISCUSSION

We describe three individuals with schwannomatosis whose diag-
noses were untenable due to the presence, or reported presence, of a
unilateral VS [MacCollin et al., 2005]. All three patients would have
been technically diagnosed as having NF2 due to the presence of a
unilateral VS and two or more additional schwannomas [Baser
et al., 2002]. However, for Patient 1 the absence of VS in ﬁve other
affected family members makes NF2 very unlikely and for Patient 2
an NF2 mutation has been excluded as the cause of his schwannoma
predisposition. For Patient 3, the presence of a pathogenic
SMARCB1 mutation conﬁrms deﬁnite schwannomatosis. Muta-
tion sensitivity in the second generation of NF2 families is 92%
[MacCollin et al., 2003], therefore in the families of Patients 1 and 3
a missed NF2 mutation would be very unlikely. Patients 1 and 2,
each with a deﬁnite VS, show a pattern of subcutaneous painful
peripheral nerve and spinal tumors typical of schwannomatosis.
Tumors from Patient 2 also show somatic inactivation of NF2 with
different NF2 mutations in each schwannoma [MacCollin et al.,
2003]. The presence of identical NF2 mutations would have con-
ﬁrmed mosaic NF2 [Murray et al., 2006]. It is of course possible that
all three patients had a ‘‘sporadic’’ VS and this was not caused by the
underlying schwannomatosis disease. Nonetheless, it seems likely
that, even with SMARCB1 mutations, there will be some excess of
VS above the 1 in 1,000 risk seen in the general population [Evans
et al., 2005]. In view of the long delay in a correct diagnosis in Family
3 caused by the cerebello-pontine angle tumor being reported as VS,
we have reviewed the presence of intracranial schwannoma and
found that 24% of 34 SMARCB1 mutation-positive schwannoma-
tosis patients had evidence suggestive of vestibular schwannoma.
Five of these tumors occurred in the cerebello-pontine angle and
many non-expert radiologists would presume these were vestibular
schwannomas. One of these was a tumor removed in the 1980s from
the IX cranial nerve, which presented as a large cerebello-pontine
angle tumor on CT scan and was, at that time, indistinguishable
from a VS. The four others were trigeminal schwannomas that
appeared in the cerebello-pontine angle with a further trigeminal in
the cavernous sinus. While we are now conﬁdent that Patient 3 does
not have a VS, his case illustrates that VS may be misdiagnosed in
schwannomatosis and therefore throw uncertainty on the diagno-
sis. While it is sensible to exclude VS in research criteria for
schwannomatosis, it is likely that this exclusion has deterred
clinicians from investigating whether patients with a unilateral
VS and other schwannomas may have schwannomatosis. Indeed,
the literature is likely to be biased against including VS amongst
schwannomatosis cases. We currently have these two conﬁrmed

cases with unilateral VS amongst 178 schwannomatosis patients on
our Manchester Schwannomatosis database. This is higher than
would be consistent with the chance of VS seen in the general
population. In addition, a further family containing three siblings
with multiple schwannomas and unilateral VS has not been shown
to be due to germline mutation of either the NF2 or the SMARCB1
gene. For the purpose of investigation of the underlying cause of
schwannoma development a unilateral VS should lead to tumor
analysis of the NF2 gene if possible and any identiﬁed NF2 mutation
should be conﬁrmed in a second tumor or in lymphocyte DNA.
Unless an identical NF2 mutation is found in more than one tumor
or in blood DNA then a diagnosis of NF2 cannot be certain. If the
family pattern is more consistent with schwannomatosis as for
Patient 1, or if a second tumor does not carry an identical mutation,
then schwannomatosis is the more likely diagnosis. Although
we have shown that VS can occur in cases of schwannomatosis,
further work is necessary to determine the risk of VS in both
SMARCB1 mutation-positive and SMARCB1 mutation-negative
schwannomatosis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank the patients and their families described in
this report. The Department of Genetic Medicine is supported by
the NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre. Ethics Appro-
val: The study was approved by the North West 7 Research Ethics
Committee–GM Central. Patient Consent: Informed consent was
obtained from patients for publication of their data in this report.

REFERENCES

Baser ME, Friedman JM, Wallace AJ, Ramsden RT, Joe H, Evans DG. 2002.
Evaluation of clinical diagnostic criteria for neuroﬁbromatosis 2. Neu-
rology 59:1759–1765.

Boyd C, Smith MJ, Kluwe L, Balogh A, Maccollin M, Plotkin SR. 2008.
Alterations in the SMARCB1 (INI1) tumor suppressor gene in familial
schwannomatosis. Clin Genet 74:358–366.

Evans DG, Huson SM, Donnai D, Neary W, Blair V, Newton V, Harris R.
1992. A clinical study of type 2 neuroﬁbromatosis. Q J Med 84:603–618.

Evans DG, Mason S, Huson SM, Ponder M, Harding AE, Strachan T. 1997.
Spinal and cutaneous schwannomatosis is a variant form of type 2
neuroﬁbromatosis: A clinical and molecular study. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry 62:361–366.

Evans DG, Moran A, King A, Saeed S, Gurusinghe N, Ramsden R. 2005.
Incidence of vestibular schwannoma and neuroﬁbromatosis 2 in the
North West of England over a 10-year period: Higher incidence than
previously thought. Otol Neurotol 26:93–97.

Hadﬁeld KD, Newman WG, Bowers NL, Wallace A, Bolger C, Colley A,
McCann E, Trump D, Prescott T, Evans DG. 2008. Molecular character-
isation of SMARCB1 and NF2 in familial and sporadic schwannomatosis.
J Med Genet 45:332–339.

Hadﬁeld KD, Smith MJ, Urquhart JE, Wallace AJ, Bowers NL, Trump D,
Newman WG, Evans DG. 2010. Differences in rates of
loss of
heterozygosity and mitotic recombination in NF2 schwannomas,
sporadic vestibular schwannomas and schwannomatosis schwannomas.
Oncogene. 29:6216–6221.

Hulsebos TJ, Plomp AS, Wolterman RA, Robanus-Maandag EC, Baas F,
Wesseling P. 2007. Germline mutation of INI1/SMARCB1 in familial
schwannomatosis. Am J Hum Genet 80:805–810.

SMITH ET AL.

219

MacCollin M, Willett C, Heinrich B, Jacoby LB, Acierno JS Jr, Perry A, Louis
DN. 2003. Familial schwannomatosis: Exclusion of the NF2 locus as the
germline event. Neurology 60:1968–1974.

MacCollin M, Chiocca EA, Evans DG, Friedman JM, Horvitz R, Jaramillo
D, Lev M, Mautner VF, Niimura M, Plotkin SR, Sang CN, Stemmer-
Rachamimov A, Roach ES. 2005. Diagnostic criteria for schwannoma-
tosis. Neurology 64:1838–1845.

Murray AJ, Hughes TA, Neal JW, Howard E, Evans DG, Harper PS. 2006.
A case of multiple cutaneous schwannomas; schwannomatosis or
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2? J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 77:269–
271.

Sestini R, Bacci C, Provenzano A, Genuardi M, Papi L. 2008. Evidence of a
four-hit mechanism involving SMARCB1 and NF2 in schwannomatosis-
associated schwannomas. Hum Mutat 29:227–231.

