Articles

NF1 plexiform neurofibroma growth

rate by volumetric MRI
Relationship to age and body weight

E. Dombi, MD; J. Solomon, PhD; A.J. Gillespie, RNMS; E. Fox, MD; F.M. Balis, MD; N. Patronas, MD;
B.R. Korf, MD, PhD; D. Babovic-Vuksanovic, MD; R.J. Packer, MD; J. Belasco, MD; S. Goldman, MD;

R. Jakacki, MD; M. Kieran, MD; S.M. Steinberg, PhD; and B.C. Widemann, MD

Abstract—Objective: To longitudinally analyze changes in plexiform neurofibroma (PN) volume in relation to age and
body growth in children and young adults with neurofibromatosis type 1 and inoperable, symptomatic, or progressive PNs,
using a sensitive, automated method of volumetric MRI analysis. Methods: We included patients 25 years of age and
younger with PNs entered in a natural history study or in treatment trials who had volumetric MRI over ⱖ16 months.
Results: We studied 49 patients (median age 8.3 years) with 61 PNs and a median evaluation period of 34 months (range
18 to 70). The PN growth rates varied among patients, but were constant within patients. Thirty-four patients (69%)
experienced ⱖ20% increase in PN volume during the observation period. PN volume increased more rapidly than body
weight over time (p ⫽ 0.026). Younger patients had the most rapid PN growth rate. Conclusions: Volume increase of
plexiform neurofibromas is a realistic and meaningful trial endpoint. In most patients plexiform neurofibroma growth rate
exceeded body growth rate. The youngest patients had the fastest plexiform neurofibroma growth rate, and clinical drug
development should be directed toward this population. Age stratification for clinical trials for plexiform neurofibromas
should be considered.
NEUROLOGY 2007;68:643–647

Plexiform neurofibromas (PNs) in individuals with
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) are a major source of
morbidity and, in some cases, undergo malignant
transformation.1-3 Surgery is the only standard treat-
ment for PNs, but complete resection is difficult due
to the large size and location of PNs, and regrowth of
PNs after surgery is common.4,5

PNs may present at birth, and growth has been
described as erratic.1 An ongoing natural history

Additional material related to this article can be found on the Neurology
Web site. Go to www.neurology.org and scroll down the Table of Con-
tents for the February 27 issue to find the title link for this article.

study of PNs in NF1 will provide data regarding the
longitudinal growth of PNs using volumetric MRI
analysis.1,6

Several agents have been evaluated in clinical tri-
als for PNs.7,8 The large size and complex shape of
PNs, the limited understanding of their natural his-
tory, and their slow growth rate compared to solid
cancers make quantitative evaluation of benefit from
medical interventions challenging. Standard one-
and two-dimensional solid tumor response criteria
have limited value in detecting small changes in the
size of PNs.9,10

Commentary, see page 627

This article was previously published in electronic format as an Expedited E-Pub on January 10, 2007, at www.neurology.org.
From the Pediatric Oncology Branch (E.D., A.J.G., E.F., F.M.B., B.C.W.), NCI, Bethesda, MD; Medical Numerics, Inc. (J.S.), Sterling, VA; Diagnostic
Radiology Department (N.P.), National Institutes of Health, Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD; University of Alabama at Birmingham (B.R.K.), Birmingham,
AL; Mayo Clinic (D.B.-V.), Rochester, MN; Children’s National Medical Center (R.J.P.), Washington, DC; Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (J.B.),
Philadelphia, PA; Children’s Memorial Hospital (S.G.), Chicago, IL; Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh (R.J.), Pittsburgh, PA; Dana Farber Cancer Institute
(M.K.), Boston, MA; and Biostatistics and Data Management Section (S.M.S.), CCR, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD.
This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research. This research was also
supported by the U.S. Army through three clinical trial awards: 1) natural history of plexiform neurofibromas in NF1, grant no. NF70002; 2) phase II
randomized, cross-over, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial of the farnesyltransferase inhibitor R115777 in pediatric patients with neurofibromatosis
type 1 and progressive plexiform neurofibromas, grant no. NF000027; 3) phase I/phase II study of pirfenidone in NF1 and plexiform neurofibromas, grant no.
NF010042.
Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of interest.
Received March 21, 2006. Accepted in final form July 21, 2006.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Eva Dombi, Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, 10 Center Drive, Building 10 CRC,
Room 1-5750, MSC 1101, Bethesda, MD 20892; e-mail: dombie@mail.nih.gov

Copyright © 2007 by AAN Enterprises, Inc. 643

Table 1 Equivalent percentage of change in diameter (RECIST),
product of perpendicular diameters (WHO), and volume for
spherical lesions (e.g., increasing the diameter of a sphere by 6%
results in a 20% increase in the volume)

Percentage of change in tumor size

RECIST
diameter (1D)

WHO

product (2D)

Ongoing NF1 studies

volume (3D)

6
12
20*

13
25*
44

20*
40
73

* The definition of progression according to the standard RECIST
and WHO criteria, and the definition for progression by volumet-
ric measurements used on several currently ongoing clinical tri-
als for NF1-related plexiform neurofibromas. The volumetric
method can more sensitively detect tumor progression.

RECIST ⫽ Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors;
WHO ⫽ World Health Organization; NF1 ⫽ neurofibromatosis
type 1; 1D ⫽ one-dimensional; 2D ⫽ two-dimensional; 3D ⫽
three-dimensional.

To more sensitively and reproducibly monitor the
growth of PNs as the primary endpoint in clinical
trials, we developed a method of automated volumet-
ric MRI analysis of PNs.11 This method has been
used at the National Cancer Institute to centrally
evaluate time to tumor progression in several multi-
center trials for patients with NF1 and PN. In these
trials, tumor progression is defined as a ⱖ20% in-
crease in PN volume, a change that cannot be reli-
ably detected with one-
two-dimensional
measurements (table 1). In this study, we sought to

or

describe the growth rate of PNs and to analyze the
relationship of tumor growth to age and body weight.

Methods.
Inclusion criteria. Patients who were enrolled in one
or more of several ongoing trials (table 2) were included in this
study if they had NF1 and a measurable PN (longest diameter ⱖ3
cm), were 25 years of age or younger at the time of the first
evaluation, had volumetric MRI analysis of their PNs at the Pedi-
atric Oncology Branch between September 1999 and December
2005, had been followed with repeated MRI scans for a period of at
least 16 months, and gave informed consent for serial MRI scans
when enrolled in a clinical trial (table 2).

Volumetric MRI method. Axial and coronal short T1 inversion
recovery (STIR) MR images were obtained to encompass the entire
PN using a slice thickness of 5 to 10 mm with no skips between
slices.6 MRIs were performed at baseline, and then every 3 to 6
months for patients in treatment studies and every 6 to 24 months
for patients in the NF1 natural history study. PN volume was
determined as previously described using the MEDx software
platform.11 This method, which differs from the method used to
measure PN volume in the current ongoing natural history study,
is based on 1) contrast, defined by intensity in the tumor (high
signal intensity) compared to the surrounding tissue (low signal
intensity); 2) intensity gradient, defining the outside border (mar-
gin) of the lesion; and 3) size of the lesion. PNs are substantial in
size, and small isolated areas of high signal intensity can be
ignored because their contribution to the PN volume is insignifi-
cant. The steps of volumetric analysis are outlined in figure 1.
This automated method is sensitive (detects volume changes as
small as 10%) and reproducible (coefficient of variation 0.6 to
5.6%), and yields results similar to those of manual tumor trac-
ings (R ⫽ 0.999).11

When automated volume measurement was not feasible, the
reason was recorded and manual tumor tracings using the draw-
ing tool of the MEDx software were used to define tumor volume
as previously described.11

Data collection. At each evaluation, patient age (years),
weight (kilograms), and tumor volume (milliliters) assessed by
automated or, if not applicable, manual volumetric MRI analysis
as described above were recorded.

Table 2 Use of automated volumetric (three-dimensional) MRI analysis of plexiform neurofibromas (PNs) in children and young adults
with neurofibromatosis type 1 enrolled in multi-institutional clinical trials

Agent

Trial design

Eligibility for PN

Age, y

Trial endpoints

No.*

PI/trial status

Tipifarnib

Phase I

Inoperable

2–18

MTD,

3

F. Balis/completed

Tipifarnib/placebo† Phase II, double-
blind, placebo-
controlled, crossover

Inoperable,

progressive‡

pharmacokinetics

3–25

Time to progression§

32

B. Widemann/ongoing

Pirfenidone†

Phase I

Inoperable

3–21

MTD,

Pirfenidone†

Phase II

Peg-interferon

alfa-2b†

Phase I

Inoperable,

progressive‡

Inoperable,

progessive, or
symptomatic

pharmacokinetics
Time to progession§

3–21

10

10

R. Packer/completed

R. Packer/ongoing

1.5–21 MTD

2

R. Jakacki/ongoing

—

Natural history

No current medical

No limits Growth rate of PNs

17

B. Korf/ongoing

treatment for
PNs

* Of 49 patients included in this report, 31 participated in one, 11 in two, and seven in three trials.
† Centralized volumetric MRI analysis of PNs from all patients is performed at the National Cancer Institute Pediatric Oncology

Branch.

‡ Defined as ⱖ20% in three-dimensional, ⱖ13% in two-dimensional, or ⱖ6% in one-dimensional tumor measurements within approxi-

mately 1 year of trial entry or between the last two consecutive MRI studies.

§ Progression defined as ⱖ20% in tumor volume compared to baseline MRI.

MTD ⫽ maximum tolerated dose.

644 NEUROLOGY 68 February 27, 2007

and some low signal intensity surrounding tissue is manually outlined on each MRI slice. (B) The program derives a his-
togram of pixel signal intensity and identifies a threshold that separates the PN from surrounding tissue. (C) The pro-
gram automatically defines the tumor contour.

Figure 1. Steps of automated volumetric
MRI analysis of plexiform neurofibro-
mas (PNs): (A) Original axial short T1
inversion recovery MRI of a neck PN.
The PN appears bright vs normal sur-
rounding tissue. During the analysis, a
region of interest including the tumor

Data analysis. PN volumes were calculated in milliliters. For
patients who had more than one PN imaged, the volumes of the
individual tumors were summed to obtain a total tumor volume
and only time points with complete data were included. Tumor
volume (milliliters) was converted to tumor weight (grams) using
a density of one (1,000 mL ⫽ 1 kg). Changes in tumor volume,
body weight, and tumor weight expressed as a percentage of body
weight over time were calculated. PN growth and body growth
rates were expressed as the percentage of change in tumor volume
and body weight per year.

We performed two analyses to explore the relationship be-
tween tumor growth rate and increase in body weight of patients
over time. 1) For each patient, tumor weight expressed as a per-
centage of body weight was plotted as a function of time since the
initial MRI was performed. The resulting individual patient
slopes, which were determined by linear regression, would be esti-
mates of the change in tumor weight as a percentage of body
weight. These slopes would be positive if the percentage of body
weight made up of tumor were increasing over time and negative
if the percentage of body weight made up of tumor were decreas-
ing over time. The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to deter-
mine whether there was a significant change in tumor weight as a
percentage of body weight over time. If these slopes were centered
on zero, this would indicate that there was no overall change over
time in the percentage of body weight made up of tumor. 2) For
each patient, linear regression was used to obtain the slopes for
the percentage of change in tumor volume and percentage of
change in body weight as a function of time since the initial MRI.
If the percentage of change in tumor volume and body weight
changed at the same rate, the ratio of the slopes would equal 1.
The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to determine whether the
ratio centered around 1.

To analyze the relationship of age to PN growth rate and body
growth rate, the percentage of change in tumor volume and the
percentage of change in body weight per year were each plotted
against the patient age. The relationship between PN growth rate
and age was well described by fitting an exponential equation.

Finally, the Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to compare PN
volume increase per year in children younger and older than the
median age (8.3 years) at study entry.

All p values are two tailed.

Results. Patient characteristics. Fifty-six patients with
NF1 and PNs had been followed with MRI for at least 16
months. We were unable to evaluate seven of the 56 pa-
tients in this study because of incomplete MRIs or incon-
sistent MRI coverage of the PN preventing longitudinal
volumetric analysis (n ⫽ 4) or debulking surgery to the PN
(n ⫽ 3). One of the seven unasssessable patients also had
evidence of a growing lesion within a stable PN. This
raised suspicion of malignant degeneration, and the lesion
was subsequently confirmed at surgery to be a low-grade
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor. Thus, 49 pa-
tients with 61 PNs were included in this study. Eight
patients had two and two patients had three PNs.

The median (range) age of the 49 evaluated patients
was 8.3 years (3.3 to 25 years), 30 were male, and 19 were
female. The diagnosis of NF1 in these patients was based
on fulfilling the NIH Consensus Criteria.12 Thirty-seven of
these patients who had large, symptomatic PNs were eval-

uated at the National Cancer Institute Pediatric Oncology
Branch. Twenty-eight (57%) of the 49 evaluated patients
had measurable PN progression as defined in table 2
within 1 year prior to their first evaluation, as required by
the clinical trial eligibility criteria. Patients were evalu-
ated as part of their participation on the clinical trials
outlined in table 2. In addition, two patients received
treatment with thalidomide, not as part of a clinical
protocol.

Volumetric MRI analysis. The median duration of
follow-up with MRI was 34 months (range 18 to 70
months), the median number of MRI evaluations per pa-
tient was seven (range 2 to 14), and the median interval
between MRI studies was 3.9 months (range 0.6 to 35.3
months). A total of 373 MRI studies were analyzed in the
49 evaluated patients. Automated volumetric MRI analysis
was not feasible for eight patients due to artifacts result-
ing from spinal metal implants (n ⫽ 4) and lack of contrast
between tumor and surrounding nontumor tissue (n ⫽ 4).
For these patients, manual volume determinations were
performed.

PN volumes expressed in milliliters and as a percentage
of body weight at the start and end of the longitudinal
observation period by patient, by PN, and by location of
the PN are shown in tables E-1 and E-2 on the Neurology
Web site at www.neurology.org. Tumor burden was sub-
stantial in most patients (median PN volume at baseline
471 mL) and extreme in some patients, reaching up to 21%
of body weight at baseline evaluation.

The growth of PNs over time in this longitudinal study
was well documented using the volumetric MRI method.
Overall, the PN volume increased by a median of 14.3%
per year (table E-1), but this rate varied widely among
patients (⫺3.1 to 68.3% per year). Over the course of the
longitudinal observation period, PN volume increased by
as much as 218%. There was no relationship between the
PN growth rate and the site of the PN or the volume of the
PN at baseline. Ten patients had more than one PN (table
E-3). Among eight patients with two PNs, the median PN
growth rate per year of the slower growing PN was 11.8%
(range ⫺3.6 to 63.6%), and the rate of the more rapidly
growing PN was 25% (range 7.7 to 70.9%). In two patients
with three PNs each, the PN growth rates per year ranged
from 16 to 72% for Patient 9 and 12.9 to 18.4% for Patient
10 (table E-3).

Relationship of PN growth rate and changes in body
weight. The percentage of change in tumor volume and
body weight over time for the 49 evaluated patients is
shown in table E-1 and figure 2A and B. During the evalu-
ation period, 34 (69%) patients experienced ⱖ20% increase
in PN volume, and 15 patients had less change in PN
volume. The rate of PN growth varied among patients but
February 27, 2007 NEUROLOGY 68 645

Figure 2. Percentage of change in plexiform neurofibroma
(PN) volume (A) and body weight (B) over time in 49 pa-
tients with neurofibromatosis type 1 and PN.

appeared to be constant within patients. Erratic PN
growth was not observed during the evaluation periods
(figure 2A). Similarly, body growth appeared to be con-
stant within most patients. The percentage of increase in
body weight during the evaluation period was less than
the percentage of increase in PN volume (table E-1, figure
2A and B).

The slopes resulting from the linear regression analysis
of change in PN volume as a percentage of body weight
over time were positive in 34 patients and negative in 15,
indicating that PNs represented a greater proportion of
body weight over time in most patients. The Wilcoxon
signed rank test on the actual slopes had a two-tailed p
value of 0.0015, indicating a tendency for PN volume
(weight) to increase faster than body weight (and thus to
represent a greater percentage of body weight) over time.
The relationship between the slopes representing the
rate of PN growth and the rate of increase in body weight
per year is shown in figure 3A. If the rate of PN growth
equals the rate of increase in body weight, points will fall
on the 45-degree line and the ratio of the slopes centers
around 1. Thirty-three of the 49 patients (67%) had values
above the 45-degree line, indicating that the PN volume
increased more rapidly than the body weight. The Wil-
coxon signed rank test of whether the slopes had a ratio
that was equal to 1 had a two-tailed p value of 0.026. Thus,
there was a tendency for the percentage of change in tu-
mor volume over time to increase faster than the percent-
age of change in body weight over time in this population
of patients, most of whom were selected for clinical trials
based on demonstrated PN growth prior to enrollment.

Relationship of PN growth rate and age. The relation-
ship between age and PN growth rate per year is shown in
figure 3B. Younger children had a more rapid PN growth
rate (percentage of change in PN volume per year) (R 2 ⫽

0.4), and in a subset of these patients, the PN volume
increase per year exceeded 20%. For the ongoing clinical
trials in patients with NF1 and progressive PNs, disease
progression is defined as a 20% increase in PN volume
from baseline. In the group of 49 evaluated subjects, there
was also a tendency for patients younger than the median
age of 8.3 years to have a greater increase in PN volume
per year (median percentage of change per year 21.1%) vs
older children (median percentage of change per year 8.4%,
p ⫽ 0.0010 by the two-tailed Wilcoxon rank sum test). In
contrast, the percentage of increase in body weight per
year did not appear to be greater for very young children
(figure 3C), but young adults, as expected, showed no in-
crease in body weight over time. When PN growth rate is
expressed relative to the rate of increase in body weight,
PN growth still appears to be more rapid in younger chil-
dren. Seventy-six percent (19/25) of children 8.3 years of
age or younger had PN growth rate to the rate of increase
in body weight ratios ⬎1 vs 58% (14/24) of patients older
than 8.3 years, indicating that most young children had a
PN growth rate exceeding the body growth rate.

Discussion. The clinical development of medical
treatments for individuals with NF1 and PNs will
depend on accurate measurement of the change in
size of the PN over time to assess the effect of new
treatments. However, the limited understanding of
the natural history of PNs, their often large and
complex shape, and relatively slow growth rate con-
found the accurate measurement of PNs. The natu-
ral history of PNs in NF1 is currently under study in
a clinical trial,5,6 and, as shown here, reproducible
volumetric MRI methods for measuring PNs have
been developed.6,11 In addition, based on the expand-
ing knowledge of the biology of PNs,5 several novel
targeted agents, which are under development for
cancers and other diseases, have been identified as
rationale agents for clinical evaluation in NF1, and
these evolving imaging methods will likely serve as
an important outcome measure in the clinical trials
of new targeted agents.5,13

Our longitudinal study of volumetric MRI in pa-
tients with progressing PNs documents the variation
in size and growth rate of PNs among patients, al-
though some of this variability in growth rate could
have been related to treatment effects in patients on
one of several clinical trials. The PN growth rate

Figure 3. Relationship between the
slopes for percentage of change in plexi-
form neurofibroma (PN) volume and
percentage of change in body weight per
year (A). Values above the 45-degree
line represent ratios of the percentage of
change in PN volume to the percentage
of change in body weight that are ⬎1.
Closed symbols represent patients who
are of or younger than the median age
(8.3 years) at study entry, and open

symbols represent patients who are older than 8.3 years. Percentage of change in PN volume (B) and body weight (C) per
year as a function of patient age at baseline. The shaded area indicates the 20% change in PN volume required for docu-
mentation of disease progression in ongoing clinical trials. The line in B represents an exponential fit to the data.
646 NEUROLOGY 68 February 27, 2007

within each patient was constant rather than er-
ratic, as previously thought.1 However, the relatively
short evaluation period (median 34 months) and the
inclusion of predominantly young patients with
symptomatic or progressive PNs limit this observa-
tion, and longitudinal volumetric analysis over more
prolonged time periods is required to detect changes
in PN growth rate as a result of hormonal or other
influences.

This automated volumetric MRI analysis11 was
applicable to most PNs, and measurable growth of
PNs could be detected in a substantial subset (69%)
of patients within 1 year of the first evaluation. Vol-
ume increase of PNs therefore is a realistic and
meaningful trial endpoint for patients with symp-
tomatic or progressive PNs. However, longitudinal
volumetric analysis is only possible if the entire PN
is covered by the MRI study and if the same image
acquisition protocol including STIR images is used
consistently.

PN growth rate exceeded the rate of increase in
body weight in most patients. The clinical impres-
sion that PNs grow faster in young children was
confirmed in our study. We observed the most rapid
PN growth rates in the youngest patients. The me-
dian age of patients at time of the first evaluation
was 8.3 years (range 3.3 to 25 years), indicating that
PNs become symptomatic or demonstrate progres-
sion at a young age, and the lower age limit of 3
years for participation in three of the clinical trials
from which patients on this study came limited par-
ticipation of even younger children. If effective, new
treatments are more likely to prevent the growth of
PNs rather than to reduce their size. Therefore,
treatments are likely to be most effective if adminis-
tered at the time of most rapid PN growth in young
patients, and clinical drug development should be
directed toward this population. In addition, based
on the observation of more rapid PN growth rate in
young children, consideration should be given to age
stratification at trial entry in clinical trials for PNs.
In addition to documenting the natural history of
PN growth and to serving as the primary outcome
measure in clinical trials of new treatments for PNs,
longitudinal volumetric analysis may also be useful
for the detection of degeneration of PNs into malig-
nant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Identifying a
change in PN growth rate or a growth rate that
significantly exceeds the growth rates demonstrated
here or by identifying significant growth of a compo-

nent within an otherwise stable PN may be potential
indicators for malignant degeneration.

Progressive, symptomatic PNs in patients with
NF1 are relatively uncommon, and randomized,
placebo-controlled trials, such as the tipifarnib study
described in table 2, may not always be feasible.
Depending on the outcome of the ongoing clinical
trials from which patients in this study were drawn,
the data presented here may serve as a useful histor-
ical control population for future trials using volu-
metric MRI as the primary outcome measure.

Finally, it should be emphasized that the subjects
in this analysis are a heterogeneous group, with sub-
jects treated in several protocols with unknown ef-
fects on the natural history of PNs in NF1, including
tipifarnib/placebo, pirfenidone, observation (natural
history), or a combination of these. Thus, because of
the heterogeneity and the fact that for patients in
the randomized tipifarnib trial, their treatment as-
signment is still blinded, the results must be viewed
somewhat cautiously and will require confirmation
in a larger, more homogeneous group of patients be-
fore considering the results definitive.

References
1. Korf B. Plexiform neurofibromas. Am J Med Genet 1999;89:31–37.
2. Korf BR. Malignancy in neurofibromatosis type 1. Oncologist 2000;5:

477–485.

3. Evans DG, Baser ME, McGaughran J, Sharif S, Howard E, Moran A.
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours in neurofibromatosis 1. J
Med Genet 2002;39:311–314.

4. Needle MN, Cnaan A, Dattilo J, et al. Prognostic signs in the surgical
management of plexiform neurofibroma: the Children’s Hospital of Phil-
adelphia experience, 1974–1994. J Pediatr 1997;131:678–682.

5. Packer RJ, Gutmann DH, Rubenstein A, et al. Plexiform neurofibromas
in NF1: toward biologic-based therapy. Neurology 2002;58:1461–1470.
6. Poussaint TY, Jaramillo D, Chang Y, Korf B. Interobserver reproduc-
ibility of volumetric MR imaging measurements of plexiform neurofi-
bromas. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2003;180:419–423.

7. Gupta A, Cohen BH, Ruggieri P, Packer RJ, Phillips PC. Phase I study
of thalidomide for the treatment of plexiform neurofibroma in neurofi-
bromatosis 1. Neurology 2003;60:130–132.

8. Widemann BC, Salzer WL, Arceci RJ, et al. Phase I trial and pharma-
cokinetic study of the farnesyltransferase inhibitor tipifarnib in chil-
dren with refractory solid tumors or neurofibromatosis type I and
plexiform neurofibromas. J Clin Oncol 2006;24:507–516.

9. Therasse P, Arbuck S, Eisenhauer E, et al. New guidelines to evaluate
the response to treatment in solid tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;92:
205–216.

10. Miller AB, Hoogstraten B, Staquet M, Winkler A. Reporting results of

cancer treatment. Cancer 1981;47:207–214.

11. Solomon J, Warren K, Dombi E, Patronas N, Widemann B. Automated
detection and volume measurement of plexiform neurofibromas in neu-
rofibromatosis 1 using magnetic resonance imaging. Comput Med Im-
aging Graph 2004;28:257–265.

12. National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference
Statement: neurofibromatosis. Bethesda, Md., USA, July 13–15, 1987.
Neurofibromatosis 1988;1:172–178.

13. Widemann BC. Merlin PAKs a punch. Cancer J 2004;10:8–11.

February 27, 2007 NEUROLOGY 68 647

