Neurocognitive outcomes in
neurofibromatosis clinical trials
Recommendations for the domain of attention

Karin S. Walsh, PsyD
Jennifer Janusz, PsyD
Pamela L. Wolters, PhD
Staci Martin, PhD
Bonita P. Klein-Tasman,

PhD

Mary Anne Toledo-

Tamula, MA

Heather L. Thompson,

PhD, CCC-SLP
Jonathan M. Payne,

DPsych

Kristina K. Hardy
Peter de Blank, MD,

MSCE

Claire Semerjian, MA
Laura Schaffner Gray,

MPhil

Sondra E. Solomon,

PhD†

Nicole Ullrich, MD
For the REiNS
International
Collaboration

Correspondence to
Dr. Walsh:
kwalsh@childrensnational.org

Supplemental data
at Neurology.org

ABSTRACT
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is associated with neurocognitive deficits that can impact every-
day functioning of children, adolescents, and adults with this disease. However, there is little
agreement regarding measures to use as cognitive endpoints in clinical trials. This article de-
scribes the work of the Neurocognitive Committee of the Response Evaluation in Neurofibroma-
tosis and Schwannomatosis (REiNS) International Collaboration. The goal of this committee is to
identify standardized and specific cognitive assessment tools for use in NF clinical trials. The
committee first identified cognitive domains relevant to NF1 and prioritized attention as the first
domain of focus given prior and current trends in NF1 cognitive clinical trials. Performance meas-
ures and behavioral rating questionnaires of attention were reviewed by the group using estab-
lished criteria to assess patient characteristics, psychometric properties, and feasibility. The
highest rated tests underwent side-by-side comparison. The Digit Span subtest from the Wechsler
scales was given the highest ratings of the performance measures due to its good psychometrics,
feasibility, utility across a wide age range, and extensive use in previous research. The Conners
scales achieved the highest ratings of the behavioral questionnaires for similar reasons. Future
articles will focus on other cognitive domains, with the ultimate goal of achieving agreement for
cognitive endpoints that can be used across NF clinical trials. Neurology® 2016;87 (Suppl 1):S21–S30

GLOSSARY
ADHD-RS 5 ADHD Rating Scale; CAARS 5 Conners Adult ADHD Rating Scale; COA 5 clinical outcome assessment; DS 5
Digit Span; FDA 5 Food and Drug Administration; FSIQ 5 full-scale IQ; MATRICS 5 Measurement and Treatment Research
to Improve Cognition in Schizophrenia; NF1 5 neurofibromatosis type 1; ObsRO 5 observer-reported outcome; PerfO 5
performance outcome; REiNS 5 Response Evaluation in Neurofibromatosis and Schwannomatosis; TEA 5 Test of Everyday
Attention; TEA-Ch 5 Test of Everyday Attention for Children.

Neurocognitive sequelae in neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) have been well-documented and
result in significant morbidity and dysfunction in children, adolescents, and adults with the dis-
ease.1–7 Research has documented phenotypic patterns of cognitive dysfunction in NF1, as well
as the functional impact these deficits have on individuals in naturalistic settings such as school
and work.8–11

Despite the high prevalence and significant morbidity of cognitive impairments, few interven-
tion trials have targeted cognitive dysfunction as a primary endpoint. It is vital to establish stand-
ards to evaluate therapies for the treatment of cognitive deficits, and to work towards acceptance of
cognition as a therapeutic target. Behavioral interventions to prevent or remediate cognitive def-
icits would benefit from consensus on cognitive endpoints as well. With these goals in mind, the
Response Evaluation in Neurofibromatosis and Schwannomatosis (REiNS) Neurocognitive Sub-
committee was formed to identify standardized, specific cognitive endpoints for clinical trials.

While human clinical trials targeting cognition in NF1 have been relatively slow to emerge,
murine models of cognitive dysfunction have been ongoing since the original work of Silva

†Deceased.
From the Children’s National Health System (K.S.W., K.K.H.), The George Washington School of Medicine, Washington, DC; Children’s
Hospital Colorado (J.J.), University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora; Pediatric Oncology Branch (P.L.W., S.M.), National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD; University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee (B.P.K.-T.); Clinical Research Directorate/Clinical Monitoring Research Program
(M.A.T.-T.), Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., NCI at Frederick, MD; California State University (H.L.T.), Sacramento; Murdoch Children’s
Research Institute (J.M.P.), Victoria, Australia; Rainbow Babies & Children’s Hospital (P.d.B.), Cleveland, OH; Roosevelt University (C.S.),
Chicago, IL; Boston Children’s Hospital (L.S.G., N.U.), MA; and University of Vermont (S.E.S.), Burlington.
REiNS International Collaboration members are listed on the Neurology® Web site at Neurology.org.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

© 2016 American Academy of Neurology

S21

et al.12 Animal models have provided guidance
in the development of clinical trials, providing
pathway level hypotheses for translation to
human trials.13 However, the translation from
mouse behavior to human cognitive models
has been challenging due to the range and
complexity of human cognition and the lack
of consensus regarding how best to measure
cognition for clinical trials endpoints.

The diversity of approaches to measure-
ment of cognitive outcomes is illustrated when
reviewing the cognitive clinical trials that have
been completed or are ongoing. As of 2016,
there have been 9 clinical
trials targeting
cognitive outcomes in NF1, each employing
a different battery of cognitive tests despite
targeting the same primary constructs of atten-
tion, working memory, visual memory, intelli-
gence, and emotional/behavioral functioning
(table 1). The lack of evaluative and analytic
consistency and standards significantly hinders
our ability to adequately assess therapeutic effi-
cacy, to combine smaller samples to yield
higher power to detect effects, and limits the
generalizability of findings.

Other disease groups have developed consen-
sus and standards for evaluating cognitive out-
comes to support the development of new
therapies.14,15 Perhaps the most successful work
in this area has been the work of the Measure-
ment and Treatment Research to Improve
Cognition in Schizophrenia (MATRICS) col-
laboration.15–17 The MATRICS group posited
that the lack of approved treatments for cogni-
tive dysfunction in schizophrenia was directly
related to the use of diverse assessment ap-
proaches across clinical trials. This problem sig-
nificantly limited the ability to adequately
evaluate a drug’s effectiveness in treating cogni-
tive deficits, especially for governmental organ-
izations tasked with oversight.15 The MATRICS
group identified specific criteria critical
for
determining appropriate assessment tools for
endpoints in clinical trials of schizophrenia,
including (1) good test-retest reliability, (2) high
utility for repeated assessment, (3) a relationship
with functional outcomes, (4) sensitivity to
a pharmacologic agent, and (5) practicality.15
Co–primary endpoints that assess the impact
of cognitive functioning on everyday living
skills were also emphasized. These measures

complement the primary outcome of cognitive
performance and provide essential evidence of
therapeutic utility.

Following the example of other disease-
specific groups, this article is the first of its kind
to provide recommendations for cognitive out-
comes for clinical trials in NF1. This will sup-
port the promotion of cognition as a target for
interventions in NF1 and encourage the devel-
opment of novel compounds and behavioral
therapies targeting these impairments.

CONSIDERATIONS AND CHALLENGES There are
challenges associated with efficiently and effectively
developing a standardized cognitive test battery for
use in clinical trials. First, there are many cognitive do-
mains that could conceivably be appropriate for clinical
trials endpoints and within many of these domains are
subdomains of skills, each of which has the potential to
be a specific therapeutic target (table 2). For example,
full-scale IQ (FSIQ) is composed of multiple distinct
functional
and nonverbal
reasoning, working memory/attention, and processing
speed. Given the multifactorial nature of intellect,
global measures such as FSIQ will
likely lack the
sensitivity to be ideal primary endpoints, particularly
when there are discrepancies between the various
functions assessed, as is common in NF1.

including verbal

areas

Second, many tests are available to assess each cog-
nitive domain. Each test varies in its reliability and
validity for specific populations, as well as its feasibil-
ity for use in clinical trials, including use for shorter
test-retest periods. Developmental factors are another
significant challenge for cognitive researchers. Few cog-
nitive tests or symptom checklists are intended to span
broad age ranges, with most meant for specific use
with preschoolers, school-age children/adolescents, or
adults. It will be important to include young children
in clinical trials; however, preschool measures are
sparse compared to those available for other age ranges,
and will require careful consideration. Finally, there is
virtually no literature about cognitive effects of aging in
NF1, such that it is unclear which measures are most
effective at characterizing cognitive functioning in old-
er adulthood. Based on these considerations, we prior-
itized the domain of attention, a highly prevalent
problem in NF1, which has been evaluated in recent
or ongoing clinical and preclinical trials. Further, the
current work will focus on school-aged children ($6
years) through adults. We will review and make rec-
ommendations for the preschool age group, as well as
offer methodologic and statistical approaches to longi-
tudinal designs across age groups (e.g., preschool into
school age, and school age into adulthood), in future
publications.

S22

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Table 1

Clinical trials targeting cognitive outcomes in neurofibromatosis type 1

Study
referencea

Intervention/design

Primary construct of interest
and outcome measures

Other outcome measures

Results

Methylphenidate (single-arm)

Simvastatin (randomized
placebo controlled)

No.

93

62

Attention: TOVA; CBCL

Not applicable

Long-term visual memory: RCFT
(Delayed Recall); attention:
Cancellation Test (speed)

RCFT (Copy); Cancellation Test
(SD); Stroop; Block Design;
Object Assembly; VMI; JLO

JLO; Grooved Pegboard

Significant improvement on TOVA
and improvement after 1 year on
CBCL

No significant improvement
following treatment with the
exception of object assembly
(specifically in the group with lower
baseline functioning on the task)

Some improvements in memory with
13%–39% exceeding base rate
change (80% CI) from pretreatment
to posttreatment evaluation,
indicative of clinically meaningful
change following treatment for at
least this subgroup of participants

No results published or presented

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

27

41

Single-arm lovastatin (phase I/II;
on treatment 3 months)

24

Methylphenidate (placebo-
controlled)

Randomized placebo-controlled
simvastatin (on treatment
12 months)

80

84

Short- and long-term visual and verbal
memory: WRAML-2 (Story, Design, and
Picture Memory), CVMT, CVLT-C;
attention: TEA-Ch (Score!, Sky Search,
Sky Search Dual Task, Creature
Counting)

Psychological: STAI-C; CDI

Global functioning/intelligence: WISC-
III-NL (full-scale intelligence); attention
and emotional: CBCL (Attention
Problems and Internalizing Problems
scales)

RCFT (Delayed Recall); Stroop;
Grooved Pegboard; TRF; YSR;
CHQ (Parent)

No significant improvement
following treatment

Methylphenidate (placebo-
controlled, crossover)

39

Attention: CPRS-3

CTRS-3

Lovastatin (placebo-controlled)

44

Nonverbal declarative memory: BVMT;
working memory: Letter-Number
Sequencing

Digit Cancellation; HVLT;
WISC-III Object Assembly;
CBCL/YASR

Randomized placebo-controlled
lovastatin (STARS)

146

Visual working memory: CANTAB
(Paired Associates Learning);
attention: TEA-Ch (Score!)

CANTAB (Spatial Working
Memory, Stockings of
Cambridge, Stop Signal Task,
Motor); TEA-Ch (Sky Search,
Sky Search Dual Task, Creature
Counting); JLO; WISC-III (Object
Assembly); CPT-II; COWAT

Significant improvement in
symptoms on CPRS

Significant improvement on Letter-
Number Sequencing, HVLT, and
categorical verbal generation;
significant improvement in adult
patients on internalizing symptoms;
all other primary and secondary
outcomes not significant

Results pending

Lamotrigine (randomized
placebo-controlled)

Active Intellectual: WISC-III (performance IQ) WISC-III (full IQ); SA-Dots;

BRIEF; ADHD Questionnaire;
PAL (CANTAB); VMI-6; MVPT-3;
Grooved Pegboard

Active

Abbreviations: ADHD 5 attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; BRIEF 5 Behavior Rating Inventory for Executive Function; BVMT 5 Brief Visuospatial
Memory Test–Revised; CANTAB 5 Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery; CBCL 5 Child Behavior Checklist; CDI 5 Children’s Depression
Inventory; CHQ 5 Child Health Questionnaire; CI 5 confidence interval; COWAT 5 Controlled Oral Word Association Test; CPRS/CTRS 5 Conners’ Parent
Rating Scale/Conners’ Teacher Rating Scale; CPT-II 5 Conners Continuous Performance Test, Second Edition; CVLT-C 5 California Verbal Learning Test
for Children; CVMT 5 Continuous Visual Memory Test; HVLT 5 Hopkins Verbal Learning Test; JLO 5 Judgment of Line Orientation; MVPT-3 5 Motor-Free
Visual Perception Test, Third Edition; PAL 5 Paired Associative Learning; RCFT 5 Rey Complex Figure Test; SA-Dots 5 Sustained Attention Dots of the
Amsterdam Neuropsychological Tasks; STAI-C 5 State Trait Anxiety Inventory for Children; STARS 5 A Randomized Placebo-Controlled Study of Lova-
statin in Children With Neurofibromatosis Type 1; TEA-Ch 5 Test of Everyday Attention for Children; TOVA 5 Test of Variables of Attention; TRF 5
Teacher Report Form; VMI 5 Beery Test of Visual-Motor Precision; WISC 5 Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children; WRAML 5 Wide Range Assessment of
Memory and Learning, Second Edition; YSR/YASR 5 Youth Self-Report/Young Adult Self Report.
a Literature search included PubMed and Clinicaltrials.gov.

METHODS Goals of
the REiNS Neurocognitive
Committee. The goals of this working group are to (1) critically
and scientifically review standardized cognitive assessment tools
for use in NF1 clinical trials, (2) provide recommendations
for a core test bank of neurocognitive measures across cognitive
domains to be utilized in NF1 clinical trials to enhance consis-
tency across trials and sites, and (3) function as a resource for re-
searchers in the development of cognitive protocols. By providing
this guidance, we hope to support the development and evalua-
tion of novel therapeutics for the treatment of cognitive deficits
in children and adults with NF1.

Food and Drug Administration (FDA) clinical outcome
assessment (COA). To select clinically useful cognitive endpoints,

we have been guided by recommendations regarding COAs.18 These
COAs must be appropriately defined and reliable for the evaluation
of a specific condition of interest in a specific context of use, based on
available evidence. Qualification as a COA indicates that a tool can
be relied upon to measure a distinct concept and have a specific
interpretation and application in drug development. The FDA has
deemed 2 areas of specific relevance: performance outcome (PerfO)
and observer-reported outcome (ObsRO) assessments. PerfO fall
into 2 categories: (1) paper-pencil tests and (2) computerized
tasks/batteries. ObsRO include behavior
rating questionnaires
completed by caretakers (parents, guardians) and teachers, which
assess a child’s behavioral/emotional
functioning or cognitive
functions including attention, impulsivity, executive function, and
adaptive function, in their everyday environment. Within each of the

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

S23

Table 2

Cognitive domains relevant to neurofibromatosis clinical trials

Cognitive domain

Description

Subdomains

Attention

Executive function

The ability to select and focus on relevant information while
filtering out irrelevant information

Vigilance (engagement, focus); sustained attention; attentional
shift (re-engagement)

An umbrella term for higher-order cognitive processes involved
in managing cognitive and behavioral resources to achieve a goal

Memory

The ability to retain and recall information

Processing speed

The ability to complete tasks quickly, automatically, and fluently

Visual-spatial/visual-motor

Language

Visual-spatial skills include the ability to mentally manipulate 2D
and 3D objects, as well as determine spatial relationships
between objects; visual-motor skills are the ability to coordinate
motor movements with visual input

Receptive language skills are the ability to understand language
heard or read; expressive language skills are the ability to put
thoughts into words and sentences in a way that makes sense
and is grammatically correct

Adaptive

The ability to handle common life demands

Behavioral/emotional

An individual’s mood and behavioral presentation

Academics

School-related skills

Initiation; inhibition; monitoring (cognitive and behavioral);
working memory; strategic planning; organization; flexibility;
emotional regulation

Encoding; consolidation; retrieval; (verbal and visual; short- and
long-term)

Mental rotation; visual closure; spatial orientation; object
localization; form/pattern discrimination; drawing/copying

Phonology—phonemic awareness, decoding, encoding (spelling
and reading); semantics—receptive (aural and written—to
include reading comprehension); expressive (oral and written—to
include spelling and composition); morphology—understanding
and producing grammatical aspects of language; pragmatics—
understanding social aspects of language; using social language
appropriately; syntax—understanding and using appropriate
sentence structure

Community living; health and safety; self-care; leisure skills;
coping skills; social skills; functional communication; functional
academics; work skills; self-direction

Depression; anxiety; conduct problems; aggression; withdrawal;
atypical behaviors

Reading; reading comprehension; spelling; written expression;
math calculation; math problem-solving

cognitive domains being evaluated, we provide recommendations
for both performance and observational measures, which may
serve as co–primary outcome tools in NF1 clinical trials to evaluate
their impact on everyday function, as has been recommended by
the FDA.19

paper-pencil tests (PerfO) and behavioral questionnaires (ObsRO)
of attention in NF1. Because computerized test batteries evaluate
a range of cognitive domains, recommendations for computerized
test batteries that include tests of attention will be included in
a future article.

Current clinical trials. We completed a literature search for
past and current pharmacologic cognitive clinical trials in NF1
in order to summarize the literature and document the diversity
of assessment instruments utilized for the same or very similar
primary outcome constructs. We performed several searches to
include PubMed.gov and ClinicalTrials.gov. Using the search
terms “neurofibromatosis type 1 cognitive clinical trial” and
“neurofibromatosis
identified 8
current or complete/published trials. We were made aware of
a ninth pharmacologic trial that was accepted for publication
but ahead of print, which was included.

type 1 methylphenidate”

Identification of cognitive domains and tools for review.
Because of the extensive number of cognitive domains and asso-
ciated assessment tools, it would be prohibitive to complete an
exhaustive review of all published tests. In order to increase the
feasibility of achieving the goals of the working group, a 2-step
process was implemented. The first phase involved identifying
all cognitive domains relevant to NF1 and prioritizing those
domains, with the highest importance associated with the known
or likely targets for cognitive clinical trials now and in the near
future. The second phase included surveying experienced NF1
cognitive researchers and clinicians, who were asked to list the
assessment instruments within each cognitive domain that they
use most consistently and consider to be reliable and sensitive
tools with the NF1 population. The list of potential assessment
tools was summarized and discussed to establish a final pool of
instruments to be reviewed in order to establish a core set of test
instruments. This manuscript provides
for

recommendations

Establishing evaluation criteria. Based on a systematic review
process established by the REiNS Patient-Reported Outcomes
Committee, we developed the Cog-RATE form as a means of
reviewing cognitive tests.20 The form enabled the committee to
rate each measure on 6 key criteria: patient characteristics (age
range for measure; use with specific populations), use in
published studies, domains assessed, availability of standard
scores, psychometric characteristics, and feasibility for clinical
trials. The Neurocognitive Committee decided to give greater
consideration to each test’s psychometric properties, patient
characteristics, and feasibility of use in clinical trials, which
were considered the most relevant for clinical trials. The process
utilized by our committee in reviewing each tool is provided in
table 3.

RESULTS We reviewed 5 performance-based measures
and 5 observation measures of attention available for
school-aged children through adults (age 6 and up;
table 4). Of the 5 performance measures considered,
2 tasks, Spatial Span from the Wechsler scales and
Spatial Span from the Stanford-Binet, did not
remain under consideration given their limited use
in previous NF1 clinical studies and limitations in
specificity.21,22

Three measures were sufficiently rated to remain
from the
Intelligence Scale for

under consideration: Digit Span (DS)
Wechsler

scales

(Wechsler

S24

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Table 3

Review and rating process of cognitive tests and rating scales

Step 1: Identify cognitive measures to review per domain

Survey neurofibromatosis researchers and clinicians about cognitive measures they use

Identify other possible measures from personal knowledge or literature review

Review of a measure by one member helps decide if a full group review is needed

Step 2: Prepare for the review of a measure

Members use the Cog-RATE form to systematically review cognitive measures

One member is identified to serve as a lead reviewer for a measure

The lead reviewer and group chair review the literature about the measure

Relevant articles describing the measure and its use in validation/descriptive studies and clinical trials are posted on the group’s
document-sharing site 1–2 weeks prior to the call

Members review the scale and articles and rate each Cog-RATE criteria

Step 3: Group review and rating of a measure by conference call

Cog-RATE forms may be e-mailed to the chair if members cannot attend a call

Members provide and discuss their rating from 0 (lowest rating/unacceptable) to 3 (highest rating) for each of the 6 Cog-RATE
criteria; ratings are recorded

Discrepancies are discussed to make sure they are not based on lack of familiarity with the measure or not understanding all the
information

The mean of the ratings for each of the 6 criteria is computed; the overall score is the total mean of the 6 criteria

Strengths and weaknesses are summarized; notes are taken regarding any outstanding issues

Members discuss whether the measure could be recommended as a primary or secondary outcome measure

The group determines if any additional information is needed to reach a final decision and whether a measure needs to be brought
up for a second review

For newly developed measures, a future review is planned to consider new information

The top closely rated measures may be compared side-by-side in another meeting

Step 4: Post-call activities

The group chair provides notes to summarize the conference call

Final notes and the Cog-RATE form ratings are uploaded to the document-sharing site to document the group’s decision

Final recommendations are reviewed with the entire REiNS collaborative group at yearly meetings

Abbreviations: REiNS 5 Response Evaluation in Neurofibromatosis and Schwannomatosis.

Children and Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale), the
Test of Everyday Attention (TEA), and the TEA for
Children (TEA-Ch).23–26 The TEA-Ch and DS have
both been used in previous published clinical trials
with NF1 and demonstrated adequate psychometric
properties. As the TEA-Ch includes 9 different subt-
ests, we evaluated this measure in several ways: as
a complete battery including all 9 subtests, as a screen-
ing instrument of 4 subtests (Sky Search, Score!,
Creature Counting, and Sky Search Dual Task),
and as individual subtests. We reviewed the TEA as
a complete battery as well as by individual subtests,
particularly as they relate to continuity with the
TEA-Ch. These measures were then compared across
the primary evaluative factors.

Although the TEA-Ch (and the TEA, the adult
version of the test) is a feasible and sensitive assess-
ment of attention, it lacks normative data in individ-
uals 16 and 17 years of age. In prior studies, this gap
has resulted in arbitrary truncation of inclusion crite-
ria related to age.27 In addition, there is a lack of

parallel subtests between the TEA-Ch and TEA, sig-
nificantly limiting the use of these tools across age
ranges in clinical trials. For these reasons, the com-
mittee could not recommend the tools as primary
outcome measures in NF1 clinical trials.

DS can be used as a combined performance score,
or separated into Forward, Backward, and Sequenc-
ing components. The committee ultimately chose
DS as the recommended PerfO measure of attention
given its utility in a wide range of ages (6 years
through adult), good feasibility (easily administered
in sites that have a Wechsler instrument), as well as
good psychometric properties, particularly test-retest
reliability. Because DS Backward and Sequencing
tap into aspects of executive function including work-
ing memory, the committee recommends the specific
use of DS Forward for the measurement of attention.
When using any performance-based test in preinter-
vention and postintervention designs, the risk of prac-
tice effects must always be considered. Previous
intervention trials using DS have found limited

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

S25

S
2
6

l

N
e
u
r
o
o
g
y
8
7

(

S
u
p
p

l

1

)

A
u
g
u
s
t
1
6

,

2
0
1
6

ª
2
0
1
6
A
m
e
r
i
c
a
n
A
c
a
d
e
m
y
o
f

N
e
u
r
o
o
g
y
.

l

U
n
a
u
t
h
o
r
i
z
e
d
r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
o
f

i

t
h
s
a
r
t
i
c
e

l

Table 4

Performance-based measures reviewed

Measures

Normative
data, n

Age range,
year:month

Digit Span WISC-IV23 2,200

6:0–16:11

Reliability (test-retest)

Validity studies

Pros

Cons

Cog-RATE
overall group
rating

No. 5 243; DS: r 5 0.81; DSF: r 5 0.79;
DSB: r 5 0.76; no. 5 4342; DS: r 5 0.74

Concurrent: WISC-III: r 5 0.77; WAIS-III:
r 5 0.73; construct: CMS attention/
concentration: r 5 0.72

Widely used in descriptive
and clinical studies,
including NF1 cohorts

Total score is a composite of DSF and DSB,
which measure different constructs43,44

2.62

WAIS-IV24

2,200

16:0–90:11 No. 5 293; DS: r 5 0.83; DSF: r 5 0.77;

DSB: r 5 0.71

TEA-Ch26

293

6:0–15:11

No. 5 5545; r 5 0.65–0.87

TEA25

154

18:0–80:0

No. 5 11825; r 5 0.59–0.86

Construct: CMS attention/
concentration; r 5 0.76; RBANS
attention; r 5 0.65 (WAIS-IV technical
manual)

Structural equation model reveals
3 factors: selective, switching, and
sustained attention (regression
coefficients: 0.44–0.79); TEA-Ch
subtest correlations with IQ are
generally weak (all r , 0.31)

Construct: r 5 0.42–0.63 with other
established measures of attention

Used in clinical studies,
including NF1; numerous
subtests that allow
assessment across
different attentional
capacities

Numerous subtests that
allow assessment across
different attentional
capacities

Spatial Span (WISC-
IV Integrated)21

2,200

6:1–16:11

No. 5 17421; SPF: r 5 0.79; SPB: r 5 0.81 Discriminative: SSF and SSB scores for

ADHD and ASD standardization
samples are significantly lower than
matched control group

Block Span (Stanford
Binet-V)22

4,800

2:0–85:0

No. 5 35622; r 5 0.66–0.93

Construct: r 5 0.66–0.85 with the
Wechsler Scales (WPPSI-R, WISC-III,
WAIS-III)

Normative data limited to 6–15 years, 11
months

2.44

Has not been used in NF1 clinical studies

2.18

Total score is a composite of SPF and SPB,
and they appear to measure different
constructs46; floor effects in younger
children; not used in NF1 clinical studies

Test specificity in question since other
factors can impact performance (e.g., visual
scanning and problems with motor control);
not used in NF1 clinical studies

2.26

2.42

Abbreviations: ADHD 5 attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; ASD 5 autism spectrum disorder; CMS 5 Children’s Memory Scale; DS 5 Digit Span; DSB 5 Digit Span Backward; DSF 5 Digit Span Forward; NF15
neurofibromatosis type 1; RBANS 5 Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status; SPB 5 Spatial Span Backward; SPF 5 Spatial Span Forward; SSB 5 spatial span backward; SSF 5 spatial
span forward; TEA-Ch 5 Test of Everyday Attention for Children; WAIS 5 Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale; WISC 5 Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children; WPPSI 5 Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of
Intelligence.

i

s
p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d

i

.

ª
2
0
1
6
A
m
e
r
i
c
a
n
A
c
a
d
e
m
y
o
f

N
e
u
r
o
o
g
y
.

l

U
n
a
u
t
h
o
r
i
z
e
d
r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
o
f

i

t
h
s
a
r
t
i
c
e

l

i

s
p
r
o
h
b
i
t
e
d

i

.

l

N
e
u
r
o
o
g
y
8
7

(

S
u
p
p

l

1

)

A
u
g
u
s
t
1
6

,

2
0
1
6

S
2
7

Table 5

Observer-rated measures reviewed

Measures

Normative
data

Age range, year:
month

Reliability

Validity studies

Pros

Conners 332

3,400

6:0–16:0 (parent/
teacher); 8:0–
18:0 (self-report)

Test-retest r 5 0.85 (parent); r 5 0.85
(teacher); r 5 0.79 (self-report);
interrater r 5 0.81 (parent); r 5 0.73
(teacher)

CAARS33

2,000

181 (observer
and self-report)

Test-retest r 5 0.80–0.91 (self-report);
r 5 0.85–0.95 (observer)33

ADHD Rating
Scale-IV31

2,000

6:0–18:0 (parent/
teacher)

Not available

Confirmatory factor analyses revealed parent
and self-reports have adequate fit; teacher
version was slightly lower; acceptable between-
informant correlations: parent to teacher r 5
0.60; parent to self-report r 5 0.56; teacher to
self-report r 5 0.48; convergent and divergent
validity established with other measures of child
and adolescent psychopathology; moderate to
high discriminant validity reported in the manual
for the different scoring version of the Conners
3; probability of accurately predicting group
membership (e.g., ADHD vs non-ADHD, impulsive
vs hyperactive vs combined) ranged from 0.66
to 0.95

Confirmatory factor analyses for both self-
report and observer forms met criteria for good
fit; was able to discriminate between ADHD and
control group with an overall correct
classification rate of 85%; construct validity
examined using the WURS, r 5 0.37–0.67

Consistent with the 2-factor model of ADHD
(inattention and hyperactive/impulsive);
differentiated children with impulsive and
combined subtypes from unaffected controls

Previous version (CRS-R) has been used in
16 clinical trials (PubMed search term:
Conners’ Rating Scales–Revised); CRS-R has
been used in many cross-sectional studies,
including NF147; Scoring options for DSM-5
and DSM-IV-TR

Cog-RATE
overall group
rating

2.65

Cons

Current version has
limited use in
published clinical
trials to date

Used in many cross-sectional and large
clinical trials

Not used in NF1
cohorts to date

2.30

Used in many cross-sectional and clinical
studies, including NF1 cohorts

Weak evidence of
convergent and
discriminant validity
reported using both
teacher and parent
versions48

2.65

2.41

1.72

Adult ADHD
Symptom Scale,
Self-Report49

Vanderbilt ADHD
Diagnostic Parent
Rating Scale50

720

17:0–501

Not available

Not available

Have been used in multiple descriptive
studies

Not used in NF1
cohorts to date

243

5:0–9:11

Not available

Consistent with the 2-factor model of ADHD
(inattention and hyperactive/impulsive);
moderate concurrent validity with DISC-IV
r 5 0.79

Not widely used in
studies; no studies
identified within NF1
samples

Abbreviations: ADHD 5 attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; CAARS 5 Conners Adult ADHD Rating Scale; CSR-R 5 Conners Rating Scale–Revised; DISC-IV 5 Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children, 4th
edition; DSM 5 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; NF1 5 neurofibromatosis type 1; WURS 5 Wender Utah Rating Scale.

practice effects in as short as a 6 week test-retest time
span, suggesting that DS can be used even over short
intervals.28,29 However, practice effects should always
be managed through study methodology (e.g., inclu-
sion of a control group) or statistical approaches, such
as the use of reliable change indices, which take into
account psychometric issues, practice effects, and
other sources of variance to ensure that change dem-
onstrated on tests is meaningful.30 In addition, the
DS, like many tests, has a truncated range of scores
that may limit the ability to detect change for indi-
viduals who are not impaired at baseline. Researchers
will need to take these considerations into account
when using this measure as a clinical trial endpoint.
Five observation attention scales were reviewed
(table 5). The 2 measures with the highest ratings
were the Conners scales and the ADHD Rating Scale
(ADHD-RS).31 The Conners scales include 2 ver-
sions: the Conners Parent Rating Scale–3 (ages 6
through 18) and the Conners Adult ADHD Rating
Scale (CAARS; age 18 and older).32,33 Similarly, the
ADHD-RS has child and adult rating forms. The
Vanderbilt ADHD Rating Scale was also considered,
but limitations related to a severely truncated age
range,
limited use in studies generally, regionally
limited normative data, and lack of age-based stan-
dard scores removed the instrument from further
consideration.

scales

In comparing the Conners

and the
ADHD-RS, both received similar ratings. However,
the committee believed that the superior psychomet-
ric information available and the extensive use of the
prior version of the Conners scales in clinical trials
were significant advantages and the Conners scales
were therefore chosen for recommendation. In addi-
tion, the Connors scales have options for multiple in-
formants for both the child and adult scales, adding to
their reliability in multiple settings. For school-aged
children, options include a parent, teacher, and self-
report questionnaire. For adults, options include
a self-report and an observer report. Additionally,
the Conners scales have extensive psychometric data
available and provide subscales beyond attention-
deficit
interest and
importance in NF, including learning problems, exec-
utive function, and peer relations (table 4). However,
caution is warranted in using the executive function
subscale as a primary outcome variable as it only
correlated significantly with the Plan/Organize scale
of
the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive
Function.33

symptomatology that are of

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS The estab-
lishment of recommendations for a rigorously re-
viewed core test bank of cognitive tests for use in
NF clinical trials is of vital importance given the

morbidity these deficits cause in individuals with
NF1 and the increased focus from the scientific com-
munity on the development of targeted therapies to
ameliorate these impairments. To date, there has been
no systematic review of the psychometric properties
of available cognitive assessment tools specifically
for use in clinical trials in NF1. As we work to pro-
mote the development of novel therapies targeting
cognition in this population, it is imperative that
we prioritize this step. To that end, the REiNS Neu-
rocognitive Committee has
taken a systematic,
detailed approach to reviewing available tests of cog-
nition in order to be able to make recommendations
for performance- and observer-based instruments in
clinical trials targeting cognitive deficits. We have
taken guidance from the FDA in our approach,
with the identification of and regulatory approval
of cognitive enhancing agents for NF1 in mind.
In this article, we focused on paper-pencil tools
assessing attention, and our extensive review led us
to recommend DS from the Wechsler scales as the
performance-based outcome measure,
and the
Conners scales (Conners 3 for children; CAARS for
adults) as the observer-rated outcome measure. The
recommendations being made are to establish a core
set of tests for use in clinical trials, but are not meant
to preclude individual researchers’ ability to include
other tests relevant to the specific research hypotheses
in the battery of outcome measures for any given trial.
Future articles will provide recommendations
for
computerized batteries (including tests of attention)
and tests in other key domains, including executive
function, memory, academic skills, and others.

No single instrument will capture all aspects of
a complex domain or function ideally for all trial de-
signs. However, the DS and Connors scales represent
the ObsRO and PerfO tools that have been reviewed
so far with the best combination of psychometric
properties, patient characteristics, and feasibility for
NF1 clinical trials currently available. Adoption of
these measures in clinical trials of cognitive outcomes
in NF1 will support the development of novel thera-
peutics for cognitive dysfunction in NF1 and lead
to improved impact through the use of consistent,
reliable, and sensitive cognitive outcome measures.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Karin Walsh: design and conceptualization of the study, collection and
interpretation of the data, drafting and revising the manuscript. Jennifer
Janusz: design and conceptualization of the study, collection and inter-
pretation of the data, drafting and revising the manuscript. Pamela
Wolters: study concept, collection and interpretation of the data, drafting
and revising the manuscript. Staci Martin: study concept, collection and
interpretation of the data, drafting and revising the manuscript. Bonita
Klein-Tasman: design and conceptualization of the study, collection
and interpretation of the data, revising the manuscript. Mary Anne
Toledo-Tamula: design and conceptualization of the study, collection
and interpretation of the data, drafting and revising the manuscript.

S28

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Heather Thompson: design and conceptualization of the study, collection
and interpretation of the data, revising the manuscript. Jonathan Payne:
design and conceptualization of the study, collection and interpretation of
the data, revising the manuscript. Kristina Hardy: design and conceptu-
alization of the study, collection and interpretation of the data, revising
the manuscript. Peter de Blank: design and conceptualization of the
study, collection and interpretation of the data, revising the manuscript.
Claire Semerjian: design and conceptualization of the study, collection
and interpretation of the data. Laura Schaffer Gray: design and concep-
tualization of the study, collection and interpretation of the data. Sondra
Solomon: design and conceptualization of the study, collection and inter-
pretation of the data, revising the manuscript. Nicole Ullrich: design and
conceptualization of the study, collection and interpretation of the data,
revising the manuscript.

STUDY FUNDING
No targeted funding reported.

DISCLOSURE
K. Walsh received research support from the Children’s Tumor Founda-
tion and the Gilbert Neurofibromatosis Institute. J. Janusz reports no
disclosures relevant to the manuscript. P. Wolters received funding from
the Childhood Brain Tumor Foundation and Neurofibromatosis Thera-
peutics Acceleration Program and holds stock in Bristol-Meyers-Squibb.
S. Martin received funding for a trip from the Children’s Tumor Foun-
dation. B. Klein-Tasman received funding from the NF Midwest and NF
Northeast. M. Toledo-Tamula received funding from the federal funds
from the National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Health, under
contract no. HHSN261200800001E. The content of this publication
does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of
Health and Human Services, nor does mention of trade name, commer-
cial products, or organization imply endorsement by the US government.
H. Thompson received funding through the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research Doctoral Research Awards Program and the Ontario
Barbershoppers’ Harmonize for Speech Fund. She also received funding
from the British Columbia Neurofibromatosis Foundation (BCNF) for
travel to the BCNF Annual Conference. J. Payne received research sup-
port
the Department of
Defense, and the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute. K. Hardy
received research support
from the Children’s Tumor Foundation
and the Gilbert Neurofibromatosis Institute. P. de Blank received
support from the Neurofibromatosis Therapeutic Acceleration Program.
C. Semerjian and L. Schaffer Gray report no disclosures relevant to the
manuscript. S. Solomon is deceased; she reported no disclosures prior to
her death. N. Ullrich received research support from the Department
of Defense, NIH/National Cancer Institute, Neurofibromatosis Inc.,
and the Children’s Tumor Foundation. Go to Neurology.org for full
disclosures.

from the Children’s Tumor Foundation,

Received November 18, 2015. Accepted in final form April 6, 2016.

REFERENCES
1.

Lehtonen A, Howie E, Trump D, Huson SM. Behaviour
in children with neurofibromatosis type 1: cognition, exec-
utive function, attention, emotion, and social competence.
Dev Med Child Neurol 2013;55:111–125.
Levine TM, Materek A, Abel J, O’Donnell M, Cutting LE.
Cognitive profile of neurofibromatosis type 1. Semin Pediatr
Neurol 2006;13:8–20.

2.

3. Rosser TL, Packer RJ. Neurocognitive dysfunction in chil-
dren with neurofibromatosis type 1. Curr Neurol Neurosci
Rep 2003;3:129–136.

4. North K, Hyman S, Barton B. Cognitive deficits in neu-
rofibromatosis 1. J Child Neurol 2002;17:605–612; dis-
cussion 627–629, 646–651.

5. Kayl AE, Moore BD. Behavioral phenotype of neurofibro-
matosis, type 1. Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev 2000;6:
117–124.

6. Ozonoff S. Cognitive impairment in neurofibromatosis

type 1. Am J Med Genet 1999;89:45–52.

7. Acosta MT, Gioia GA, Silva AJ. Neurofibromatosis type
1: new insights into neurocognitive issues. Curr Neurol
Neurosci Rep 2006;6:136–143.
Pride NA, Crawford H, Payne JM, North KN. Social
functioning in adults with neurofibromatosis type 1. Res
Dev Disabil 2013;34:3393–3399.

8.

9. Oates EC, Payne JM, Foster SL, Clarke NF, North KN.
Young Australian adults with NF1 have poor access to
health care, high complication rates, and limited disease
knowledge. Am J Med Genet A 2013;161A:659–666.
Pride NA, Payne JM, North KN. The impact of ADHD
on the cognitive and academic functioning of children
with NF1. Dev Neuropsychol 2012;37:590–600.

10.

12.

11. Coudé FX, Mignot C, Lyonnet S, Munnich A. Academic
impairment is the most frequent complication of neurofi-
bromatosis type-1 (NF1) in children. Behav Genet 2006;
36:660–664.
Silva AJ, Frankland PW, Marowitz Z, et al. A mouse
model for the learning and memory deficits associated with
neurofibromatosis type I. Nat Genet 1997;15:281–284.
Shilyansky C, Lee YS, Silva AJ. Molecular and cellular
mechanisms of learning disabilities: a focus on NF1. Annu
Rev Neurosci 2010;33:221–243.

13.

14. Wefel JS, Vardy J, Ahles T, Schagen SB. International
Cognition and Cancer Task Force recommendations to
harmonise studies of cognitive function in patients with
cancer. Lancet Oncol 2011;12:703–708.

15. Green MF, Nuechterlein KH, Gold JM, et al. Approach-
ing a consensus cognitive battery for clinical trials in
schizophrenia: the NIMH-MATRICS conference to select
cognitive domains and test criteria. Biol Psychiatry 2004;
56:301–307.
Lystad JU, Falkum E, Mohn C, et al. The MATRICS
consensus cognitive battery (MCCB): performance and
functional correlates. Psychiatry Res 2014;220:1094–1101.
17. Green MF, Harris JG, Nuechterlein KH. The MATRICS
consensus cognitive battery: what we know 6 years later.
Am J Psychiatry 2014;171:1151–1154.

16.

18. Drug Development Tools Qualification Programs: Clinical
Outcome Assessment Qualification Program. Available at:
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/
DrugDevelopmentToolsQualificationProgram/ucm284077.
htm. Accessed June 26, 2015.

19. US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and
Drug Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research (CDER), Center
for Biologics Evaluation
and Research (CBER). Guidance for Industry Clinical Trial
Endpoints for the Approval of Cancer Drugs and Biologies.
2007. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
Guidances/ucm071590.pdf. Accessed July 23, 2013.

20. Wolters PL, Martin S, Merker VL, et al. Patient-reported
outcomes in neurofibromatosis and schwannomatosis clin-
ical trials. Neurology 2013;81(suppl 1):S6–S14.

21. Wechsler D, Kaplan E, Fein D, et al. Wechsler Intelli-
gence Scales for Children. 4th ed. San Antonio, TX:
Harcourt Assessment; 2004.

22. Roid GH. Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scales: Technical

Manual. 5th ed. Itasca, IL: Riverside Publishing; 2003.

23. Wechsler D. Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children. 4th

ed. San Antonio, TX: Pearson; 2003.

24. Wechsler D. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale. 4th ed.

San Antonio, TX: Pearson; 2008.

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

S29

25. Robertson IH, Ward T, Ridgeway V, Nimmo-Smith I.
The Test of Everyday Attention. Bury St. Edmunds,
UK: Thames Valley Test Company; 1994.

26. Manly T, Robertson IH, Anderson V, Nimmo-Smith I. The
Test of Everyday Attention for Children: Manual. Bury St.
Edmunds, UK: Thames Valley Test Company; 1999.

27. A randomized placebo-controlled study of lovastatin in chil-
dren with neurofibromatosis type 1-full text view Clinical-
Trials.gov. Available at: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
show/NCT00853580?term5STARS1neurofibromatosis&
rank51. Accessed June 26, 2015.
Løhaugen GCC, Antonsen I, Håberg A, et al. Computer-
ized working memory training improves function in ado-
lescents born at extremely low birth weight. J Pediatr
2011;158:555–561.

28.

29. Hellwig-Brida S, Daseking M, Keller F, Petermann F,
Goldbeck L. Effects of methylphenidate on intelligence
and attention components
in boys with attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Child Adolesc Psychophar-
macol 2011;21:245–253.
Iverson GL, Green P. Measuring improvement or decline
on the WAIS-R in inpatient psychiatry. Psychol Rep 2001;
89:457–462.

30.

31. DuPaul GJ, Anastopoulos AD, Power TJ, Reid R, Ikeda MJ,
McGoey KE. Parent ratings of attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder symptoms: factor structure and normative data.
J Psychopathol Behav Assess 1998;20:83–102.

32. Conners CK. Conners. 3rd ed. Toronto: Multi-Health

Systems; 2008.

33. Conners CK, Erhardt D, Sparrow EP. Conners’ Adult
ADHD Rating Scales (CAARS) Technical Manual. North
Tonawanda, NY: Multi-Health Systems; 1999.

34. Mautner VF, Kluwe L, Thakker SD, Leark RA. Treatment
of ADHD in neurofibromatosis type 1. Dev Med Child
Neurol 2002;44:164–170.

35. Krab LC, de Goede-Bolder A, Aarsen FK, et al. Effect of
simvastatin on cognitive functioning in children with neu-
rofibromatosis type 1: a randomized controlled trial. J Am
Med Assoc 2008;300:287–294.

36. Acosta MT, Kardel PG, Walsh KS, Rosenbaum KN,
Gioia GA, Packer RJ. Lovastatin as treatment for neuro-
cognitive deficits type 1: phase I study. Pediatr Neurol
2011;45:241–245.
Lion-Francois L, Kemlin I. Comportemental and Neuro-
psychologic Study of Children With Neurofibromatosis
Type 1 Treated by Methylphenidate: A Double-blind
Randomised Study: Methylphenidate Versus Placebo.
Bethesda, MD: National Library of Medicine; 2016.

37.

38. Van der Vaart T, Plasschaert E, Rietman AB, et al. Simvas-
tatin for cognitive deficits and behavioural problems in pa-
tients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1-SIMCODA):

39.

a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol
2013;12:1076–1083.
Lion-François L, Gueyffier F, Mercier C, et al. The effect
of methylphenidate on neurofibromatosis type 1: a rando-
mised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial.
Orphanet J Rare Dis 2014;9:142.

40. Bearden CE, Hellemann GS, Rosser T, et al. A random-
ized placebo-controlled lovastatin trial for neurobehavioral
function in neurofibromatosis type 1. Ann Clin Trans
Neurol 2016;3:266–279.

41. Elgersma Y, Moll HA. The Effect of Lamotrigine on Cog-
nitive Deficits Associated With Neurofibromatosis Type 1:
A Phase II Randomized Controlled Multi-centre Trial
(NF1-EXCEL)
(NLM identifier: NCT02256124). In:
ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]. Available at: https://clinicaltrials.
gov/ct2/show/NCT02256124?term5neurofibromatosis
1lamotrigine&rank51. Accessed March 7, 2016.

42. Ryan JJ, Glass LA, Bartels JM. Stability of the WISC-IV in
a sample of elementary and middle school children. Appl
Neuropsychol 2010;17:68–72.

43. Reynolds CR. Forward and backward memory span
should not be combined for clinical analyses. Neuropsy-
chol Rev 1997;12:29–40.

44. Rosenthal EN, Riccio CA, Gsanger KM, Jarratt KP. Digit
Span components as predictors of attention problems and
executive functioning in children. Arch Clin Neuropsychol
2006;21:131–139.

45. Manly T, Anderson V, Nimmo-Smith I, Turner A,
Watson P, Robertson IH. The differential assessment of
children’s attention:
the Test of Everyday Attention
for Children (TEA-Ch), normative sample and ADHD
performance. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2001;42:1065–
1081.

46. Wilde N, Strauss E. Functional equivalence of WAIS-
III/WMS-III digit and spatial span under forward and
backward recall conditions. Clin Neuropsychol 2002;16:
322–330.
Isenberg JC, Templer A, Gao F, Titus JB, Gutmann DH.
Attention skills in children with neurofibromatosis type 1.
J Child Neurol 2012;28:45–49.

47.

48. Gomez R, Burn GL, Walsh JA, de Moura MA. A
multitrait-multisource
analytic
approach to the construct validity of ADHD rating scales.
Psychol Assess 2003;15:3–16.

confirmatory

factor

49. Barkley RA, Murphy KR. Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder: A Clinical Workbook. 2nd ed. New York: The
Guilford Press; 1998.

50. Wolraich ML, Lambert W, Doffing MA, Bickman L,
Simmons T, Worley K. Psychometric properties of the
Vanderbilt ADHD diagnostic parent rating in a referred
population. J Pediatr Psychol 2003;28:559–568.

S30

Neurology 87 (Suppl 1) August 16, 2016

ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Neurocognitive outcomes in neurofibromatosis clinical trials: Recommendations for the

Karin S. Walsh, Jennifer Janusz, Pamela L. Wolters, et al. 

domain of attention

Neurology 

2016;87;S21-S30 

DOI 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002928

This information is current as of August 15, 2016

Updated Information &
Services

including high resolution figures, can be found at:
http://n.neurology.org/content/87/7_Supplement_1/S21.full.html
 

Supplementary Material

References

Subspecialty Collections

Permissions & Licensing
  

Supplementary material can be found at: 
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2016/08/15/WNL.0000000000002
928.DC1

 

This article cites 36 articles, 0 of which you can access for free at: 
http://n.neurology.org/content/87/7_Supplement_1/S21.full.html##ref-l
ist-1

 

This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
following collection(s): 
Assessment of cognitive disorders/dementia
http://n.neurology.org//cgi/collection/assessment_of_cognitive_disorde
rs_dementia
 
Neurofibromatosis
http://n.neurology.org//cgi/collection/neurofibromatosis
 
Neuropsychological assessment
http://n.neurology.org//cgi/collection/neuropsychological_assessment

 

Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures,tables) or in
its entirety can be found online at:
http://n.neurology.org/misc/about.xhtml#permissions

 

Reprints
  

Information about ordering reprints can be found online:
http://n.neurology.org/misc/addir.xhtml#reprintsus
 

® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Neurology. All 
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.

