Acta Neuropathol
DOI 10.1007/s00401-011-0905-0

M E E T I N G R E P O R T

Neuroﬁbromatosis 2011: a report of the Children’s Tumor
Foundation Annual Meeting

Michel Kalamarides • Maria T. Acosta • Dusica Babovic-Vuksanovic • Olli Carpen • Karen Cichowski •
D. Gareth Evans • Filippo Giancotti • C. Oliver Hanemann • David Ingram • Alison C. Lloyd • Debra A. Mayes •
Ludwine Messiaen • Helen Morrison • Kathryn North • Roger Packer • Duojia Pan • Anat Stemmer-Rachamimov •
Meena Upadhyaya • David Viskochil • Margret R. Wallace • Kim Hunter-Schaedle • Nancy Ratner

Received: 24 August 2011 / Revised: 21 September 2011 / Accepted: 31 October 2011
Ó The Author(s) 2011. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com

Abstract The 2011 annual meeting of the Children’s
Tumor Foundation, the annual gathering of the neuroﬁ-
bromatosis (NF) research and clinical communities, was
attended by 330 participants who discussed integration of
new signaling pathways into NF research, the appreciation
for NF mutations in sporadic cancers, and an expanding
pre-clinical and clinical agenda. NF1, NF2, and schwan-
nomatosis
approximately 100,000

collectively affect

M. Kalamarides
Hoˆpital Beaujon, Inserm U674, Universite Paris 7, Paris, France
M. T. Acosta  R. Packer
Children’s National Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA

D. Babovic-Vuksanovic
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA

O. Carpen
University of Turku, Turku, Finland

K. Cichowski
Harvard Medical School,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

D. Gareth Evans
MAHSC, University of Manchester,
St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, UK

F. Giancotti
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA

C. Oliver Hanemann
University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK

D. Ingram
Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA

A. C. Lloyd
MRC LMCB, University College London, London, UK

and NF2 (schwannoma,

persons in US, and result from mutations in different genes.
Benign tumors of NF1 (neuroﬁbroma and optic pathway
glioma)
and
meningioma) and schwannomatosis (schwannoma) can
cause signiﬁcant morbidity, and there are no proven drug
treatments for any form of NF. Each disorder is associated
with additional manifestations causing morbidity. The
research presentations described in this review covered
basic science, preclinical testing, and results from clinical

ependymoma,

D. A. Mayes
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, USA

L. Messiaen
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA

H. Morrison
Leibniz Institute for Age Research, Jena, Germany

K. North
The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, Australia

D. Pan
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA

A. Stemmer-Rachamimov
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

M. Upadhyaya
Cardiff University, Wales, UK

D. Viskochil
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

M. R. Wallace
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA

K. Hunter-Schaedle
Children’s Tumor Foundation, New York, NY, USA

123

trials, and demonstrate the remarkable strides being taken
toward understanding of and progress toward treatments
for these disorders based on the close interaction among
scientists and clinicians.

Abbreviations
ApoE
AR12
BMD
BRAF

cAMP
CDKN2A

CNPase

CTF
dALK

DN
EMA
ErbB2

EuroQOL
F-actin
FC
GTPase
GWA
HDAC
Hippo/Mst

HRasG12V
HSW
IDH
INI1

CNS
CNV
COG
CRL4-DCAF1 E3 ubiquitin ligase
CTEP-NCI

Apolipoprotein E
Akt inhibitor
Bone density
v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene
homolog B1
Intracellular messenger
Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A
(melanoma, p16, inhibits CDK4)
20,30-Cyclic nucleotide 30
phosphodiesterase
Central nervous system
Copy number variant
Children’s Oncology Group

the anaplastic

Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program-
National Cancer Institute
Children’s Tumor Foundation
Drosophila homolog of
lymphoma kinase
Default network
Epithelial membrane antigen
v-erb-b2 erythroblastic leukemia viral
oncogene homolog 2, neuro/glioblastoma
derived oncogene homolog (avian)
European quality of life
Filamentous actin
Functional brain connectivity
Guanosine triphosphatase
Genome-wide association analysis
Histone deacetylase
Drosophila and mammalian Ste20 family
kinases
Activated form Ras
Hippo/Salvador/Warts
Isocitrate dehydrogenase
Integrase interactor 1 gene

N. Ratner (&)
Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology,
Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave.,
M.L.C. 7013, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA
e-mail: Nancy.Ratner@cchmc.org

M. Kalamarides (&)
Hoˆpital Beaujon, Neurochirurgie, 100 bd General Leclerc,
92110 Clichy, France
e-mail: michel.kalamarides@bjn.aphp.fr

123

Acta Neuropathol

Janus kinase 2 (a protein tyrosine kinase)/
signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5
Large tumor suppressor homolog 1 gene
Long range epigenetic silencing
Mosaic analysis with double markers
Negative regulator of p53
MAP kinase-ERK kinase
Massachusetts General Hospital
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
FK506 binding protein 12-rapamycin
associated protein 1
Neuroﬁbromatosis
Neuroﬁbromatosis 1 ﬂox/ﬂox
T2-weighted magnetic resonance image
Nursing facility transition initiative-quality
of life
Neural stem cells
Oligodendrocyte precursor cell
Mutant p53 and NF1 genes
Platelet-derived growth factor receptor
Positron emission tomography
Prostaglandin D2 synthase
Inducible proteolipid protein cre
recombinase
Phosphorylated MAP kinase kinase
Plexiform neuroﬁbroma
Polycomb repressive complex
Phosphatase and tensin homolog
Signaling downstream of the Rac small
GTPase
v-raf-1 murine leukemia viral oncogene
homolog 1
Monomeric GTPases
Signaling downstream of Ras
Retinoblastoma
Replication-competent ASLV long terminal
repeat (LTR) with a splice acceptor/tv-a
gene.mouse modeling system
Sleeping beauty
Health survey
Single nucleotide polymorphism
Sprouty-related protein with EVH-1 domain
Suppressor of zeste 12 homolog (Drosophila)
DNA-binding
the YAP
coactivator
Transcriptional imbalances
Tumor protein p53
Vascular endothelial growth factor
Vestibular schwannoma
World Health Organization
Yes-associated protein 1, 65 kDa

partner

of

Jak2/Stat5

Lats
LRES
MADM
MDM2
MEK
MGH
MPNST
mTOR

NF
Nf1 ﬂ/ﬂ
MRI T2
NFTI-QOL

NSC
OPC
p53/NF1
PDGFR
PET
PGDS
Plp-CreERT

P-MEK
PN
PRC
PTEN
Rac-Pak

Raf

Ras
Ras-MAPK
RB
RCAS/tv

SB
SF-36
SNP
SPRED
SUZ12
TEAD

TI
TP53
VEGF
VS
WHO
YAP1

Acta Neuropathol

Introduction to the meeting and the neuroﬁbromatoses

The 2011 annual meeting of the Children’s Tumor Foun-
dation (CTF) NF Conference took place at the Snow King
Resort, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, June 11th–14th, 2011.
The CTF meeting is the annual gathering of the neuroﬁ-
bromatosis (NF) research and clinical communities. Since
its inception in 1985, this conference has played a key role
as a forum for fostering collaboration, consensus building,
and advances in translational research. Meeting attendance
has grown from 140 attendees in 2005 to over 300
attendees in 2011, driven by integration of new signaling
pathways into NF research, the appreciation for NF path-
ways in sporadic diseases, and an expanding pre-clinical
and clinical agenda component as the NF ﬁeld progresses
bench to bedside.

Neuroﬁbromatosis is a group of inherited genetic dis-
orders—NF1, NF2, and schwannomatosis—that together
affect approximately 100,000 persons in US (http://www.
ctf.org/Living-with-NF/learn-about-nf.html). NF1 is the
most common, affecting 1:3,000 births; NF2 affects
1:25,000 births. NF1 and NF2 are autosomal dominant
disorders: 50% of new cases arise from spontaneous
mutations with no family history. Schwannomatosis affects
an estimated 1:40,000 births. NF1, NF2 and schwanno-
matosis each predispose affected individuals to develop
Schwann cell tumors. The disorders arise from mutations in
different genes, each of which plays a key role in regu-
lating Schwann cell function. The NF1 gene on human
chromosome 17 encodes an intracellular signaling mole-
cule that functions as a GTPase activating protein for Ras
proteins. In contrast, the NF2 gene on human chromosome
22 encodes a cytoskeletal-membrane linking protein.
Understanding of Schwannomatosis is progressing since a
candidate gene INI1 was identiﬁed.

Even the benign tumors of NF1 (neuroﬁbromas and optic
pathway gliomas) and NF2 (schwannoma, ependymoma,
and meningioma) and schwannomatosis (schwannoma) can
cause signiﬁcant morbidity and even mortality. This is
because of continuous growth and frequent surgical inac-
cessibility. In addition, malignancy and bone abnormalities,
pain, vascular abnormalities, and in 60% of cases, learning
disabilities complicate study of NF1. Pain is a debilitating
consequence of schwannomatosis. There are as yet no pro-
ven drug treatments for any form of NF, but over the past
several years multiple clinical trials have been initiated.

Meeting report: keynote speakers

Charles Eberhart (Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine) provided the opening keynote presentation. He

focused on emerging links between NF pathways and
sporadic gliomas. He reviewed reports identifying NF1
gene mutations in approximately 15% of sporadic human
high grade glioma [4]. He then discussed the key role of
BRAF signaling in sporadic pilocytic astrocytoma; most
sporadic tumors have genetic alterations in BRAF, and
80% of non-NF1 pilocytic tumors show P-MEK staining,
indicating activation of the same pathway affected in NF1-
associated pilocytic astrocytoma [2]. He emphasized the
need to correlate genotype with outcome and tumor grade,
and presented new work linking BRAF activity to onco-
gene-induced senescence in pilocytic astrocytoma, a
process which may explain the sometimes indolent growth
of optic gliomas in NF1 patients [19]. He also showed that
a protein functioning downstream of NF2 (YAP1)
is
expressed in human neural stem cells, is associated with
aggressive glioblastoma biology in patients, and that sup-
pressing YAP1 levels in tumor cells slows their growth
[16].

Stan Nelson (University of California, Los Angeles)
described a powerful new strategy to identify novel
Mendelian disease genes using whole exome sequencing.
This approach reliably searches about 90% of the known
protein coding sequence for all mutation types including
single base substitutions, small indels, single and multi-
ple exon deletions and duplications. His group and many
others are identifying the cause of rare Mendelian dis-
eases at a rapid pace, and the team at UCLA is using
efﬁcient and cost-effective whole exome sequencing to
more rapidly diagnose individuals with genetic diseases.
This approach has great promise for deﬁning the spec-
trum of DNA variants
that contribute to rare and
common diseases and that may modify disease processes
such as NF.

David Threadgill (North Carolina State University) gave
the keynote presentation on Day 3 of the Conference. Dr.
Threadgill leads a large international effort to exploit a new
mouse genetic resource supporting the integration of
genetics into systems biological analyses at
the whole
animal level. These efforts are based upon the Collabora-
tive Cross, a set of unique recombinant inbred populations
of mice that have randomly assorted the genetic polymor-
phisms present
inbred strains. He
discussed his progress in identiﬁcation and functional
characterization of genes inﬂuencing susceptibility to dis-
eases, and how researchers might use the Collaborative
Cross to identify cancer modiﬁer genes. Speciﬁcally, the
NF community may consider using the Collaborative Cross
to identify modiﬁer genes relevant in particular to the most
prevalent form of NF, NF1, because modiﬁer genes are
implicated in NF1 manifestations including numbers of
dermal neuroﬁbromas.

in eight

founder

123

Update: neuroﬁbromatosis type 1

The Brain in NF1

NF1 patients are predisposed to CNS manifestations,
mainly cognitive deﬁcits, hyperintensities that appear on
MRI imaging, and low grade pilocytic astrocytomas. NF1
mutations are also common in high grade glioma in the
general population. Modeling of these phenotypes, under-
standing underlying mechanisms, and ongoing therapeutic
trials were discussed.

Kathryn North (Children’s Hospital Westmead, Aus-
tralia) overviewed cognitive deﬁcits and academic learning
difﬁculties, the most common neurological disability in
patients with NF1. She found that developmental deﬁcits
can be identiﬁed clinically in patients as young as 2 years
old [15]. Some cognitive deﬁcits may be associated with
developmental or structural brain anomalies and are
therefore unlikely to be reversible; these include increased
grey matter volume and increased cross sectional area of
the corpus callosum which are associated with lower IQ
and learning deﬁcits [18], and NF1 MRI T2-hyperintensi-
ties (non-enhancing bright areas on T2 images of unknown
etiology) in the thalamus that are associated with reduced
IQ [9]. Other cognitive deﬁcits may be reversible and
amenable to pharmacological
therapy. Dr. North also
overviewed published studies that used Nf1 mouse models.
She described studies from the Silva group reversing
defects in hippocampal based learning with Lovastin and
noted that another mouse model, and humans, with
abnormal ras activation due to mutations in SPRED1 (Le-
gius syndrome) also have impaired hippocampal based
learning [5]. She described another Nf1 mouse model
showing abnormal dopamine homeostasis underlying
attention deﬁcits that could be reversed by treatment with
methylphenidate, suggesting a defect in brain catechol-
amine homeostasis [3]. These animal studies provide a
strong imperative for pursuing deﬁnitive trials of stimulant
medication in children with NF1.

Maria T. Acosta (Children’s National Medical Center)
found that
lovastatin normalizes the brain spontaneous
low-frequency ﬂuctuations in children with NF1 [1]. She
presented an initial examination of functional brain con-
nectivity (FC) in Default Network (DN) architecture in
7/24 patients treated with lovastatin as a part of a phase 1
study testing lovastatin as treatment for cognitive deﬁcits in
children with NF1 at the Gilbert Neuroﬁbromatosis Insti-
tute. Lovastatin administration in this
sample
appeared to normalize anterior–posterior and local func-
tional connectivity within the DN. The pattern of results is
consistent with normalization of developmental processes,
and with apparent beneﬁts in a mouse model. Although
interpretation is necessarily tentative because of the sample

small

123

Acta Neuropathol

size, these results suggest that continued examination of the
potentially beneﬁcial effects of
lovastatin in NF1 is
warranted.

The mechanisms underlying the cognitive changes in
NF1 remain incompletely understood. Debra Mayes (Cin-
cinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center) described her
studies of how loss of Nf1 affects oligodendrocytes, the
myelinating cell of the brain. She examined the optic nerve
and corpus callosum white matter tracts in animal models.
Phenotypes of Nf1 heterozygous mice, tamoxifen-induced
Nf1 loss in mature oligodendrocytes (Plp-CreERT), and a
new transgenic model
in which the CNPase promoter
drives expression of HRasG12V were presented. Expres-
sion HRasGV12 and loss of Nf1 (PLPCre;Nf1ﬂ? &
PLPCre; Nf1ﬂ/ﬂ) in oligo-lineage cells displayed similar
defects in myelin, brain vasculature and axonal size, in the
optic nerves and corpus callosum. These data support the
idea that oligodendrocytes, as well as neurons and astro-
cytes in the CNS might contribute to patient deﬁcits in NF1
disease.

A workshop on gliomas in NF highlighted problems in
clinical management and diagnosis that relate to gliomas in
the NF population. Anat Stemmer-Rachamimov (Massa-
chusetts General Hospital) reviewed the World Health
Organization (WHO) classiﬁcation of gliomas.
In the
WHO classiﬁcation scheme tumors are classiﬁed by type
(as per type or cell or origin) and then assigned a histo-
logical grade. In NF1 patients, the predominant problem is
that of grading of astrocytomas; speciﬁcally distinguishing
between pilocytic astrocytomas (WHO grade I) from dif-
fuse astrocytomas (WHO grades II, III and IV). The classic
pilocytic astrocytomas are non-inﬁltrating, and have unique
histological features including piloid cells, myxoid back-
ground, Rosenthal ﬁbers and eosinophilic granular bodies.
Pilocytic astrocytomas have excellent prognosis. Diffuse
astrocytomas are divided into grades II, III and IV based on
the degree of cellular density, cytological atypia, mitotic
activity, necrosis and microvascular proliferation. Diffuse
astrocytomas progress over time and higher grades (III, IV)
require treatment with radiation and chemotherapy. The
distinction between pilocytic astrocytomas and diffuse
astrocytomas in NF1 patients may be difﬁcult as some
tumors present histological features that are intermediate.
David Gutmann (Washington University, St Louis)
reviewed the clinical features of NF1-associated astrocy-
tomas. The overwhelming majority of CNS tumors in NF1
are optic pathway pilocytic astrocytomas (WHO Grade I).
However, diffuse low grade and high grade astrocytomas
also occur. These tumors often present a diagnostic and
treatment challenges as their radiological and pathological
features are different from sporadic tumors and there are no
correlational large studies to provide guidance for clinical
management and treatment.

Acta Neuropathol

Joann Ater (MD Anderson Cancer Center) presented
data regarding treatment of progressive hypothalamic/optic
pathway gliomas in children with NF1. The Children’s
Oncology Group (COG) evaluated tumor response in 127
children with or without NF1, and progressive hypotha-
lamic/optic pathway gliomas treated on protocol COG
A9952. Children with NF1 tolerated carboplatin and vin-
cristine well and had tumor response rate and EFS that
were superior to children without NF1. Second malignant
neoplasms occurred only in patients who had progression
and received secondary treatment with temozolomide.

Stemmer-Rachamimov

include IDH1,

Josh Rubin (Washington University St Louis) outlined a
novel set of ﬁndings regarding the cAMP pathway in low
grade Nf1-related brain tumors. Gliomagenesis can be
induced by low levels of cAMP in a genetically engineered
mouse model of NF1. However, tumor formation displays a
signiﬁcant sex-dependent disparity resulting in disease in
100% of male, but only 20% of female mice. The molec-
ular basis for the difference in tumor rates in male and
female mice appears to involve cell-intrinsic differences in
cAMP regulation. These exciting studies may provide
insight into why astrocytoma is more common in males
than females and whether targeting the cAMP pathway in
astrocytoma treatment will have equal value for males and
females.
Anat

(with Cathy Nutt)
reviewed the literature on genomic anomalies associated
with sporadic gliomas. Genes often altered in sporadic low
IDH2, TP53 and
grade astrocytomas
PDGFR while EGFR, CDKN2A, chromosome 10 loss,
PTEN and MDM2 alterations are seen in high grade glio-
mas. Recent
large scale studies using gene expression
proﬁling have identiﬁed four subclasses of glioblastomas
based on transcriptional signatures: proneural, neural,
mesenchymal and classic [21]. The mesenchymal subtype
has been found to be associated with NF1 mutations. Other
mutations found in the mesenchymal subgroup included
PTEN, TP53, and RB1. This suggests that NF1 mutations
aggregate with speciﬁc other mutations and these may
affect prognosis and response to speciﬁc treatment. A large
correlative study in which histology, molecular features
and clinical outcome of gliomas in NF1 will be integrated
would provide valuable information as to clinical man-
agement and treatment of
these tumors, and identify
prognostic indicators.

Hui Zong (University of Oregon) used his elegant
mouse genetic mosaic system MADM (Mosaic Analysis
with Double Markers) to identify glioma cell-of-origin by
analyzing aberrations in individual brain cell lineages prior
to the glioma formation. After initiating p53/NF1 muta-
tions sporadically in neural stem cells (NSCs),
they
analyzed mutant NSCs and their progeny at pre-malignant
stages. Their data pointed to a non-NSC cell type, the OPC

cell, as the cell-of-origin for glioma [13]. Further tran-
scriptome analysis and genetic evidences conﬁrmed the
essential role of OPCs in gliomagenesis. Their ﬁndings
provide valuable guidance for cell-type speciﬁc treatment
for malignant glioma.

The peripheral nervous system in NF1

NF1 patients are predisposed to benign Schwann cell tumors
called neuroﬁbromas, and to malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors, an aggressive sarcoma which is a leading
cause of death in NF1 adults. The discussion centered
continuing improvement of mouse models, identiﬁcation of
mechanisms of neuroﬁbroma formation, preclinical thera-
peutics in existing mouse models, and ongoing clinical
trials.

Alison Lloyd (University College London, UK) reported
on two novel mouse models to study neuroﬁbroma for-
mation. The lab has previously shown in in vitro studies
that activation of the ERK signaling pathway was sufﬁcient
to drive myelinating Schwann cells back to the progenitor-
like cells found in nerves following an injury and which
resemble the Schwann cells found in neuroﬁbromas. They
constructed a transgenic mouse in which ERK signaling
could be reversibly induced following tamoxifen injec-
tions. These studies conﬁrmed that
this pathway was
sufﬁcient to drive this switch in cell-state, and identiﬁed
that signals from the Schwann cells were responsible for
inducing the inﬂammatory response seen following injury
and during tumor formation. The links to injury were
conﬁrmed in a second mouse-model in which neuroﬁbro-
mas developed from adult myelinating Schwann cells when
NF1 loss was induced in concert with an injury.

The link between inﬂammation and neuroﬁbroma
development was further explored in the talk by Yuan Zhu
(University of Michigan). He reported a detailed temporal
analysis of tumor development in his Nf1 mouse model. He
showed that Nf1-/- Schwann cells mostly differentiate
normally except there are abnormalities in Remak-bundle
formation which resolved as the animals aged. However, at
these later ages, non-myelinating Schwann cells appeared
to start to dissociate from axons concomitant with mast cell
inﬁltration. These later defects were associated with
increased ERK and mTOR signaling. Treatment with
Rapamycin blocked most of the Schwann cell dissociation,
indicating a potential treatment to block tumor formation at
an early stage.

Nancy Ratner (Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical
Center) emphasized that speciﬁc Ras signaling pathways
that mediate neuroﬁbroma and MPNST pathology remain
unknown. She described cross-species transcriptome anal-
ysis to identify molecular pathways altered in NF1 tumors
and guide molecular-targeted therapeutic strategies. The

123

analysis identiﬁed global negative feedback of Ras-MAPK
signaling was prominent in human and mouse. Inhibiting
this pathway with a MEK inhibitor diminished human
MPNST cell growth in xenografts and decreased neuroﬁ-
broma volume in 85% of neuroﬁbromas in a mouse model
[22], providing strong rationale for testing MEK inhibitors
in neuroﬁbroma and MPNST human clinical trials.

Wade Clapp (Indiana University School of Medicine)
described his efforts to develop novel experimental thera-
peutics
for plexiform neuroﬁbromas. He previously
reported that a multi- receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(imatinib mesylate), a drug that targets c-kit, PDGF, and
c-abl, reduces plexiform neuroﬁbromas in a mouse model
[23]. He has screened ten drugs that are in various phases
of clinical development of which two passed both short
term and long term treatment objectives that
included
reducing the size of the tumors by 50% and reducing the
absolute number of tumors by 25% or more. His current
work is aimed at moving these drugs forward into phase 2
clinical trials.

Brigitte Widemann (National Cancer Institute) descri-
bed previous human trials for plexiform neuroﬁbroma,
utilizing agents such as farnesyl-transferase inhibitors,
antiﬁbrotic drugs, and immunomodulary agents (inter-
feron) that have been completed with mixed and somewhat
disappointing results;
these trials were based on some
preclinical
testing, but not detailed pre-clinical mouse
modeling. The interactions between the human and mouse
trials have become a two way road, informing both types of
studies. The next generation of human clinical trials for
plexiform neuroﬁbromas will be heavily based on pre-
clinical modeling. Imatinib (NCT01140360) and sorafenib
(NCT00727233) are two trials which have been recently
undertaken based on mouse modeling, but these studies
point out the complexity of the transition from mouse
models to human care.

Dusica Babovic-Vuksanovic (Mayo Clinic) provided an
update on results from a CTEP-NCI multi-center phase 2
trial of cediranib for NF1 plexiform and/or paraspinal
neuroﬁbromas (NCT00326872). The study enrolled 26
adult patients who were treated with oral cediranib at
30 mg/day over 26 cycles. The primary endpoint of ther-
apy was a volume change of target tumors, based on 3-D
MRI, measured by two independent blinded evaluators. A
secondary endpoint was symptomatic improvement based
on the Brief Pain Inventory. Four patients responded with
decrease in tumor volume of [20% and no radiological
progression of disease was noted in any of evaluable
patients. Brief Pain Index analysis showed reduction in
pain or a reduction in the interference caused by pain in
treated patients. Results are encouraging but more data is
needed to assess efﬁcacy of cediranib in patients with
NF1.

123

Acta Neuropathol

Kent Robertson (Indiana University School of Medi-
cine) presented data from a pilot phase 2 study of imatinib
in NF1 patients with plexiform neuroﬁbromas
(PN)
(NCT01140360). The primary endpoint was PN size by
MRI cross sectional area and secondary endpoints included
symptomatic improvement, expression of 15 plasma cyto-
kines, and safety/toxicity of imatinib. Of 24 evaluable
patients, 15 (62%) responded with tumor reduction of one
or more PN’s; 9 (38%) were non-responsive (stable or
progressive tumors only). Out of 73 tumors scored, 22
(30%) showed reduction while 22 (30%) showed progres-
sion, and 29 tumors remained stable (40%). Symptom
improvement was reported by 6 of 15 (40%) patients with
responsive disease and 1 of 9 (11%) of patients with non-
responsive tumors following 6 months of oral
imatinib
(p = 0.19). A panel of 15 plasma cytokines after 6 months
of therapy showed greater than twofold increase in levels in
24% of cytokines measured in patients with non-responsive
disease as compared to 2% in patients with responsive
tumors (p \ 0.001). Thus, a subset of NF1 patients with
PN’s treated with imatinib had reductions in tumor size
associated with symptom improvement and cytokine
expression correlated with tumor response.

Fawn Leigh (Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard
Medical School) presented data related to efforts to identify
genetic modiﬁers of cutaneous neuroﬁbroma tumor burden
in NF1. The MGH group carried out a genome-wide
association analysis (GWA) in 300 subjects with extreme
burden of cutaneous tumors, using the Affymetrix Gene-
Chip 6.0 platform, providing 909, 622 single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) markers. While their preliminary
data indicate that
there is no single common modiﬁer
responsible for the variation in tumor burden, genotyping
in an additional cohort of extreme subjects to conﬁrm or
refute its modiﬁer status is ongoing. Copy number variant
(CNV) analysis in their initial cohort is also in process.
Importantly, the authors solicit collaboration from all NF
Clinics interested in a collaborative community-wide effort
to address the cooperative identiﬁcation of genetic modi-
ﬁers of NF1.

David Largaespada (University of Minnesota)’s labora-
tory uses insertional mutagenesis for cancer gene discovery
in the mouse. By crossing mice harboring mutagenic
Sleeping Beauty (SB) transposons to mice expressing SB
transposase in speciﬁc cell-types they are able to identify
novel driver genes for tumor formation in speciﬁc tissues.
Using this approach to target Schwann cells, Largaespada
reported the formation of a large number of SB-accelerated
neuroﬁbromas and malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors. Analysis of the SB transposon insertion sites
resulted in the identiﬁcation of Nf1 and Pten genes as
recurrent insertional sites as well as a large number of other
genes not previously identiﬁed as having a role in Schwann

Acta Neuropathol

cell tumor formation. Interestingly, Pten and Nf1 inacti-
vation often occurred in the same tumors arguing that NF1
loss may not be sufﬁcient to achieve the levels of PI3-
kinase signaling required for tumor formation.

Luis F. Parada (University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center) presented exciting results from a screen
for novel drugs to treat glioblastomas and MPNSTs for
which current therapeutics are currently ineffective. He
took the novel approach of isolating cancer stem cells from
glioblastomas and MPNSTs from his mouse-tumor models.
Growing these cells under more physiological conditions,
he pooled cells from multiple tumors for each tumor type,
to provide a target for a screen that should hit multiple
independent tumors. He then screened a 200K chemical
library for small molecule drugs that differentially killed
tumor cells versus normal cells. Interestingly, in this assay,
a number of drugs that have been used therapeutically but
with little success were ineffective. These screens have
resulted in the identiﬁcation of a number of new potential
drugs that function at low concentrations and with some
speciﬁcity, and thus are exciting candidates for future
therapeutics.

Eduard Serra (Institut de Medicina Predictiva I Person-
alitzada del Cancer, Barcelona) correlated transcriptional
proﬁles generated by the NF1 Microarray Consortium with
SNP data from neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs. His group
identiﬁed clusters of up-regulated or down-regulated genes
that mapped in speciﬁc genomic regions (termed Tran-
scriptional Imbalances, TIs), present in MPNSTs and not
neuroﬁbromas. Many TIs correlated with somatic copy
number alterations (gains and losses of genetic material),
with the best correlation with genomic gains rather than
losses. Dr. Serra’s group suggested that long range epige-
netic
the mechanism
responsible for the generation of TIs representing clusters
of down-regulated genes that were not explained by losses
of genetic material, since there was a good overlapping
between the precise chromosomal position of these TIs and
LRES previously identiﬁed in prostate cancer.

silencing

(LRES)

could

be

Karen Cichowski (Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Harvard Medical School) reviewed the ﬁnding that inhi-
bition of the mTOR pathway alone is insufﬁcient to cause
MPNST cell death, and proposed a more comprehensive,
cytotoxic approach. She described a new potential combi-
nation therapy for these tumors [6]. Speciﬁcally, she
showed that agents
that enhance proteotoxic stress,
including HSP90 inhibitors, induce rapid tumor regression
in an aggressive genetically engineered mouse cancer
model, but only when combined with the mTOR inhibitor,
rapamycin. Her lab found that these agents synergize by
promoting irresolvable proteotoxic stress and inducing
catastrophic endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial
damage. Moreover, Dr. Cichowski
this

found that

combination therapy is also effective in a genetically
engineered mouse model of K-Ras mutant lung cancer.
These studies have deﬁned a speciﬁc and promising drug
combination that can be assessed in patients with MPNSTs.
Dina Lev (MD Anderson) is studying the impact of
drug-induced autophagy in cancer. While several drugs
promote tumor cell death via a possible autophagic
mechanism and/or apoptosis, such drugs may also promote
the unintentional survival of cancer cells,
indicating a
likely role for drug-induced autophagy as a component of
tumor chemoresistance. Her group has demonstrated that
blockade of the PI3K/mTOR pathway and inhibtion of
HDAC induce autophagy in human MPNST cells, both in
vitro and in xenografts [14]. Furthermore, such genetic and
chemical blockade of drug-induced autophagy signiﬁcantly
enhanced therapeutic apoptotic MPNST cell death, a clear
indication that drug-induced autophagy represents a sur-
vival mechanism in MPNST that may identify a new focus
of therapy development to prevent MPNSTs from becom-
ing resistant to chemotherapy.

NF1 manifestations outside the nervous system

Children with NF1 are predisposed to myoproliferative dis-
ease, to bone abnormalities, and to vascular abnormalities.
Kevin Shannon (UCSF) presented a talk on the effects
of MEK inhibitors in mouse models of acute myeloid
leukemia and myeloproliferative neoplasms,
including
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia. Interestingly, his data
suggest that Raf/MEK/ERK signaling plays a central role
in the pathologic growth of hematopoietic tumors that have
inactivated NF1. However, he found that there are disease
stage-speciﬁc effects of treatment with MEK inhibitors in
that advanced cancers such as AML initiated by NF1
inactivation are highly dependent on Raf/MEK/ERK sig-
naling and sensitive to MEK inhibitors [11]. By contrast,
early stage neoplasms in which NF1 inactivation is the
dominant (or only) cell autonomous genetic lesions are less
‘‘addicted’’ to Raf/MEK/ERK signaling, but respond to
MEK inhibition by modulating aberrant growth. Impor-
tantly, this treatment does not eradicate mutant cells. These
data have implications for treating benign neoplasms and
fully malignant cancers in persons with NF1.

David Ingram (Indiana University School of Medicine)
addressed inﬂammation in the adventitia of the vessel wall
and identiﬁed a central role for macrophages. It is notable
that the recruitment of bone marrow macrophages takes
months. Potential treatment regimens to interrupt recruit-
ment of Nf1 heterozygous macrophages
to inﬂamed
neointima were addressed. Switching topics to assess the
possibility that dysregulated Ras signaling could lead to
aneurismal vessel disease, Dr. Ingram presented mouse
models based on ApoE receptor signaling that when

123

provided a high lipid or high cholesterol diet developed
thickened adventitia and elevated oxidative stress. This
oxidative stress has been seen in an Nf1 drosophila model,
and provides potential in treatment paths for aneurismal
vessel disease. Likewise, the ROS pathway is now a target
for novel therapeutic intervention.

Kimberly Jett (University of British Columbia, Canada)
discussed the effect of vitamin D3 treatment on bone
density (BMD) in NF1 patients. They investigated the
therapeutic potential of high dose oral vitamin D3 on
bone mineral density in NF1 patients with vitamin D3
deﬁciency. The dose that maintained the serum 25-hy-
droxyvitamin D3 level[30 lg/l was used. Treated subjects
had signiﬁcantly improved BMD in hip and lumbar spine
in comparison to untreated subjects. Further studies are
needed to elucidate the mechanisms
responsible for
reduced bone mineral density in NF1.

Cautionary notes

The NF community is focused on using preclinical studies
to guide clinical trials.

Matthias Karajannis (NYU Langone Medical Center)
discussed how preclinical trials are useful to inform clinical
trials by reviewing the use of cultured primary tumor cells,
immortalized/transformed cells, and presumptive cancer
stem cells. While useful for cell-based high throughput
screens, the challenges associated with using these in vitro
models were highlighted, including the development of
secondary genetic or epigenetic changes that may arise in
culture, as well as the inability to assess tumor-host and
host-tumor interactions. As an alternative, he discussed
advantages of genetically engineered mouse models for
preclinical studies.

the

difﬁculties

in

directly

comparing

Scott Plotkin (Massachusetts General Hospital) high-
lighted
the
preclinical mouse model to human patients. Variable ex-
pressivity of NF1 and NF2, effects of other genes, gene/
environment interactions are limits to the ability of mouse
models to inform human disease. Perhaps, the greatest
limitation of the mouse models is their inability to model
the impact of disease on quality of life that is decreased
in NF1, NF2 and schwannomatosis patients. Understand-
ing how psychological and social factors inﬂuence the
experience of living with NF will require human rather
than animal studies.

Update: neuroﬁbromatosis type 2

The NF2 patients are predisposed to vestibular schwan-
nomas, meningiomas and intramedullary tumors. A large
part of the basic science talks was centered continuing

123

Acta Neuropathol

improvement of understanding of NF2 role in tumor initi-
ation and ﬁne tuning of mouse models of different tumor
types that allow preclinical therapeutics.

NF2 models ? mechanisms

Filippo Giancotti (Memorial-Sloan Kettering Cancer Hos-
pital) summarized recent advances in our understanding of
the function of the NF2 gene product Merlin. He outlined
potential models for Merlin’s tumor suppressor function.
He noted that, in addition to playing a role at or near the
cell cortex, Merlin also enters into the nucleus to repress
the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4-DCAF1 [12]. In addition, he
presented evidence that Merlin’s entry into the nucleus and
interaction with DCAF1 can repress activation of YAP
independently of the canonical Hippo pathway described in
Drosophila.

Chunling Yi from Joseph Kissil’s lab (The Wistar
Institute) identiﬁed Angiomotin as a novel binding partner
for Merlin, establishing a physical link between Merlin and
the tight junction-associated Crumbs apical polarity com-
plex [24]. Her data illustrated that Merlin functions through
Angiomotin to control Rac-Pak signaling and also impli-
cated Angiomotin as an integral component of Hippo
signaling. Through the use of an orthotopic model of NF2,
she demonstrated that Angiomotin is required for tumori-
genesis
suggesting that
Angiomotin should be considered a potential therapeutic
target for NF2.

stemmed from loss of Nf2,

Julian Boggiano from Richard Fehon’s lab (The Uni-
versity of Chicago) identiﬁed the Sterile 20 kinase Tao-1 as
an additional upstream regulator of the Hippo pathway
from an in vivo RNAi screen in Drosophila. Tao-1, like
other HSW pathway genes, is required to maintain proper
organ size during development and several HSW pathway
target genes are upregulated in Tao-1 RNAi tissue. In
addition, Tao-1 can directly phosphorylate Hippo at a
critical regulatory site, providing a clear mechanism for
Hippo activation. Interestingly, Tao-1 has recently been
implicated as a negative regulator of microtubule stability,
suggesting a possible link between HSW signaling and
microtubule dynamics.

Duojia Pan (Johns Hopkins University) presented mouse
genetic studies on the functional link between Merlin and
the Hippo pathway. Building on their recent demonstration
that the Merlin-deﬁcient phenotypes of multiple tissues can
be suppressed by heterozygous deletion of YAP [25], he
presented evidence that attenuation of TEAD, the DNA-
binding partner of the YAP coactivator, also suppresses
Merlin-deﬁcient phenotypes in transgenic mouse models.
These ﬁndings provide additional support for an evolu-
tionarily conserved role of Merlin in regulating YAP from
Drosophila to mammals.

Acta Neuropathol

Georg Halder (MD Anderson Cancer Center) is using
Drosophila as a model system to study the Hippo tumor
suppressor pathway. He and his colleagues have previously
shown that Merlin as well as the Fat cadherin and the
crumbs receptor act as inputs into the core Hippo pathway
[8]. They have now used a genome-wide RNAi screen in
cultured cells and identiﬁed the Capping proteins A and B,
known to restrict F-actin polymerization, as regulators of
the Hippo pathway. Interestingly, they found that modu-
lating F-actin organization by knock-down of Capping
proteins or by overexpression of the formin Diaphanous in
vivo caused severe over proliferation by hyperactivation of
the Hippo pathway effector Yorkie. These results suggest
that the actin cytoskeleton may transduce mechanical for-
ces into the Hippo pathway.

Michel Kalamarides (Hopital Beaujon, Inserm U674,
France) presented new insights mouse models of menin-
gioma. He has previously shown that biallelic loss of Nf2 is
rate-limiting for meningioma development with mice
developing grade I meningiomas. Recently, he identiﬁed a
prostaglandin D synthase-positive (PGDS) meningeal pre-
cursor as the cell of origin for murine meningioma, and
showed that Nf2 inactivation in these cells before the for-
mation of the three meningeal
layers accounts for the
heterogeneity of the meningiomas [10]. He presented a new
technology based on the RCAS/tv-a system that he is
currently using to characterize the PGDS cell as a menin-
gioma progenitor cell. Finally, he presented a new mouse
model of grade II and III meningioma by combining
p16Ink4a;p15Ink4b;p19Arf inactivation to Nf2 loss restricted
to arachnoid cells thus mimicking human meningioma
tumorigenesis.

Using mouse models, in which Nf2 inactivation was
speciﬁcally induced in mammary gland luminal epithe-
lium at different stages of development, Jie Huang (Ohio
State University) showed that Merlin is critically involved
in breast development and physiological adjustment dur-
Inactivation of Nf2 from mammary
ing pregnancy.
epithelium during early development leads to substantial
under development of mammary buds at E12.5. Inacti-
vation during mid-to-late pregnancy decreases
cell
proliferation and induces apoptosis leading to decreased
alveolar morphogenesis, decreased milk production and
Inactivation of Nf2
malnourishment of
during early gestation also inhibits cell proliferation and
causes nursing problems during ﬁrst parturition. Cellular
defects caused by Nf2 inactivation included alterations in
the Jak2/Stat5 signaling pathway and defective modula-
tion in tight
junction components as the epithelium
underwent transition from pregnancy to lactation. Inter-
the Nf2 defective
estingly, after multiple pregnancies,
mice develop myoepithelioma-like breast tumors at high
frequency.

the offspring.

Matthieu Peyre (Hopital Beaujon, Inserm U674, France)
presented mouse models for Nf2-meningiomas. Data from
array analysis of human tumors and mouse models point to
different genetic alterations in the initiation and progres-
sion phases of meningiomas. A conditional mouse model,
in which Merlin was speciﬁcally deleted in arachnoidal
cells showed meningothelial proliferation and formation of
meningiomas in 20% of mice at 12 months. If additionally
the entire Cdkn2ab locus was inactivated (p19Arf is ﬂoxed,
p15Ink4b carries an insertion mutation and p16Ink4a a point
mutation) the mean survival decreased to 3.5 months and
69% of the mice developed meningiomas. Most tumors
were grade I, but also higher grade tumors (grades II and
III) were observed with frequent brain invasion, which the
authors monitored with elegant confocal
techniques.
Meningiomas from these mice did not reveal gross chro-
mosomal abnormalities different to the ones found in NF2
patients. This mouse model with short latency for tumor
development and the diversity of grades makes this model
an invaluable tool for investigating new treatments for
meningiomas.

Sarah Burns (Ohio State University) summarized the
published data on pAKT activation in Merlin-deﬁcient
tumors and then presented data on the use of two com-
pounds, AR42 (a histone deacetylase [HDAC] inhibitor)
and AR12 (an AKT inhibitor). She showed an effect of
AR42 in meningioma and schwannoma cells in vitro. As a
mouse model they used xenotransplants with a luciferase-
expressing, Merlin-deﬁcient meningioma cell
line Ben-
Men-1. AR12 treatment led to a reduction of tumor growth
of 42% after 1 month and 65% after 3 months. AR42 led to
tumor reduction by 86% after 1 month and 94% after
3 months. When treatment with AR42 was stopped, there
was minimal re-growth.

The last talk was by Wei Li (Memorial-Sloan Kettering
Cancer Hospital). He presented data on how the E3 ubiq-
uitin ligase CRL4 (DCAF1) connects to an important
pathway in tumorigenesis of Merlin deﬁcient tumors, i.e.
the hippo pathway. The authors looked at contact inhibition
in keratinocytes and showed that under conﬂuent condition
one ﬁnds more phosphorylation of YAP, the transcription
co-activatior downstream of Hippo/Mst 1/2. Further, YAP
phosphorylation is increased in conﬂuent cells as is phos-
phorylation of Mst 1/2. The down-stream effector Lats 1/2
can be seen in the nucleus under conﬂuent conditions.
However, in renal carcinoma cells which do not contain
Salvador, a binding partner of Mst 1/2, Merlin can still
induce YAP phosphorylation, and thus does not need Sal-
vador. He concluded that Merlin can direct YAP
phosphorylation via DCAF1. This is supported by experi-
ments using another cell line meso 33, which is deﬁcient of
Merlin. In these cells re-introduction of Merlin can induce
YAP, which can be inhibited by DCAF1.

123

NF2 clinical research

The clinical session on NF2 was extremely well attended
and showed the groundbreaking clinical/translational
research now ongoing for patients with this condition.

Gareth Evans (St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, UK)
reviewed the topic of gliomas in NF2. Although astrocy-
toma forms a constituent of the NF2 diagnostic criteria, the
main predisposition in NF2 is actually to grade 1/2
ependymomas which show a predilection for the cervical
spine but can involve other spinal areas and medulla.
Occasional low grade astrocytomas occur intracranially in
NF2 but not high grade. EMA immunohistochemistry and
electron microscopy should be used in difﬁcult cases to
distinguish between ependymomas and astrocytomas At
the molecular level, although NF2 mutations have been
described in a proportion of sporadic spinal ependymomas
they have not been found in several large series of high
grade gliomas. In summary, although gliomas are part of
NF2, the type associated is ependymomas and not astro-
cytomas. The group suggested that NF2 diagnostic criteria
should be revised to include ependymoma.

Jaishri Blakeley (Johns Hopkins University) presented
early results from the Phase 0 study of anti- EGFR/ErbB2
therapy in sporadic and NF2-related human vestibular
schwannomas (VS) (NCT00863122). Adult patients with
VS were prescribed lapatinib 1,500 mg daily orally for
10 days immediately preceding surgery for VS resection.
Overall, lapatinib was well tolerated and no dose modiﬁ-
cations were necessary due to adverse events. Tumor
pharmacokinetic data showed good tumor penetration and
immunohistochemical analysis conﬁrmed expression of
EGFR and/or ErB2 in the majority of case and control
samples. The data are promising and support continued
testing of lapatinib as a potential therapy for human VS.

Fabio Nunes (Massachusetts General Hospital) then
presented an update on the MGH series of NF2 patients
treated with bevacizumab (5 mg/kg i.v. every 2 weeks) this
time concentrating on responses in meningioma, a recent
paper having highlighted meningioma response to bev-
acizumab in one patient [7]. The MGH group looked at
their series of 14 patients with evaluable meningiomas
(NCT01207687). An initial radiographic response was
noted in 12/40 meningiomas (30%). Over the duration of
the study, only seven tumors
remained in
response, 20 progressed (50%), and 13 remained stable
(32.5%). The results suggest that bevacizumab was only
effective in decreasing meningioma size in a minority of
meningiomas. There was a presentation from Simone
Ardern-Holmes (The Children’s Hospital at Westmead,
Australia) on the potential value of Positron Emission
Tomography with Gallium-Octreotide to estimate somato-
statin receptor density in order to select NF2 patients most

(17.5%)

123

Acta Neuropathol

likely to respond to somatostatin analogs. The Sydney
based group had performed Gallium-Octreotide PET scans
on 12 NF2 patients. Preliminary results indicated that
octreotide avidity varies considerably among NF2 associ-
ated tumors, with meningiomas showing higher responses.
A young patient had recently been commenced on the
somatostatin analog octreotide (Sandostatin LAR), with a
further patient about to begin treatment. Clinical response
as indicated by symptomatic improvement and 3 dimen-
sional volumetric MRI data will be followed.

There followed two papers looking at quality of life.
Rachael Hornigold (Guy’s and St. Thomas’ NHS Foun-
dation Trust, UK) presented her new NF2 measure the
NFTI-QOL which was speciﬁcally developed to assess a
disease-speciﬁc quality of life score for NF2. The SF-36
and EuroQOL were used for validation. NFTI-QOL scores
correlated strongly and signiﬁcantly with the EuroQOL and
with all domains of
the SF-36 (Pearson correlation,
p B 0.001. THE NFTI-QOL appears to be a promising new
QOL measure speciﬁc to NF2 that is easy to administrate
and score (only 8 items). Vanessa Merker (Massachusetts
General Hospital) presented her research trying to correlate
QOL with whole body tumor burden in patients with NF1,
NF2 and schwannomatosis. Tumor volume and number
were correlated with SF-36 subscales. The study included
142 subjects with NF1, 53 subjects with NF2, and 49
subjects with schwannomatosis. While tumor volume and
count did not correlate with any SF-36 scales in patients
with NF1 or NF2, tumor volume was positively correlated
with bodily pain in schwannomatosis.

Finally, Amanda Bergner (Johns Hopkins Comprehen-
sive Neuroﬁbromatosis Center) presented an update on
the Schwannomatosis International Database, a collabo-
rative effort to allow for pooling of data from multiple
centers. The database was designed to be a platform from
which multiple research endeavors can be launched. The
data points were chosen speciﬁcally to provide adequate
information to identify patients appropriate for a variety
of research studies while remaining de-identiﬁed to pro-
tect
committee
composed of experts in the ﬁelds of schwannomatosis has
been established,
the database has been designed and
built, an effective and efﬁcient infrastructure for coordi-
nating this project has been established, and applications
for use of
trials are now being
received. The project had increased communication and
collaboration within the schwannomatosis community of
experts.

conﬁdentiality. A steering

patient

the data in clinical

A panel session focused on long term hearing preser-
vation strategy in NF2 patients. Michel Kalamarides
(Hopital Beaujon, France) presented his experience in
conservative (watch and wait) approach for selected cases.
He showed that spontaneous hearing preservation is

Acta Neuropathol

frequent in NF2 patients (81% at 5 years in this series)
indicating that a tailored treatment should be based on the
knowledge of
the natural history of each vestibular
schwannoma (VS) in each patient. Michael Link (Mayo
Clinic) shared his experience of radiosurgery in NF2
patients. He has treated 32 VS with a 7-year follow-up.
Hearing preservation was rare (23%) compared to sporadic
VS. However, 80% of irradiated VS showed no growth
allowing cochlear implantation in case of positive respon-
ses during electric stimulation. This strategy could provide
long-term auditory rehabilitation with open-set speech
discrimination in some cases (2 out 4). This strategy needs
further conﬁrmation. Derald Brackmann (House Ear
Clinic) presented his large experience in the proactive
treatment of smaller tumors allowing hearing preservation
rates nearly comparable to those obtained in patients with
sporadic tumors (60%). However, there is a tendency for
growth of new schwannomas within the surgical ﬁeld
(60%). He presented an original surgical strategy per-
formed in 45 NF2 patients: middle fossa decompression of
vestibular schwannoma in only hearing ear. The average
period of hearing maintenance was 2.1 years. The short-
term hearing preservation rate was approximately 90%.
The 1-year hearing preservation rate was 63% [20].
Understanding the duration of hearing preservation can
enable more effective counseling of patients considering
middle cranial fossa decompression for VS. Scott Plotkin
(Massachusetts General Hospital) presented an update
(median time for treatment: 14 months (3–42 m.) of his
series of patients treated with bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF
monoclonal antibody well
tolerated in NF2 (NCT012
07687) [17]. Twenty-three patients were eligible for a
hearing response evaluation: 12 had a hearing response
(deﬁned as a signiﬁcant increase in the word-recognition
score, as compared with baseline), 8 had stable hearing,
and 3 had progressive hearing loss. The median time to
response was 3 months and the median time to hearing loss
is superior to 3 years.

In conclusion, the NF community is unceasingly con-
centrated on identifying the mechanisms of
tumor
development in NF1 and NF2. Lagging behind are under-
standing of schwannomatosis, cognitive changes, and bone
abnormalities in NF1. Continual improvement of mouse
models to provide platforms for validating new anticancer
drugs, performing preclinical
trials to inform ongoing
clinical trials, and designing optimally new clinical studies
including combination therapy remain top priorities in NF
research.

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.

References

1. Acosta MT, Kardel PG, Walsh KS, Rosenbaum K, Gioia GA,
Packer RJ (2011) Lovastatin improves cognitive deﬁcits in NF1:
safety and efﬁcacy study. Ped Neurol 45(4):241–245

2. Bar EE, Lin A, Tihan T, Burger PC, Eberhart CG (2008) Frequent
gains at chromosome 7q34 involving BRAF in pilocytic astro-
cytoma. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 67(9):878–887

3. Brown JA, Emnett RJ, White CR et al (2010) Reduced striatal
dopamine underlies the attention system dysfunction in neuroﬁ-
bromatosis-1 mutant mice. Hum Mol Genet 19:4515–4528

4. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (2008) Comprehensive
genomic characterization deﬁnes human glioblastoma genes and
core pathways. Nature 455:1061–1068

5. Denayer E, Ahmed T, Brems H et al (2008) Spred1 is required for
synaptic plasticity and hippocampus-dependent learning. J Neu-
rosci 28:14443–14449

6. De Raedt T, Walton Z, Yecies JL, Li D, Chen Y, Malone CF,
Maertens O, Jeong SM, Bronson RT, Lebleu V, Kalluri R, Nor-
mant E, Haigis MC, Manning BD, Wong KK, Macleod KF,
Cichowski K (2011) Exploiting cancer cell vulnerabilities to
develop a combination therapy for ras-driven tumors. Cancer Cell
20(3):400–413

7. Goutagny S, Raymond E, Sterkers O, Colombani JM, Kalama-
rides M (2011) Radiographic regression of cranial meningioma in
a NF2 patient treated by bevacizumab. Ann Oncol 22:990–991

8. Halder G, Johnson RL (2011) Hippo signaling: growth control

and beyond. Development 138:9–22

9. Hyman SL, Gill DS, Shores EA, Steinberg A, North KN (2007)
T2 hyperintensities in children with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 and
their relationship to cognitive functioning. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry 78(10):1088–1091

10. Kalamarides M, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Niwa-Kawakita M
et al (2011) Identiﬁcation of a progenitor cell of origin capable of
generating diverse meningioma histological subtypes. Oncogene
30:2333–2344

11. Lauchle JO, Kim D, Le DT et al (2009) Response and resistance
to MEK inhibition in leukaemias initiated by hyperactive Ras.
Nature 461:411–414

12. Li W, You L, Cooper J et al (2010) Merlin/NF2 suppresses
tumorigenesis by inhibiting the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4
(DCAF1) in the nucleus. Cell 140:477–490

13. Liu C, Sage JC, Miller MR et al (2011) Mosaic analysis with
double markers reveals tumor cell of origin in glioma. Cell
146:209–221

14. Lopez G, Torres K, Lev D (2011) Autophagy blockade enhances
HDAC inhibitors’ pro-apoptotic effects: potential implications
for the treatment of a therapeutic-resistant malignancy. Autoph-
agy 7(4):440–441 (Epub 2011 Apr 1)

15. Lorenzo J, Barton B, Acosta MT, North KN (2011) The mental
motor and language development of toddlers with neuroﬁbro-
matosis type 1. J Pediatr 158:660–665

16. Orr BA, Bai H, Odia Y, Jain D, Anders RA, Eberhart CG (2011)
Yes-associated protein 1 is widely expressed in human brain
tumors and promotes glioblastoma growth. J Neuropathol Exp
Neurol 70:568–577

17. Plotkin SR, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Barker FG 2nd et al
(2009) Hearing improvement after bevacizumab in patients with
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2. N Engl J Med 361:358–367

18. Pride N, Payne JM, Webster R, Shores EA, Rae C, North KN
(2010) Corpus callosum morphology and its relationship to
cognitive function in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. J Child Neurol
25:834–841

19. Raabe EH, Lim KS, Kim JM et al (2011) BRAF activation
induces transformation and then senescence in human neural stem

123

Acta Neuropathol

a pilocytic

cells:
17:3590–3599

astrocytoma model. Clin Cancer Res

using magnetic resonance imaging. Pediatr Blood Cancer. doi:
10.1002/pbc.23015

20. Slattery WH, Hoa M, Bonne N et al (2011) Middle fossa
decompression for hearing preservation: a review of institutional
results and indications. Otol Neurotol 32:1017–1024

23. Yang et al (2008) Nf1-dependent tumors require a microenvi-
ronment containing Nf1± and c-kit-dependent bone marrow. Cell
135(3):437–448

21. Verhaak RG, Hoadley KA, Purdom E et al (2010) Integrated
genomic analysis identiﬁes clinically relevant subtypes of glio-
blastoma characterized by abnormalities in PDGFRA, IDH1,
EGFR, and NF1. Cancer Cell 17:98–110

22. Wu J, Dombi E, Jousma E, Scott Dunn R, Lindquist D, Schnell
BM, Kim MO, Kim A, Widemann BC, Cripe TP, Ratner N
(2011) Preclincial
testing of Sorafenib and RAD001 in the
Nf(ﬂox/ﬂox) ;DhhCre mouse model of plexiform neuroﬁbroma

24. Yi C, Troutman S, Fera D et al (2011) A tight junction-associated
Merlin-angiomotin complex mediates Merlin’s regulation of
mitogenic signaling and tumor suppressive functions. Cancer Cell
19:527–540

25. Zhang N, Bai H, David KK et al (2010) The Merlin/NF2 tumor
suppressor functions through the YAP oncoprotein to regulate
tissue homeostasis in mammals. Dev Cell 19:27–38

123

