CONFERENCE REPORT

Recent Developments in Neuroﬁbromatoses and
RASopathies: Management, Diagnosis and Current
and Future Therapeutic Avenues
Katherine A. Rauen,1** Susan M. Huson,2 Emma Burkitt-Wright,2 D. Gareth Evans,3
Said Farschtschi,4 Rosalie E. Ferner,5 David H. Gutmann,6 C. Oliver Hanemann,7 Bronwyn Kerr,2
Eric Legius,8 Luis F. Parada,9 Michael Patton,10 Juha Peltonen,11 Nancy Ratner,12
Vincent M. Riccardi,13 Thijs van der Vaart,14 Miikka Vikkula,15 David H. Viskochil,16
Martin Zenker,17 and Meena Upadhyaya18*
1MIND Institute, University of California at Davis, Sacramento, California
2St Mary’s Hospital, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
3Genomic Medicine, University of Manchester, St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, UK
4Department of Neurology, University Medical Centre Hamburg-Eppendorf Hospital, Hamburg, Germany
5Guy’s & St. Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust London & Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College, London, UK
6Department of Neurology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri
7Center for Biomedical Research Translational and Stratiﬁed Medicine, Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry,
Plymouth, UK
8Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
9Department of Developmental Medicine, University of Texas, Dallas, Texas
10Human Genetics Research Center, St. Georges University, London, UK
11Department of Biology and Anatomy, University of Turku, Turku, Finland
12Division of Experimental Haematology and Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio
13The Neuroﬁbromatosis Institute, La Crescenta, California
14Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
15de duve Institut, Universite´ catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium
16Division of Medical Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah
17Institut fur Humangenetik, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany
18Institute of Cancer and Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK

Manuscript Received: 5 June 2014; Manuscript Accepted: 28 August 2014

Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) was the ﬁrst RASopathy and is
now one of many RASopathies that are caused by germline
mutations in genes that encode components of the Ras/mito-
gen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Their common
underlying pathogenetic etiology causes signiﬁcant overlap in
phenotypic features which includes craniofacial dysmorphology,
cardiac, cutaneous, musculoskeletal, GI and ocular abnormali-
ties, and a predisposition to cancer. The proceedings from the
symposium “Recent Developments in Neuroﬁbromatoses (NF)
and RASopathies: Management, Diagnosis and Current and
Future Therapeutic Avenues” chronicle this timely and topical
clinical translational research symposium. The overarching goal
was to bring together clinicians, basic scientists, physician-
scientists, advocate leaders, trainees, students and individuals

Conflicts of interest: none.
Grant sponsor: NIH/NIAMS; Grant number: AR062165; Grant sponsor:
Wales Gene Park; Grant sponsor: Fonds voor Wetenschappellijk
Onderzoek (FWO)-Vlaanderen; Grant number: G046910N10;
Grant sponsor: Catholic University of Leuven; Grant number: GOA/
11/010; Grant sponsor: Manchester Biomedical Research Centre;
Grant sponsor: Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Training Fellowship.

Correspondence to:
Meena Upadhyaya, Ph.D., FRCPath, Institute of Medical Genetics,
Cardiff University, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN.
E-mail: upadhyaya@cardiff.ac.uk


Correspondence to:

Katherine A. Rauen, M.D., Ph.D., UC Davis MIND Institute, 2825 50th
Street, Room #2284, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.
E-mail: rauen@ucdavis.edu
Article first published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com): 12 November 2014
DOI 10.1002/ajmg.a.36793

Ó 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

1

2

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

with Ras pathway syndromes to discuss the most state-of-the-art
basic science and clinical issues in an effort to spark collabo-
rations directed towards the best practices and therapies for
individuals with RASopathies. Ó 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Key words: capillary malformation–AV malformation syndrome;
cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome; Costello syndrome; neurofibro-
matosis; Noonan syndrome; Legius syndrome; Ras/MAPK; signal
transduction pathway; RASopathy; therapy

How to Cite this Article:
Rauen KA, Huson SM, Burkitt-Wright E,
Evans DG, Farschtschi S, Ferner RE,
Gutmann DH, Hanemann CO, Kerr B,
Legius E, Parada LF, Patton M, Peltonen J,
Ratner N, Riccardi VM, Vaart TVD,
Vikkula M, Viskochil DH, Zenker M,
Upadhyaya M. 2015. Recent developments
in neuroﬁbromatoses and RASopathies:
management, diagnosis and current and
future therapeutic avenues.

Am J Med Genet Part A 167A:1–10.

INTRODUCTION

The international symposium “Recent Developments in Neuro-
ﬁbromatoses (NF) and RASopathies: Management, Diagnosis and
Current and Future Therapeutic Avenues” was held on
September 30th and October 1st, 2013 in Cardiff, Wales, UK at
the Radisson Blu Hotel. Clinicians, basic scientists, physician-
scientists, clinical and molecular geneticists, advocate leaders,
genetic counselors, trainees, students, and individuals with Ras/
MAPK syndromes and their families attended. Nearly 150 regis-
trants participated. This conference was organized under the
auspices of Wales Gene Park, Cardiff. Educational funds were
provided by NeuroFoundation, NF Ireland, Children’s Tumor
Foundation, International Costello Syndrome Support Group,
Noonan Syndrome Association, NewGene, BioMarin, Heart Re-
search Fund for Wales, and Sheila and Clive Owen. Professor Meena
Upadhyaya chaired the symposium and welcomed all by sharing the
history of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) research in Cardiff,
Wales, UK. Research started in 1983 with Dr. Susan Huson, under
Professor Peter Harper’s leadership, and now 30 years later, is still
an active area of research. Dr. Upadhyaya became involved in NF1
in 1986 just as Dr. Huson was leaving Cardiff to take a position in
London. The team was able to contribute toward the mapping of the
NF1 locus a year later and subsequently made substantial contri-
butions towards cloning of the gene, establishing protocols for
molecular diagnosis including both constitutional and somatic
mutation detection of NF1, understanding functional analysis of
mutations and establishing genotype-phenotype correlations. Re-
cently, the research team has focused on NF1-associated cancers in
order to generate potential therapeutic targets. Dr. Upadhyaya
explained that human genomics is revolutionizing medical genetics
which has evolved from dealing with single gene-based syndromes
to pathway-based groups of conditions. Accordingly, RASopathies
constitute a group of syndromes that are caused by molecular
lesions in the Ras/Mitogen-activated Protein Kinase (MAPK)
pathway. It is estimated that over 50,000 people in the UK could
be affected by RASopathies, so as genetic conditions, they are
collectively not so rare. NF1 was, of course, the ﬁrst RASopathy
to be recognized, even if that wasn’t obvious at the time; however,
during the last few years many more RASopathies have been
identiﬁed [Upadhyaya and Cooper, 2012]. In summary, this two
day symposium achieved its goal by providing an open forum for
attendees to share and discuss basic science and clinical issues

setting forth a solid framework for future research, translational
applications directed towards therapy and best practices for indi-
viduals with NF and other RASopathies. These proceedings provide
the clinical and scientiﬁc communities with an executive summary
of the clinical translational research symposium and to publish the
abstracts from the platform presentations.

SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS

Session I was chaired by Eric Legius and Vincent Riccardi. This session
reviewed the different forms of neuroﬁbromatoses, the differential
diagnoses and the molecular bases of the syndromes NF1, neuroﬁ-
bromatosis type 2 (NF2) and schwannomatosis. Complex NF1 is
deﬁned as unusual NF1 phenotypes and rare complications or
manifestations of disease that are potentially life threatening or cause
signiﬁcant morbidity. Tumor burden and whole body MRI in NF1
was discussed in the context of plexiform neuroﬁbromas (PNF) which
can be seen in up to 50% of individuals with NF1.

Session II, led by Susan Huson and Meena Upadhyaya, focused
on mouse modeling and preclinical testing in NF1. Discussion in
this session focused on neoplasia in NF1. The ﬁrst presentation
described in NF1 there are two central issues in the ﬁeld of solid
tumors: (1) What the identity of the tumor source cells is? and (2)
Whether solid tumors propagate in a clonal versus hierarchical
model. The second presentation focused on translational research
with genetically-engineered animal models for NF1 and the treat-
ment of neuroﬁbromas with MEK inhibitors.

Session III was moderated by Nancy Ratner and D Gareth Evans
and centered on learning issues in NF1 and clinical trials for NF1. As
discussed in this session, one of the major barriers to the successful
implementation of clinical trials, of which many have focused on
learning issues, is an incomplete appreciation of the heterogeneity
inherent to this disorder.

Session IV was chaired by Rosalie E Ferner and David Gutmann
and focused on NF2, schwannomatosis and related disorders. In
addition, preclinical modeling and clinical trials were discussed for
NF2. Merlin, the protein encoded by NF2, is a tumor suppressor
which is haploinsufﬁcient in NF2 and is lost in a variety of tumors.
New drug targets and how they translate into early clinical trials
were discussed.

RAUEN ET AL.

3

Session V was led by Luis F Parada and David Viskochil. This
session discussed the complexities of understanding the function of
neuroﬁbromin (Nfn), as well as the examination of social skill levels
in NF1 individuals and the overlap of their social skills and autism.
As was introduced in Session I, bone health is of great concern in
individuals with NF1.

In Session VI, moderated by Bronwyn Kerr and Martin Zenker,
the RASopathies were introduced. The RASopathies include NF1,
Noonan syndrome (NS), NS with multiple lentigines, Costello
syndrome (CS), cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC), capillary
malformation–arteriovenous malformation syndrome and Legius
syndrome. Detailed clinical overviews were provided on CS and
Legius syndrome.

Session VI was chaired by Katherine Rauen and Michael Patton.
This session continued the detailed clinical overviews of RASopa-
thies and included in-depth discussion of capillary malformation–
ateriovenous malformation syndrome, CFC, NS and NS with
multiple lentigines (formally known as LEOPARD). In addition,
the session provided an over view of animal modeling in the
RASopathies, as well as exploring treatment for these genetic
syndromes.

SPEAKERS’ ABSTRACTS
Diagnosing the Different Forms of
Neuroﬁbromatosis: A Practical Approach

Susan Huson. The different forms of NF are distinguished
clinically by what combination of skin pigmentary changes, eye
features and peripheral/central nervous system tumors the patient
has. Neuroﬁbromas are seen in NF1 and schwannomas in NF2 and
schwannomatosis although there is some overlap including
tumors with a mixture of histologies. Diagnosis is usually straight-
forward after clinical evaluation, although expert histological
review of tumors and radiological review of imaging may be
necessary. In childhood, the commonest presentation is of a child
with multiple cafe´-au-lait (CAL) spots referred as possible NF1.
There are few other conditions in which a child will have multiple
CAL spots without other obvious clues to a non-NF1 diagnosis.
They occur in various ring chromosome syndromes but the child
will usually have more developmental problems than seen in NF1
and other dysmorphic features. If the pigmentation varies in
intensity and has very irregular edges, or follows large segments
of the body then other diagnoses such as DNA repair syndromes,
pigmentary miscegeny (the result of parents having very different
skin coloring) or McCune-Albright need to be considered. If the
CALs are limited to one or more body segments mosaic/segmental
NF1 is likely. In children with less than six CAL the possibility of
NF2 needs to be considered. Children with sporadic severe NF2
may present in childhood with peripheral nerve/skin schwanno-
mas or characteristic eye changes causing visual problems. Recent-
ly recognized conditions like Legius syndrome and constitutional
mismatch repair deﬁciency syndrome (CMMRD) mean the NIH
diagnostic criteria for NF1 are no longer robust. Patients with
Legius syndrome present with CAL spots and skinfold freckling
indistinguishable from NF1, the distinguishing features clinically

are the absence of Lisch nodules and neuroﬁbromas. CMMRD is
caused when a child inherits a mismatch repair gene mutation
from each parent. The heterozygote parents may therefore have a
family history that suggests hereditary non-polyposis colon can-
cer, although this is not always the cases particularly with the less
penetrant PMS2 gene. The skin phenotype of CMMRD consists
usually of irregular hyper-pigmented and hypo-pigmented lesions.
However, rare cases can have segmental or full blown NF1 with the
somatic NF1 mutation occurring as a secondary event. These
children are at an increased risk of childhood CNS and hemato-
logical malignancies and survivors develop colon cancer at a young
age, inheritance is recessive. The NIH criteria include a ﬁrst degree
relative with NF1 by the above criteria. CMMRD and the fact that
pure gonadal mosaicism (with unaffected parents having two
children with NF1) is extremely rare means that siblings alone
should not count in the diagnosis.

Complex NF1

Rosalie Ferner. The majority of individuals with NF1 manage
well with the support of local clinicians, community services and
family. However, specialized care is required for people with rare
complications or unusual NF1 phenotypes and for disease mani-
festations that are potentially life threatening or cause signiﬁcant
morbidity. The Complex NF1 multi-disciplinary services were
established in London and Manchester in 2009 with the aim or
providing long-term education, management and support for
people with complex disease and their families. The experience
of the London unit was discussed and some retrospective and
prospective clinical ﬁndings were highlighted. Currently 360
patients attend the service and 411 complex disease manifestations
were identiﬁed in this cohort between 2009 and 2013. The com-
monest problem identiﬁed was symptomatic PNFs (99 patients)
and the presentation was with one or more of persistent pain,
neurological deﬁcit or sphincter disturbance, or change in texture
or size of visible lesions. Sixty patients have been followed-up or
diagnosed with malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST)
since 2009. Thirty-seven of 60 (61.6%) patients have survived at
least ﬁve years from the initial diagnosis. In 34 individuals with
pseudarthrosis, the tibia was the site most frequently involved and
24 patients required surgery including excision of dysplastic bone,
external ﬁxation with bone grafting and bone morphogenetic
protein and below knee amputation in four cases. Fifty patients
were diagnosed with brain glioma including pilocytic astrocytoma,
ﬁbrillary astrocytoma and two people with glioblastoma multi-
forme. Although many tumors remained indolent, twenty ﬁve
individuals with gliomas required surgery and two had intracranial
shunts for hydrocephalus. The commonest mode of diagnosis for
65 NF1 associated gliomas was neuroimaging for unrelated symp-
toms and nine children were diagnosed on visual screening. Thirty-
four people required treatment for progressive visual impairment
and ﬁve were treated after the age of 6 years. Erroneous diagnoses of
NF1 included NF2, schwannomatosis and Cowden syndrome.
Complex NF1 services will facilitate prospective data collection
and the formulation of management protocols and outcome meas-
ures to promote high quality patient care.

4

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

Tumor Burden and Whole Body MRI in NF1

Said Farschtschi. NF1 is an autosomal dominant inherited
tumor predisposition disorder with an estimated incidence of
about 1:3000 and characterized by the occurrence of PNF in about
50% of patients based on whole body MRI studies. PNF are rarely
identiﬁable by physical examination and are a major cause for
morbidity in NF1 patients. Malignant transformation from PNF
into MPNST is the most important cause of early death in the NF1
population. We are evaluating new therapeutic approaches in order
to identify patients at risk. Whole body MRI might be used as a
potential risk stratiﬁer for NF1 risk groups. Recent studies were
focusing on following questions:

1. Whole body tumor burden in children and adolescents with NF1

2. Growth dynamics of PNFs

3. Relation between cutaneous/subcutaneous and internal tumor

burden

4. Internal tumor burden and risk of MPNST

5. Growth behavior after surgery of PNF

About 57% of 65 NF1 patients show internal PNF with 46%
exhibiting tumor speciﬁc deﬁcits such as pain and/or neurological
impairments. PNF tend to cause complications in older children
and adolescents more frequently than in young children. Growth
rate of tumors is correlated with total internal tumor volume and
inversely correlated with age. Patients without tumors are unlikely
to develop new internal PNF. In terms of risk stratiﬁcation subcu-
taneous but not cutaneous tumors can be used to estimate whole
body internal tumor volume. Scalp subcutaneous neuroﬁbromas
are easy to detect and to count on cranial MRI and seem to be a
valuable prognostic marker for internal tumor load. Additionally
we found that a high number of PNF and/or a large tumor burden in
young age are important risk factors for MPNSTs. After surgery
regrowth of PNF was observed with a signiﬁcant accentuation in
young patients. After complete resection, regrowth of PNF seems to
be very unlikely. Internal tumors are accurately identiﬁable by
whole body MRI and volumetry of these lesions allows quantitative
analysis of tumor progression. Longitudinal studies are necessary to
assess the potential value of whole body MRI and volumetric
analysis in clinical care, for example risk assessment for morbidity
or malignant degeneration. Volumetric analysis of tumor burden in
NF1 patients can be used to detect small changes over time. For best
results it is recommended to use the same imaging parameters in all
follow-up studies, such as ﬁeld of view, imaging matrix, image
resolution, echo time, repetition time and inversion time.

New Developments in Mouse Modeling of NF1

Luis Parada. Two central questions in the ﬁeld of solid tumors
are: The identity of the tumor source cells; and moreover, whether
solid tumor propagates in a clonal versus hierarchical model.
Answers to these questions are of importance because of the

therapeutic implications. If the cell of origin for MPNST is in
fact a rather unique and rare cell, then its isolation and study would
be critical to better understanding the process and mechanism of
tumor development. Likewise, if the cells propagate as an essentially
equivalent mass of cells, then gross tumor shrinkage is an accurate
assessment of therapeutic effectiveness. If however, the tumors
develop in a hierarchical manner in which the cells with tumor
propagation properties (cancer stem cells) represent only a subset of
tumor cells, then therapeutic value can only be measured by the
effects on the cancer stem cell population and not on the tumor as a
volume as a whole. For this the putative cancer stem cell would have
to be identiﬁed, isolated and analyzed. We have developed and
studies mouse models of NF1 based MPNST to attempt to evaluate
these processes and by extension to seek new therapeutic avenues to
these intractable tumors. Our studies point to a relatively rare
population of neural crest derived progenitors as the source of
murine MPNSTs. Using this key piece of information, we have been
able to more precisely analyze the molecular changes of the cell of
origin as it becomes transformed into a malignant cell. These
studies have led to the identiﬁcation of the G-coupled receptor,
CXCR4 as a critical component for the MPNST cells to proliferate.
We have identiﬁed the intracellular pathways downstream of
CXCR4, associated this pathway to human patient MPNSTs and
devised novel strategies to therapeutically tackle these tumors.
Using a variety of transgenic tools devised in the laboratory, we
have further addressed the question of the cancer stem cell. Our
preliminary studies with MPNST, based on much more advanced
work on glioblastoma, give us indication that MPNSTs indeed grow
in hierarchical manner. These preliminary ﬁndings are under
rigorous validation. Together with the above mentioned studies,
we have optimism that we will have successfully exploited our
mouse models to learn more about MPNST development and to
identify novel therapeutic opportunities.

Preclinical Testing in NF1

Nancy Ratner. NF1 patients are predisposed to develop benign
PNFs that cause substantial morbidity. Surgery, the only standard
treatment, is not feasible for most tumors. The NF1 gene product
accelerates Ras-GTP hydrolysis to Ras-GDP and thus functions as a
potent negative regulator of Ras. The Ratner laboratory developed a
genetically engineered mouse model of neuroﬁbroma, DhhCre;
Nf1ﬂ/ﬂ, for use in preclinical testing; response is monitored by MRI
imaging and volumetric analysis in conjunction with pharmacoki-
netic and pharmacodynamic readouts. The most effective neuroﬁ-
broma therapy in this neuroﬁbroma mouse model to date is drug
candidates targeting inhibition of MEK1/2. New studies of the
allosteric MEK inhibitor PD-0325901 using the DhhCre;Nf1ﬂ/ﬂ
model were described. Results indicated that even lower doses than
those previously tested (1.5 mg/kg/day) retain efﬁcacy, and that no
rebound effect occurred after dosing, although tumors did regrow.
Also, early MEK inhibition, for 3 months, delayed but did not
prevent neuroﬁbroma growth. Recently published studies aimed at
modeling white matter in NF1 and Costello syndromes were also
described. Ratner’s group induced Nf1 loss or HRas hyperactiva-
tion in mouse oligodendrocytes. Enlarged brain white matter tracts
correlated with myelin decompaction, and, surprisingly, non-cell-

RAUEN ET AL.

5

autonomous defects in perivascular astrocytes and the blood-brain
barrier. Treating mice with the NOS inhibitor NG-nitro-L-arginine
methyl ester or the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine corrected cellular
phenotypes. CNP-HRasG12V mice also displayed locomotor hy-
peractivity, which were rescued by antioxidant treatment. It will be
interesting to determine if antioxidants can improve some behav-
ioral deﬁcits in RASopathy patients.

Learning Problems in NF1

Eric Legius and Thijs van der Vaart. NF1 is an autosomal
dominant disorder characterized by multiple cafe´-au-lait spots,
benign tumors of the peripheral nerves and learning and behavioral
problems. The NF1 gene codes for Nfn, a protein responsible for the
down-regulation of activated RAS proteins. RAS signaling is highly
increased in many malignancies. More recently it has been shown
that the RAS-pathway is also very important for learning and
memory. There are now a number of inherited conditions known
that are caused by mutations in genes coding for key components of
the RAS-pathway such as NF1, NS, LEOPARD syndrome, CFC
syndrome, CS, and Legius syndrome. These disorders are all
associated to some degree with learning and behavioral problems.
More recently it has been shown that children with NF1 have a
higher frequency of social cognition problems. Previous work by
the group of Alcino Silva showed that hyperactivation of the MAPK
pathway in inhibitory GABA-ergic interneurons in heterozygous
Nf1 knockout mice is responsible for a reduced synaptic plasticity
leading to learning problems in these animals and that reversing of
the hyperactive RAS pathway was able to acutely correct the
learning problems in adult mice. One of the drugs successfully
used in mice was lovastatin. This opened the door to clinical trials in
humans with NF1. At this moment several trials using statins in
children have been initiated and recently a larger trial by the
Rotterdam and Leuven groups following up on the initial pilot
trial was ﬁnished and did not show any beneﬁt on cognition from
taking simvastatin during a 12-month period.

Clinical Trials for NF1

David Gutmann. NF1 is a common neurogenetic condition
characterized in part by defects in Ras regulation. While the
discovery that the NF1 protein, Nfn, is a critical negative Ras
regulator has opened the door to rational targeted drug therapies
for NF1, one of the major barriers to the successful implementation
of clinical trials is an incomplete appreciation of the heterogeneity
inherent to this disorder. Numerous factors that contribute to
clinical heterogeneity and limit our ability to deliver effective
treatments for the medical problems arising in people with NF1
were discussed. Using NF1-associated brain tumors (optic glio-
mas), genomic/genetic factors have been found to inﬂuence glioma
formation and clinical behavior . In addition, leveraging novel Nf1
genetically engineered mouse strains, a series of experiments were
described establishing the critical importance of the timing of
somatic Nf1 gene inactivation, the cell of origin, and the local
cellular microenvironment to gliomagenesis and continued tumor
growth. Strategies are needed to better dissect clinical heterogeneity
as a critical step towards the design and execution of precision

medicine for individuals with NF1. These strategies include (1) the
development and utilization of enabling resources, such as the NF1
Patient Registry Initiative, clinically annotated DNA and induced
pluripotent stem cell repositories (http://nfcenter.wustl.edu), and
research-oriented patient clinical databases, (2) robust collections
of informative preclinical small-animal models, and (3) an efﬁcient
clinical trials infrastructure. Over the past decade, the generation of
accurate preclinical genetically-engineered mouse strains coupled
with the establishment of the Department of Defense NF Clinical
Trials Consortium has created a logical pipeline for drug discovery,
early evaluation and translation to human subjects. The future
stratiﬁcation of individuals with NF1 into clinically distinct sub-
groups will provide exciting opportunities for risk assessment and
targeted individualized therapies for this patient population.

NF2 and Related Syndromes

D Gareth Evans. NF2 is an autosomal dominant tumor pre-
disposing condition caused by mutations in the NF2 gene on
chromosome 22. Individuals who inherit a mutant copy inevitably
develop schwannomas on the vestibular nerves at some time in their
lives. Most individuals develop bilateral disease in addition to
schwannomas on other cranial and spinal nerve roots. Meningio-
mas affect about 70% of individuals at some time in their lives and
low grade ependymomas are also common especially in the cervical
spine. Management of NF2 requires a multidisciplinary team
approach involving: neurosurgeons, otolaryngologists, neurolo-
gists, neuroradiologists and geneticists. NF2 has a birth incidence
of 1 in 25–33,000 and a prevalence in the UK of 1 in 56,000. There are
at least two other related syndromes to NF2 that cause predisposi-
tion to either schwannomas and/or meningiomas. Schwannoma-
tosis is rarer than NF2 and causes painful predominantly spinal and
peripheral nerve schwannomas with sparing of the cranial nerves.
About 50% of inherited cases are due to germ-line mutations in the
SMARCB1 gene and about 10% of sporadic cases. There are
continuing searches to identify remaining schwannomatosis genes
by exome sequencing. Recently we identiﬁed the gene SMARCE1 by
this approach as the cause of a predisposition to spinal clear cell
meningiomas and have now identiﬁed six families with germ-line
mutations.

Preclinical and Clinical Trials for NF2

Oliver Hanemann. The validity of the human in vitro model of
human schwannoma as model for merlin deﬁcient tumors has been
established. Our model reﬂects in vivo ﬁndings and emphasizes that
schwannomas are genetically well deﬁned and homogenous. Tyro-
sine kinase receptors are found to be overexpressed and activated in
human schwannoma. These are mainly ErbB2, ErbB3, PDGFR, and
Axl. Activation of these leads to downstream activation of the Ras/
Mek/Erk and Pi3K pathway. The in vitro model allows one to test
drug candidates. PDGFR inhibitors Sorafenib, Nilotinib, and Ima-
tinib led to reduction in Erk pathway activity and proliferation.
Sorafenib was most effective. Erb/EGFr Lapatinib showed less effect
than Sorafenib and Nilotinib with the MEK inhibitor Selumtinib in
between. The combination of Nilotinib and Selumtinib demon-
strated to be quiet effective in vitro. Building on this, the status of

6

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

current clinical trials in NF2 was overviewed. The published data on
avastin and lapatinib was summarized and the on-going Phase 2
trials with everolimus, the Phase 1 trial AR42 (HDAC inhibitor) and
the Phase 0 trial with Sorafenib were discussed.

Understanding Neuroﬁbromin Function—A
Clinicians Perspective

Vincent M. Riccardi. The task of understanding Nfn, the gene
product of the NF1 gene, is substantially different from under-
standing the disorder, NF1, although the hereditary nature of NF1
pointed to the presence of a unique gene ultimately accounting for
the disorder. The actual understanding of Nfn was initiated with the
cloning of the NF1 gene, more than a century after the disorder’s
deﬁnitive characterization. While modest progress has resulted
from detailing and cataloging NF1 mutations and deletions, and
carrying out genotype–phenotype correlations among thousands of
patients with NF1, these data merely establish a partial phenotype
for mutations and deletions. They do not directly address Nfn
function determined by the wildtype alleles. For example, innu-
merable investigators have labeled NF1 a “tumor suppressor gene,”
keying off one element of the mutations’ phenotypes. More accu-
rately, we only know that, for a large number of NF1 gene changes,
there are many “tumor contributor mutations.” Moreover, it is not
even clear whether this attribution applies, on the one hand, to the
array of sarcomas and other malignancies associated with NF1 or
also, on the other hand, to the neuroﬁbromas that are hallmarks of
the disorder. Designating a neuroﬁbroma to be a “tumor” is as
much poetry as it is science. Over the long run, the neuroﬁbroma
will best be understood as a scar, a type of “wound-healing gone
awry.” Ribeiro and colleagues quite convincingly document this
consideration, although they perpetuate the notion that the lesion,
the neuroﬁbroma, is necessarily a tumor and that diploinsufﬁciency
for Nf1 abrogates a “tumor suppression” function of NF1/Nf1 wild-
type alleles. Applying a clinical approach to the NF1 disorder,
acknowledging that compromised attentiveness is the most consis-
tent cognitive element of the disorder, one can characterize the NF1
gene as an “attentiveness suppressor gene” and appropriately rename
Nfn as Attentin. If the clinical approach has any merit at all, it is most
likely to be fruitful in this regard: The wild-type NF1 alleles
contribute to human performance, with speciﬁc regard to functions
of the central, peripheral and autonomic nervous systems, particu-
larly when time is of the essence, when response “on the instant” is
required for organism and species survival. This conclusion is
reinforced by acknowledging the NF1 person’s lean habitus and
absence of diabetes, the attributes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
homologues of NF1 and, ﬁnally, the most well-studied interactome
element of NF1 and NF1 mutations, namely, “hyperactive Ras” or
RasGTP “overdrive.” This presentation had three elements: (1)
Background material emphasizing previous work on NF1, the
disorder, NF1 mutations, and details of RasGTP “overdrive,” as
well as recent publications establishing a role for “metabolic sig-
natures” and cell–cell “cooperativity” as cogent alternatives to
mutations and clonality in understanding lesions characterized
by cell accumulations, such as tumors and granulation tissue;
(2) A review of relevant literature regarding the roles of aerobic

glycolysis and substrate level phosphorylation under both physio-
logical and pathological conditions, with particular regard to
biochemical stress and physical conﬁnement (tight places, such
as myelin sheaths, ﬁlopodia), combined with a synthesis empha-
sizing the role of glycolytic metabolic signatures in considering
therapeutic approaches to treating incipient and established neuro-
ﬁbromas; (3) A literature review documenting that mast cell
sequestration of skin keratinocyte-synthesized vitamin D3 (chole-
calciferol) can account for both the low levels of calcidiol and/or
calcitriol and thereby at least some NF1 skeletal and extra-skeletal
abnormalities, including neuroﬁbroma development and the po-
tential for NF1 treatment with inhibitors of mast cell degranulation,
for example, ketotifen.

Social Skills and Overlaps with Autism in NF1
Patients

David Viskochil. The prevalence of autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) is purported to be increased in NF1, although this diagnosis
is often inferred from parent-reported screening tools such as the
Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) rather than through direct
evaluations using gold standard diagnostic assessments such as
the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) or the Au-
tism Diagnostic Interview (ADI). It is not known if the psychomet-
ric properties of ASD screening tools are appropriate for detection
of possible autism in the NF1 population. We compared the rate at
which children with NF1 screen positive for two ASD-speciﬁc
screening tools [Modiﬁed Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-
CHAT) and Childhood Autism Spectrum Test (CAST)] to the
screen-positive rate of children from the general population. Med-
ical records of children between the ages of 16 months and 11 years
seen in the University of Utah NF Clinic were reviewed for an ASD
screening questionnaire. Individuals scheduled for NF1 evaluation
or follow-up assessment in the NF Clinic between September 2010
and June 2012 were included in this assessment. Of 342, 153 met
criteria for NF1 or greater than 5 cafe-au-lait spots and 42 were
between 16 and 48 months of age, while 111 were between 4 and
11 years of age. Of this group, 21 families completed the M-CHAT
survey (mean age 30.5 months, range 19–47months, 12 males); and
46 completed the CAST survey (mean age 6.8 years, range 4–11
years, 25 males).

There were no statistically signiﬁcant differences in the screen-
positive rate for ASD in NF1 when compared to published control
screen-positive rates, but mean CAST scores were higher in NF1
suggesting that school aged children with NF1 may exhibit more of
the traits of ASD without reaching the threshold of screening
positive for ASD. In reviewing the literature on prevalence of
ASD in NF1, there is a tendency to rely on screening tools to infer
an association of ASD symptoms without establishing a diagnosis of
ASD. Although ASD characteristics are frequent in NF1, other
issues such as cognitive deﬁcits, learning problems, and attention
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder are further pronounced and could
inﬂuence the social adaptation phenotype. In her PhD dissertation
at the University of Utah (1993), C. Dilts identiﬁed 3 key ﬁndings in
her conclusion. One conclusion is “Motor skill deﬁcits and their
inﬂuences on adaptive behavior were the most frequent problem in

RAUEN ET AL.

7

the NF sample across both cognitive and behavioral variables.” A
second observation is, “Examination of speciﬁc ratings on a Social
Problems measure indicated that the phenomenon of being teased
by others was the most commonly rated problem followed by the NF
child acting too young.” Finally, a third conclusion was that “Ex-
amination of the items on the Child Behavior Checklist Social
Problems scale suggested that peer acceptance may interact when
the child or adolescent with NF acts different (plays with younger
children, clumsy) from age-level peers; that is, social problems may
relate to maturational factors.” It will be important for future studies
to dissect the social skills deﬁciencies of the NF1 population to
capture the phenotype with a more appropriate term than autism.

NF1 and Bone Health

Juha Peltonen. NF1 related lesions of bone can be primary,
without any apparent reason other than NF1 itself, or secondary
caused by adjacent tumor growths. Pseudarthrosis of long bones
and dystrophic scoliosis usually manifest at a young age. A rapid and
long lasting treatment is needed to treat these ailments and the
outcome may fall far from full recovery. Systemic osseous abnor-
malities, low bone mineral density (BMD), are common in NF1.

Osteoporosis is found in 20–40% of adult patients with NF1

affecting both genders. A recent register-based study has shown that
patients with NF1 have an increased fracture risk, especially, and in

men and women aged 40 or more, and in children with NF1. The

increased fracture risk in adults with NF1 is associated with low
BMD. Since NF1 has been associated with hyperactive Ras signaling
and bisphosphonates partially affect Ras in osteoclasts, it may be
possible the bisphosphonates have unexpected effects in patients
with NF1. This is supported by the fact that osteoclasts derived from
blood samples of patients with NF1 are insensitive to bisphosph-
onate-induced apoptosis in vitro compared to control osteoclasts.
In our pilot study, ﬁve men and a woman, aged 28–76 years, with
NF1-related osteoporosis were enrolled to the study. The medica-
tion included a weekly dose of 70 mg alendronate and a daily 20 mg
vitamin D supplementation. After 23 months of follow-up, bone
mineral density was increased in ﬁve out of six patients, but the
increase was not statistically signiﬁcant. Levels of serum bone
turnover markers CTX and PINP were reduced, suggesting slower
bone remodeling as expected. Even though the study group was
small, the ﬁndings of the current study (one new fracture and one
patient with decreased bone mineral density) call for a larger study
to assess the efﬁcacy of bisphosphonates in NF1-related osteopo-
rosis. Our studies of craniofacial and dental manifestations in NF1
have revealed that periapical cemental dysplasia is common in
women with NF1. The radiologic ﬁndings of this harmless condi-
tion may be mistakenly interpreted as infection requiring root canal
treatment. Clinical examination of 110 patients showed that NF1
per se does not predispose to caries. The results are important to
report since a common anecdotal perception is that the rate of caries
may be higher in NF1 compared to reference population.

Overview of the RASopathies

Katherine A. Rauen. The RASopathies are a group of clinically
related developmental disorders which are caused by germ-line

mutations in genes that encode components, or regulators of the
Ras/MAPK pathway. As a group, the RASopathies are one of the
largest groups of malformation syndromes known, affecting ap-
proximately 1:1,000 individuals and include NF1, NS, NS with
multiple lentigines, capillary malformation–arteriovenous malfor-
mation syndrome, CS, CFC and Legius syndrome. The Ras/MAPK
pathway plays an essential role in the regulation of the cell cycle,
differentiation, growth and cell senescence, all of which are critical
to normal development. As a result, Ras/MAPK pathway dysregu-
lation has been shown to have profound deleterious effects on both
embryonic and later stages of development. Because the underlying
molecular mechanism for these syndromes is dysregulation of the
Ras/MAPK pathway, the RASopathies exhibit numerous overlap-
ping phenotypic features, including reduced growth, characteristic
facial features, cardiac defects, cutaneous abnormalities, neuro-
cognitive delay and a predisposition to neoplasia, both benign and
malignant.

Legius Syndrome

Eric Legius. Germline loss-of-function mutations in human
SPRED1 were ﬁrst reported in 2007 in patients with a NF1-like
phenotype (Legius syndrome), and since then several reports have
conﬁrmed this ﬁnding. Legius syndrome clinically presents with
multiple cafe´-au-lait spots with or without axillary or inguinal
freckling. Other typical NF1 associated features (Lisch nodules,
bone abnormalities, neuroﬁbromas, optic pathway gliomas, and
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors) are systematically ab-
sent. Loss-of-function mutations in SPRED1, a negative regulator
of the RAS-MAPK pathway, result in overactivation of this signal
transduction cascade. Recently a SPRED1 mutation database was
established based on the Leiden Open Variation Database (LOVD)
software and is accessible online at http://www.lovd.nl/SPRED1
The database contains a spectrum of different mutations: frameshift
(32%), missense (32%), nonsense (22%), copy number changes
(CNCs) (9%), splicing (2%), silent (1%), in-frame deletion (1%),
and a mutation affecting the initiation codon (1%). Sixty-three
mutations and deletions are deﬁnitely pathogenic, most likely
pathogenic or suspected to be pathogenic, 7 SPRED1 missense
mutations are probably benign and 17 are still unclassiﬁed.

Costello Syndrome

Bronwyn Kerr. CS was ﬁrst described in the 1970s by Jack
Costello, a New Zealand Pediatrician, who recognized the key
characteristics in two patients. There were no further publications
until 1991 when der Kaloustian published a third case, suggested the
name “Costello syndrome” and noted the resemblance to NS and
CFC. Over the next decade, a number of reports deﬁned the key
clinical features: Severe feeding difﬁculty, in nearly all requiring
nasogastric feeding or gastrostomy; mild to moderate intellectual
disability; after infancy, a pleasant sociable personality; a distinctive
face and hands; relative macrocephaly; short stature, in some due to
growth hormone deﬁciency; warts at moist surfaces and a high
incidence of cardiac abnormalities. A high risk of malignancy,
particularly embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma in early childhood
and bladder carcinoma from adolescence, emerged with recom-

8

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

mendations for a screening protocol. This was subsequently modi-
ﬁed due to the observation, as yet unexplained, of abnormal urinary
catecholamines as part of the CS phenotype. The discovery of
activating mutations in HRAS established CS as a disorder of the
Ras/MAPK pathway and illuminated the clinical overlap between
CS, Noonan and CFC syndromes. Differentiation of CS from these
disorders, particularly CFC, may be difﬁcult, particularly in early
life, as there are few if any clinical ﬁndings that are speciﬁc to one
disorder rather than another. Mutation analysis has conﬁrmed the
core adult and childhood phenotypes, and permitted estimation of
incidence, with a birth prevalence in the UK, based on mutation
testing, from 2000 to 2009 of 1/381,914 live births. The prenatal
phenotype has been delineated and a severe neonatal phenotype has
emerged. Mild and atypical phenotypes have also been described.
Severity scoring has demonstrated a genotype–phenotype correla-
tion. A more accurate delineation of aspects of the natural history
has been possible. A mouse model replicates some aspects of the
human phenotype. These studies are a prerequisite for considering
treatment trials, and accurate outcome measures. The views of
affected patients and their families are however of at least equal
importance in evaluating endpoints.

Capillary Malformation–Arteriovenous
Malformation: A RASopathy Caused by RASA1
mutations

Miikka Vikkula. Capillary malformation–arteriovenous mal-
formation (CM–AVM; OMIM 608354) is an autosomal dominant-
ly inherited vascular disorder with high penetrance (97%) and
variable expressivity. Affected individuals usually have small, mul-
tifocal, randomly distributed, pale capillary malformations, many
of which have a white halo around. About one-third of the patients
have an associated fast-ﬂow lesion, which can involve the skin,
subcutaneous tissue, muscles, bones, brain, or spine. The fast-ﬂow
lesion can be an arteriovenous malformation, or an arteriovenous
ﬁstula. The majority of them are located in head and neck, being
extra- or intracranial. Intra-CNS fast-ﬂow lesions are seen in about
10% of mutation carriers. Those in infants seem to be more severe
and at higher risk of bleeding, including vein of Galen aneurysmal
malformation. Spinal lesions also occur. Parkes Weber syndrome,
characterized by a large capillary blush on an extremity, arteriove-
nous microﬁstulas, and bony and soft tissue hypertrophy, is also
part of the phenotype. Those with CM–AVM, have additional CMs,
distant to the Parkes Weber lesion. Some CM–AVM patients have
cutaneous areas covered by numerous punctate telangiectasias with
white halos. This may make one think of hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia. Occasionally, lymphedema is present in CM–AVM.
CM–AVM is caused by loss-of-function mutations in RASA1. Over
100 heterozygous mutations have been identiﬁed in greater than
130 patients [(http://www.icp.ucl.ac.be/vikkula/VAdb/home.php)
Most are private]. De novo mutations are frequent, occurring in
about 30% of patients. Thus, familial history is not a diagnostic
necessity. In about a fourth of patients, no coding region RASA1
mutation can be identiﬁed. We have demonstrated for two other
dominantly inherited vascular malformations that the inherited
mutation is not sufﬁcient for the multifocal lesions to develop. In

mucocutaneous venous malformations (VMCM, OMIM 600195)
due to a “weak” inherited gain-of-function TIE2 mutation, a loss-
of-function second-hit was identiﬁed in one lesion. In glomuve-
nous malformations (GVM, OMIM 138000), caused by inherited
loss-of-function glomulin mutations, several second-hits have been
identiﬁed. The most frequent is an acquired uniparental isodisomy
(aUPID) of chromosome 1p, on which the glomulin gene is located.
In CM–AVM we addressed this issue, by studying a likely radio-
therapy-induced tumoral tissue that had arisen within a large CM
on an arm. The tissue turned out to contain four mutations, two of
which involved RASA1: An inherited splice site mutation and
deletion of the complete long arm of chromosome 5, on which
the RASA1 is located. This combination should lead to complete
local loss of p120RASGAP, encoded by RASA1. Thus, it is plausible
that the double-hit mechanism is also involved in CM–AVM. We
tested RASA1 in two other disorders characterized by asymmetric
limb enlargement and vascular malformations, namely in the
Klippel–Trenaunay syndrome and in regional capillary malforma-
tion with overgrowth. We did not identify any clear pathogenic
change in these patients. Thus, besides clinical and radiological
criteria, RASA1 testing constitutes an additional tool to differenti-
ate patients with Parkes Weber syndrome of CM–AVM from
clinically overlapping disorders. RASA1 encodes p120RASGAP a
RASGTPase. It is involved in turning down RAS activity after
growth factor induced activation. In the absence of p120RasGap,
murine cells show prolonged Ras signaling associated with defective

migration. p120RasGAP /  embryos die at E9,5, and mosaics

generate overt superﬁcial vascular defects by E15. Thus, modulators
of RAS signaling pathway activity may hold the promise for future
targeted therapies of CM–AVM, as for other RASopathies.

Cardio-facio-cutaneous Syndrome

Emma Burkitt-Wright. CFC is a severe condition that arises
due to germ-line mutation in one of several genes of the Ras-MAPK
pathway, most commonly BRAF. Such mutations nearly always
arise de novo in the individual, and genetic and phenotypic overlaps
with NS are well-recognized. Clinical features include developmen-
tal delay, feeding difﬁcultsies, learning disability and epilepsy,
congenital heart disease including pulmonary stenosis and atrial
septal defect, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and a wide range of
ectodermal manifestations. Genotype–phenotype correlation is
challenging, hampered by the small number of identiﬁed patients,
extensive genetic and allelic heterogeneity and the fact that some
patients have no identiﬁable mutation. We have recently identiﬁed
a novel and strong association between MAP2K1 p.Tyr130Cys
mutations and extensive joint contractures, which have been
progressive through childhood and early adult life, and a source
of severe impairment in these patients. The existence of patients
with a clinical CFC diagnosis and no identiﬁable mutation implies
that further genes may be involved. All known genes for CFC and NS
need to be tested before a novel causative gene can be invoked as the
explanation for any such presentation. The identiﬁcation of SHOC2
mutations, initially described as the cause of a distinct presentation,
“Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair,” in multiple
patients with clinical diagnoses of CFC in the cohort identiﬁed
in Manchester bears witness to this. Affected patients frequently had

RAUEN ET AL.

9

severe and enduring feeding difﬁculties, often requiring gastro-
stomy, a variety of cardiac defects, short stature with relative
macrocephaly, learning disability and a wide range of ectodermal
manifestations, each of which were consistent with the clinical
diagnosis of CFC.

Exome sequencing of patient-parent trios has power to identify
de novo mutations, and hence to investigate the molecular basis of
CFC. This approach identiﬁed a frameshift mutation in NF1 in a
patient with a clinical diagnosis of CFC (on the basis of severe
developmental delay, intractable feeding difﬁculties, short stature
with relative macrocephaly, curly hair, and other ectodermal
features), with a previous history of hepatoblastoma. While it is
unclear if other factors may be contributory to this patient’s
phenotype, this observation provides proof of principle of the
value of trio exome sequencing for investigating CFC, and high-
lights the overlapping nature of germ-line Ras/MAPK pathway
disorders.

Noonan and NS with Multiple Lentigines

Michael A. Patton.

I started my work on NS in 1986 after being
invited to talk to the new UK patient group which was being set up. I
did not know at that stage that I would be spending the next 25 years
working on the syndrome, but it has been a very exciting journey
and one of the highlights has been the opportunity to work with
Dr. Jacqueline Noonan who described the syndrome in 1968.
Around that time we set up a national clinical and genetic study
on NS in the UK and we recruited around 150 families with whom
we undertook a number of studies which I will describe. We were
also able to keep in touch with this cohort of families and undertake
a 20 year follow up study which we published. It is very important to
understand the natural history of genetic disorders and I hope we
will be able to revisit this cohort in the future as although we did not
ﬁnd an increase in the incidence of cancer there are still concerns
that this may occur in later life as the genetic defect lies in a pathway
with increased cellular growth. The facial features of NS change with
age and can be quite subtle. We did a number of studies with facial
measurement but worked with Peter Hammond in developing
sophisticated photogrammetry software that can capture the facial
features from children of different ages and “morph” through the
different ages to demonstrate the changes. Such software does not
provide a diagnosis on its own but has been very useful for training
dysmorphologists about the changing facial phenotype. There have
been many studies on the cardiac abnormalities in NS and the
classic lesion is pulmonary stenosis. The heart valve is often
thickened and the standard pull through valvotomy may not in
some cases be sufﬁcient. However encouragingly we found that 68%
of the cohort only required follow up and did not require any
surgical heart treatment. The growth studies conﬁrmed that chil-
dren with NS are on the lower centiles for height and may beneﬁt
from growth hormone. It is interesting to note that the head is
relatively large and this is a feature that has been noted in other
RASopathies without any speciﬁc mechanism being suggested. The
hematological features of NS are diverse and still not fully explained
by the underlying genetic mechanisms. The link between acute
myelomonocytic leukemia and NS has been very elegantly dissected
by Marco Tartaglio and colleagues. In our original studies we found

that there are a variety of defects in the intrinsic coagulation cascade
and in some cases there were defects in multiple coagulation factors
which suggested that the genetic abnormality might be affecting the
transcription of other genes in this pathway. To my knowledge
defects of coagulation factors have not been reported in the other
RASopathies. The diagnosis of NS has been greatly improved with
molecular testing. There are now eight genes contributing to this
disorder and testing individual genes has proven to be inefﬁcient as
it is now possible to use panels or next generation sequencing
techniques to undertake this screen in a relatively short time frame.
PTPN11 mutation still account for around half of the cases of NS.
The majority of cases of NS with multiple lentignes also have
mutations in the PTPN11 gene. The SHOC2 gene is associated
with NS with “loose anagen hair” or sparse slow growing hair and
remains unique in having a speciﬁc genotype–phenotype correla-
tion. The RIT1, a recently reported gene, was found in 17 out of 180
Noonan patients who have remained gene negative after conven-
tional diagnostic testing. It is associated with a very high frequency
of cardiomyopathy. Although there has been great progress in our
understanding of this disorder there are still clinical features such as
the joint pains and lymphedema that require more research and
there are probably further genes to discover in the Ras/MAPK
pathway. This has been a very stimulating meeting and there has
been a useful cross-fertilization of ideas between the different
approaches to this molecular pathway.

Animal Models and Treatment Trials for Noonan
Syndrome

Martin Zenker. Cardiac abnormalities, short stature, and var-
iable learning difﬁculties represent major clinical issues in NS and
related RASopathies, and they are mainly responsible for the
patients’ need of long-term therapeutic intervention and medical
care. While it is well established that constitutive Ras pathway
dysregulation caused by mutations in several of its components or
modulators is the common basis of this group of disorders, the
precise pathophysiology that is underlying those clinical manifes-
tations is incompletely understood. New insights have been gained
from animal models for NS and have raised the idea of pathophysi-
ology-based (causal) treatment for NS and related disorders. Vari-
ous animal models for NS and related disorders, including mouse,
zebraﬁsh and fruitﬂy models, have been developed and studied
during the last years. They have shown that activating mutations in
the Ras/MAPK signaling cascade cause a characteristic pattern of
cardiovascular, skeletal, and neurologic abnormalities in different
species, recapitulating many aspects of the human disorders. Phar-
macologic interventions have been explored to rescue phenotypic
consequences of Ras pathway dysregulation in some animal mod-
els. These studies have been focused on cardiac, skeletal, and
neurological manifestations of NS and their results can be summa-
rized as follows: (i) Physical malformations such as heart defects
and craniofacial abnormalities may be prevented by early (embry-
onal/prenatal) MEK inhibitor treatment; (ii) hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy as an abnormality that is likely driven by ongoing
dysregulation of intracellular signaling processes can be ameliorat-
ed or even reversed by postnatal inhibition of Ras/MAPK signaling

10

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

or related signaling pathways, such as PI3K-AKT, depending on the
underlying genetic defect; (iii) as previously shown for Nf1 and
Spred1 mouse models, inhibitor treatment may also be beneﬁcial
for learning issues in an animal model for NS. Together, those
studies have also contributed to an understanding of Ras-depen-
dent signaling as a complex signaling network where other Ras
effector pathways besides the MAP kinases are involved, and may
have to be considered in the development of new therapeutic
strategies. Considering such complexity of physiological as well
as disturbed signaling in those pathways, translation of the knowl-
edge gained from animal studies into clinical practice is not trivial.
No results of clinical trials using Ras pathway inhibitors have been
published, so far. The only medical treatment for NS that has been
explored in several studies is growth hormone treatment. General
pharmacological considerations regarding inhibitor treatment for
individuals affected by NS and related RASopathies have to include
the following aspects: (i) Pharmacological inhibitors are not abso-
lutely speciﬁc for distinct protein kinases; (ii) delivery of the drug to
target tissues may grossly differ from each other (e.g., brain vs.
heart); (iii) signaling happens in networks rather than linear path-
ways, and feedback loops may have to be considered; and (iv)
restitution of a hypothetical basal pathway activity may not neces-
sarily also restore physiological signaling dynamics. There is thus an
obvious need of additional preclinical studies. On the way towards
clinical trials, it will also be important to gain deeper knowledge
about natural history and genotype–phenotype correlations in
RASopathies. Family support groups need to be involved. Major
practical questions that also remain to be answered are regarding
the selection of appropriate study populations and pharmacologi-
cal compounds (or a combination of compounds), parameters for
monitoring of treatment effects, and the deﬁnition of treatment
endpoints. Thus, despite the growing evidence that NS and related

disorders may be amenable at least to some extent to small molecule
inhibitor treatment, the most important thing we have to ask our
patients for is to be patient.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank all the participants who attended the symposium which
made this event such a success. We are grateful to Professor Julian
Sampson and Professor Peter Harper for their support for this
conference, and Angela Burgess and Nina Lazarou for their hard
work. We are grateful to Julia Mogridge (Neuro Foundation, UK),
David Farrel (NF Ireland), Dawn Purkiss (NeuroFoundation),
Colin and Cath Stone (Costello syndrome Association), and Ian
Legg(Noonan Association) for sharing their inspirational stories.
We thank NeuroFoundation, NF Ireland, Children’s Tumor Foun-
dation, International Costello Syndrome Support Group, Noonan
syndrome Association), BioMarin, NewGene, Heart Research Fund
for Wales, and Sheila and Clive Owen (Wales) for their ﬁnancial
support. We are grateful to Jincy, Taniesha, Hannah, Ellie and
Harriet for their assistance.

This work was supported in part by grants NIH/NIAMS
AR062165 (K.A.R.), Wales Gene Park (MU), Fonds voor Weten-
schappellijk Onderzoek (FWO)- Vlaanderen (G046910N10) and a
concerted action grant from the Catholic University of Leuven
(GOA/11/010) (EL), Manchester Biomedical Research Centre, and
the holder of a Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Training Fellow-
ship (EBW).

REFERENCE

Upadhyaya M, Cooper DN. 2012. Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: Molecular

and cellular biology. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.

