PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012. 7:469–95

First published online as a Review in Advance on
November 7, 2011

The Annual Review of Pathology: Mechanisms of
Disease is online at pathol.annualreviews.org

This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev-pathol-011811-132441
Copyright c(cid:2) 2012 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved

1553-4006/12/0228-0469$20.00

Pathogenesis of
Plexiform Neuroﬁbroma:
Tumor-Stromal/
Hematopoietic Interactions
in Tumor Progression

Karl Staser,1,2 Feng-Chun Yang,2,3
and D. Wade Clapp1,2,4
1Department of Biochemistry, 2Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Department of Pediatrics, 3Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
and 4Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202; email: dclapp@iupu.edu

Keywords
neuroﬁbromatosis, NF1, mast cell, SCF, c-kit

Abstract
Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a genetic disease that results from
either heritable or spontaneous autosomal dominant mutations in the
NF1 gene. A second-hit mutation precedes the predominant NF1 neo-
plasms, which include myeloid leukemia, optic glioma, and plexiform
neuroﬁbroma. Despite this requisite NF1 loss of heterozygosity in the
tumor cell of origin, nontumorigenic cells contribute to both general-
ized and speciﬁc disease manifestations. In mouse models of plexiform
neuroﬁbroma formation, Nf1 haploinsufﬁcient mast cells promote in-
ﬂammation, accelerating tumor formation and growth. These recruited
mast cells, hematopoietic effector cells long known to permeate neuroﬁ-
broma tissue, mediate key mitogenic signals that contribute to vascular
ingrowth, collagen deposition, and tumor growth. Thus, the plexiform
neuroﬁbroma microenvironment involves a tumor/stromal interaction
with the hematopoietic system that depends, at the molecular level,
on a stem cell factor/c-kit-mediated signaling axis. These observations
parallel ﬁndings in other NF1 disease manifestations and are clearly
relevant to medical management of these neuroﬁbromas.

469

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

OVERVIEW: NF1,
NEUROFIBROMAS,
AND MAST CELLS

caused by

NF1
Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1, also known
as von Recklinghausen’s disease) is a genetic
disorder
autosomal dominant
mutations in the NF1 gene, which encodes
neuroﬁbromin, a protein that accelerates the
intrinsic hydrolysis of p21ras (Ras) from its
guanosine triphosphate (GTP)- to guanosine
diphosphate (GDP)-bound conformation. This
disease afﬂicts approximately 1 in 3,500 persons
worldwide in a pandemic fashion, and it is the
most common genetic disorder with a predis-
position to cancer (1). NF1 manifests with both
nontumorigenic and tumorigenic maladies, in-
cluding learning disabilities, skeletal dysplasia,
nonhealing fractures (pseudarthrosis), myeloid
leukemia, and tumors such as optic glioma
and the namesake neuroﬁbroma. The disease’s
hallmarks include hyperpigmented areas of the
skin (caf´e-au-lait macules) and hamartomas on
the iris (Lisch nodules), which are important
diagnostic criteria and may be observed in the
infancy or childhood of afﬂicted individuals (2,
3). Because prominent NF1 symptoms arise
from neural crest–derived tissue (e.g., glia,
Schwann cells, melanocytes), some reports
have characterized NF1 as a disorder of the
neural crest. However, NF1 pathologies arise
in organs derived from all embryonic germ
layers, and we should consider NF1 to be not
only a tumor predisposition syndrome but also
a systemic developmental disorder (4).

Neuroﬁbromas
tumor syndromes ap-
NF1-like cutaneous
peared in the literature during the eighteenth
century (5–7), and in the 1880s, Friedrich von
Recklinghausen (8) published seminal obser-
vations detailing cutaneous tumors composed
of both neuronal and ﬁbroblastic tissue. NF1’s
pathognomonic neuroﬁbromas
slowly
solid tumors
progressing, heterogeneous,

are

composed of Schwann cells, ﬁbroblasts,
vascular cells, and invading hematopoietic
cells, which are predominantly degranulating
mast cells (Figure 1) (9–14). Cutaneous and
subcutaneous neuroﬁbromas derive from small
peripheral nerve branches during adolescence
or adulthood and are found in nearly all individ-
uals with NF1 (15). By comparison, plexiform
neuroﬁbromas afﬂict half (or fewer) of individu-
als with NF1 and develop from cranial and large
peripheral nerve sheaths; they may initiate dur-
ing gestation or early infancy from abnormally
differentiated nonmyelinating Schwann cells
or their less differentiated precursors (16, 17).
Plexiform neuroﬁbromas typically cause
lifelong disﬁgurement, disability, and mortal-
ity. In many cases, plexiform neuroﬁbromas
compress cranial nerves and/or peripheral
nerve roots at the vertebral column and create
an array of morbidities, including paresthesias,
paralysis, drooling, sleeplessness, respiratory
and gastrointestinal distress, blindness, and
loss of bowel and bladder control (18, 19). A
plexiform neuroﬁbroma can also transform
into a malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor, a highly morbid, metastatic cancer that
afﬂicts up to 10% of NF1 patients in their
lifetime (20, 21).

Treatment of plexiform neuroﬁbromas con-
sists primarily of symptom management and/or
surgical resection. In many cases, the tumor’s
close involvement with vital nerve tissue, vascu-
lature, or other viscera complicates surgery (18,
19, 22). Currently, the tumors have no medical
therapy or cure, although several molecularly
targeted compounds are in preclinical or
clinical testing (23–27). Problematically, nerve
sheaths and heavily collagenized areas may di-
minish drug bioavailability, complicating direct
pharmacological inhibition of the tumor mass.
Therefore, therapeutic strategies that target
components of the tumor microenvironment,
including vascular cells and inﬁltrating mast
cells, may prove viable alternatives (28). In this
review, we discuss insights into the interactions
among the tumor, stroma, and pathogenic
mast cells that may be relevant for therapy.

Staser· Yang· Clapp

470

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

Human NF1 patients 

Murine NF1 tumor model 

aa

bb

cc

dd

ee

ff

Figure 1
Cutaneous neuroﬁbromas, plexiform neuroﬁbromas, and histology. Example of cutaneous neuroﬁbromas
covering the chest and abdomen of a patient with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1). Magnetic resonance
images of a large plexiform neuroﬁbroma (indicated by arrows) compressing (a) the spinal column and
(b) the abdominal viscera. Mouse models of NF1-associated plexiform neuroﬁbroma development exhibit
(c) enlarged dorsal root ganglia (red arrows), which are histologically composed of wavy Schwann cells,
numerous ﬁbroblasts, and a mast cell inﬁltrate (d ). (e) Alcian blue deeply stains mast cell granules, and
( f ) trichrome stain highlights the abundant collagen typical of neuroﬁbromas. Images of human patients
reproduced with permission from the Children’s Tumor Foundation (http://www.ctf.org).

Mast Cells

Mast cells are cytoplasmic granule–containing
hematopoietic cells that are thought to arise
from common myeloid progenitors prior to
granulocyte/monocyte lineage commitment
(29). Mast cell precursors migrate from the
bone marrow into the vasculature and en-
ter dermal tissue, where they mature into
immune effector cells. Mast cells help to

ﬁght pathogens, increase resistance to certain
venoms and toxins, and may perform other
immunomodulatory functions, both pro- and
anti-inﬂammatory (30–33). Although mast cells
are known predominantly as the mediators of
allergy and allergic asthma via immunoglobulin
E/Fcε receptor I pathways, they depend on
stem cell factor (SCF) signaling at the c-kit re-
ceptor tyrosine kinase for their generation and,
in some contexts, pathophysiological activation

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

471

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

(34–37). Indeed, mice that have marked loss of
c-kit signaling because of spontaneous muta-
tions affecting both copies of the c-kit receptor
tyrosine kinase gene (W, or white spotting
locus, mutants) exhibit profoundly reduced
numbers of tissue-resident mast cells (35).

There is evidence that the proinﬂammatory
activities of mast cells and other immune effec-
tor cells sustain tumor microenvironments in
various disease models (reviewed in References
38–40). In this inﬂammatory microenviron-
ment hypothesis,
tumorigenic cells recruit
and co-opt the functions of nontumorigenic
hematopoietic cells via unchecked mitogenic
and chemotactic signals. These recruited cells,
in turn, coordinate vascular ingrowth; collagen
deposition; and the pathological inﬂammation
promoting extracellular matrix remodeling,
tumor expansion,
invasion, and metastasis.
Speciﬁcally, mast cells can synthesize and
secrete matrix metalloproteinases, various cy-
tokines (e.g., interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis
factor α), and multiple mitogens [e.g., nerve
growth factor, vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), and platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF)] (32, 33) with putative roles in
tumor initiation, maintenance, and growth.

Mast cells have been associated with NF1
since 1911, when Greggio (14) ﬁrst noted “les
cellules granuleuses” in neuroﬁbroma tissue.
Decades later, several investigators conﬁrmed
their presence by using traditional histology
and electron microscopy (9–13). By the 1980s,
mast cells were widely recognized inﬂamma-
tory effectors and hallmark histological features
(albeit of unknown signiﬁcance) of the neuroﬁ-
broma. Riccardi (41) hypothesized that mast
cells may critically contribute to neuroﬁbroma
formation and proposed that mast cell degranu-
lation explained his clinical observations of co-
incident pruritus and cutaneous neuroﬁbroma
formation. A small human study with ketotifen,
a second-generation H1 antihistamine that
is also reported to have mast cell–stabilizer
activities,
slowed
neuroﬁbroma growth (42), but a subsequent
multiphase trial
conﬁrmed only antipru-
ritic and analgesic effects, not neuroﬁbroma

reduced pruritus and/or

Staser· Yang· Clapp

472

reduction (43). Thus, although ketotifen may
provide symptomatic improvement,
its role
in changing the overall disease appears to be
limited.

As discussed in this review, recent biochemi-
cal, transplantation, and pharmacological stud-
ies have implicated a preponderant role for
SCF-mediated mast cell gains in function in
orchestrating the neuroﬁbroma microenviron-
ment. This SCF/c-kit coordination of mast cell
inﬂammation and tumor growth may inform a
novel approach to NF1 therapeutics.

NF1 GENETICS

NF1 Mutations
Discovery of the NF1 gene and its cloning have
been fundamental to diagnosing the associated
disease,
to the evolving understanding of
NF1 pathogenic mechanisms, and to the
ongoing development of novel therapeutics.
Notably, the genetic identiﬁcation of NF1 was
a prerequisite for the generation of accurate
NF1 disease models in mice, biological tools
that have greatly accelerated research into
experimental therapeutics. A century after von
Recklinghausen’s seminal case reports (8), ge-
netic linkage studies in NF1-afﬂicted families
identiﬁed the pericentromeric region of chro-
mosome 17 as the genomic region harboring
the gene responsible for the disease (44, 45).
Further studies in patients with translocations
of chromosome 17 (46–49)
facilitated the
identiﬁcation and full-length sequencing of the
NF1 gene (50), which spans 350 kb of human
chromosome 17 (17q11.2) and encodes 59
exons that produce a 2,818–amino acid protein
(46, 51–53). Note that human neuroﬁbromin
and its mouse homolog share 98% identity at
the protein level (54).

Approximately half of NF1 mutations in
humans arise spontaneously (55); the majority
of mutations lead to premature truncation of
the protein neuroﬁbromin (56, 57). When NF1
mutations occur postmeiotically,
individuals
may exhibit segmental NF1 with manifesta-
tions conﬁned either regionally or to a subset

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

types (e.g., only
of normally affected cell
pigmentation defects)
(58). Different NF1
frameshift and point mutations do not necessar-
ily correlate with phenotypic severity, although
some studies have shown that microdeletions
that encompass the entire NF1 locus (which
account for less than 10% of mutations) are as-
sociated with earlier onset and more profound
disease manifestations (59, 60). Phenotypic
variation tends to be high even within families,
and pedigree analyses indicate that although
NF1 mutations are fully penetrant, variation in
genes independent of the NF1 locus critically
modulates time to onset and course of the
disease (61, 62). Parallel to the human data,
different Nf1-mutant mouse strains exhibit
both varied expression levels of Nf1 and vari-
able susceptibility to different NF1-like disease
manifestations (63). Overall, with the exception
of the documented severity associated with
NF1 locus–encompassing microdeletions and
a uniquely mild phenotype associated with
a 3-bp deletion in exon 17 (64), particular
genetic mutations or genomic variations that
may correlate to speciﬁc disease outcomes are
largely unknown.

least

functions, at

NF1 encodes neuroﬁbromin, a protein
that
in part, as a Ras
GTP-activating protein (GAP) (65–69). Neu-
roﬁbromin and other Ras-GAPs exponentially
accelerate the intrinsic hydrolysis of Ras-GTP
to its inactive GDP-bound conformation (70).
In response to multiple mitogenic stimuli, ac-
tive Ras-GTP orchestrates diverse protein sig-
naling networks, including mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK)- and Akt-directed path-
ways (71–75). Thus, by accelerating the conver-
sion of Ras-GTP to Ras-GDP, neuroﬁbromin
negatively regulates Ras-dependent signaling
cascades and, generally, downregulates mito-
genic events across diverse protein networks.
In cases of NF1 heterozygosity or nullizygosity,
as observed in somatic cells and in tumor cells
of individuals with NF1, respectively, down-
stream Ras-mediated phosphorylation and
transcriptional events can increase in duration
and total output. Such global upregulation of
Ras-dependent activity in NF1/Nf1-disrupted

to cellular gains

in
tissue typically leads
function,
including enhanced proliferation,
migration, and survival in multiple cell types
(reviewed in References 76–80). Notably, the
speciﬁc Ras effectors potentiated by loss of
NF1 may vary by cell and receptor type, and
biochemical consequences in one cell-receptor
system may or may not be observed in another.

NF1 Gene Dosage
Although NF1 is classiﬁed as a classical Knud-
son tumor-suppressor gene, multiple studies
have shown that NF1 heterozygosity critically
modulates cell fate and function by altering
Ras-dependent biochemical pathways in dis-
tinct cell types (reviewed in Reference 79).
Moreover, physiological Ras activity regulates
embryogenesis, early development, and normal
tissue maintenance. Therefore, neuroﬁbromin
may be viewed not only as a tumor suppressor
but also as a regulator of histiogenesis, cellular
maintenance, and repair (4). Accordingly, NF1
is a disorder of both tumor predisposition and
developmental dysplasia.

Although somatic cells in an individual
with NF1 are heterozygous for NF1,
loss
of heterozygosity (LOH)
in different cell
types typically precedes hallmark hyperplastic,
dysplastic, and neoplastic disease manifesta-
tions. LOH has been demonstrated in human
tissue samples and conﬁrmed in NF1 mouse
models of certain NF1 pathologies via multiple
molecular techniques, which coincides with
NF1’s designation as a tumor-suppressor gene.
For example, LOH permits neuroﬁbroma
formation in Schwann cells or their precursors
(17, 81–83), precedes cutaneous neuroﬁbroma
formation in skin-derived glial precursors (15),
initiates pheochromocytoma in chromafﬁn
cells (84), produces hyperpigmentation (e.g.,
caf´e-au-lait macules) in melanocytes (58, 85),
induces myelomonocytic leukemia in myeloid
progenitor cells (86), and permits astrocytoma
formation in glia (87). Recent studies have also
revealed LOH in tissues extracted from tibial
pseudarthrosis (88), although involved cell
types and their exact genetic requirements have

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

473

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

Table 1 The cell of origin and known heterotypic interactions in multiple neuroﬁbromatosis type 1
(NF1) symptoms

Neoplasia
Plexiform neuroﬁbromas
CNS gliomas
Dermal neuroﬁbromas
Pheochromocytomas
Early CNS gliomas
Early glial tumors
Myeloid leukemia
Other symptoms
Caf´e-au-lait macules
Pseudarthroses
Osteoporosis

Cognitive deﬁcits
Vascular disease

Cells of origin

−/− Schwann cells or their precursors

Nf1
Nf1−/− astrocytes
Nf1
Nf1−/− chromafﬁn cells
Nf1−/− astrocytes
Nf1
Nf1−/− myeloid cells

−/− glia

−/− skin-derived glial precursors

+/− background/uncleara

Other cells

+/− mast cells
Nf1
Nf1+/− microglia
Nf1
Unclear
Noneb
None
None

−/− melanocytes

+/− osteoblasts
+/− osteoclasts

Nf1
Nf1−/− or Nf1+/− connective tissue
Nf1
Nf1
Nf1+/− neurons
Nf1
Nf1

+/− endothelia
+/− vascular smooth muscle

Unclear
Unclear
Unknownc

Unknown
Unknown

aUnclear indicates that the data were derived from mouse and/or human samples with a heterozygous Nf1/NF1 background
but that a ﬁrm conclusion has not been made as to whether the condition requires this background.
bNone indicates that these symptoms can emerge despite wild-type supporting cells.
cUnknown indicates that although Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency appears to be sufﬁcient for pathogenesis, the possibility of
undetected cooperating events cannot be ruled out. These data derive principally from studies in both mice and humans.
Abbreviation: CNS, central nervous system.

not yet been clearly documented (Table 1)
(89, 90).

Although it is unknown why some tissues are
more susceptible to NF1 LOH and subsequent
disease manifestation, a general hypothesis sug-
gests that normal regulation of Ras signaling
in certain cell types, for unclear reasons, de-
pends more heavily on neuroﬁbromin activity
and/or expression levels than on the activity of
other Ras-GAPs. Similarly, identical cell types
located within discrete regions of an organ may
demonstrate an increased dependency on NF1
expression and its Ras-GAP activity. Recent
studies have shown that astrocytes and neu-
roglial stem cells in the optic nerve and brain
stem express more neuroﬁbromin and more
readily manifest phenotypic consequences in its
absence when compared with astrocytes from
the frontal cortex (91, 92). These observations
help explain the NF1-associated predisposi-
tion of astrocytoma to arise as optic glioma
and not within the forebrain. In other NF1

Staser· Yang· Clapp

474

pathologies, the mechanisms behind regional
and tissue type–speciﬁc reliance on functional
neuroﬁbromin is largely unknown, although in-
sights in this area could impel future discovery
of spatially and/or temporally targeted molec-
ular therapies.

short

Individuals with NF1 also have an in-
creased prevalence of multiple generalized
manifestations that do not appear to require
cell-speciﬁc biallelic inactivation of NF1, im-
plicating a systemic gene-dosage effect. These
pathologies include skeletal and mesenchymal
dysplasia (e.g.,
stature, osteoporosis,
and soft tissue malformation), disorders of
neurocognitive development (e.g., retardation,
spatial/visual coordination, and autism), and
vascular pathologies (e.g., ﬁstulae, infarcts, and
aneurysms). Corresponding to these ﬁndings,
biochemical and animal studies have shown
various abnormalities of function in Nf1/NF1
heterozygous osteoblasts and osteoclasts (93–
95), GABA neurons (96), endothelial cells (ECs)

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

(97, 98), and smooth muscle cells (99). These
studies and others have additionally demon-
strated increased risk for NF1-associated
bone, neuronal, and vascular disease in Nf1
heterozygous mice. Thus, NF1 heterozygosity
alone alters Ras-dependent pathways to a
degree sufﬁcient for the pathological alteration
of normal developmental and homeostatic
processes in multiple organ systems.

Although NF1 heterozygosity may predis-
pose NF1 patients to generalized deﬁciencies,
NF1 heterozygous cells appear to also critically
modulate neuroﬁbroma growth and mainte-
nance. In mice, Nf1 haploinsufﬁcient mast cells
and ﬁbroblasts, major constituents of the het-
erogeneous plexiform neuroﬁbroma, demon-
strate multiple gain-in-function phenotypes
that include enhanced proliferation, survival,
migration, and cytokine production in response
to speciﬁc stimuli (100, 101). These data par-
allel ﬁndings in Nf1 haploinsufﬁcient microglia
(102), which critically modulate the inﬂamma-
tory microenvironment of NF1-associated op-
tic glioma (103–105). In some mouse models
of plexiform neuroﬁbroma and optic glioma
formation, tumorigenesis requires Nf1 hap-
loinsufﬁciency in nontumorigenic cells. Specif-
ically, hematopoietic stem cell transplanta-
tion studies in the Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Krox20Cre and
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;P0aCre models (discussed in detail
in the section titled The Stem Cell Factor/c-
kit Axis in Plexiform Neuroﬁbroma Formation
and Its Therapeutic Implications, below) have
shown that neuroﬁbroma genesis requires Nf1
haploinsufﬁciency and c-kit-mediated signaling
in the hematopoietic compartment (24).

Thus, heterotypic interactions between the
tumor, the hematopoietic system, and other
stromal components critically promote and
sustain the neuroﬁbroma microenvironment.
Moreover, Nf1/NF1 gene dosage (normal,
heterozygous, and nullizygous)
in discrete
cell lineages differentially modulates cell fate,
function, and in some mouse models, disease
outcome. These mouse models may illuminate
the pathogenic mechanisms underpinning
human genetic disease. Although several
NF1-associated diseases have been success-

fully modeled in mice, this review focuses
predominantly on plexiform neuroﬁbroma
formation while making parallel observations
in models of optic glioma formation. From the
ongoing insights derived from human data and
these mouse models, investigators can seek out
novel molecular therapeutics targeting speciﬁc
and essential interactions that permit disease
pathogenesis.

NF1 MOUSE TUMOR MODELS

Nf1 Traditional Knockout
Nf1 knockout mice harbor
a disruptive
neomycin (neo) cassette in Nf1 exon 31
(Nf1+/n31) (106, 107), an exon site homologous
to a hot spot of human NF1 mutations (108).
The encoded neo cassette induces protein in-
stability and degradation, which lead to a re-
duction of approximately 50% in total neu-
roﬁbromin protein level. Nf1+/n31 (i.e., Nf1+/−)
mice have a shortened life span and occasionally
develop pheochromocytoma and leukemia, dis-
eases found in increased incidence in humans
with NF1. Other investigations have shown
these mice to have neuronal deﬁciencies (96),
increased risk for vascular pathology (109), and
increased susceptibility to osteoporosis (95).
However, Nf1+/− mice do not develop the
pathognomic neuroﬁbroma or hallmark caf´e-
au-lait macules and, by themselves, are not used
as models of NF1-associated tumor formation.
The failure of Nf1+/− mice to develop
neuroﬁbromas—which individuals with NF1
develop nearly universally—was initially puz-
zling because humans, like the heterozygous
mice, are born essentially NF1+/−. This pheno-
typic disparity may be ascribed to inherent dif-
ferences between humans and mice: Mice have
shorter life spans, different exposures and re-
sponses to toxins and carcinogens, and perhaps
different susceptibilities to mutations in the
normal Nf1 allele (106). Therefore, the chance
of an Nf1 second hit and concomitant neopla-
sia may be lower for a Nf1+/− mouse than for a
human born heterozygous at the NF1 locus.

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

475

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

Despite the absence of neuroﬁbromas in
the Nf1+/− mice, extracted leukemic myelo-
cytes and pheochromocytoma tissue exhibit Nf1
LOH, providing strong evidence that tumori-
genesis requires a second hit in these tissues
and supporting the classiﬁcation of Nf1 as a
tumor suppressor gene (106). Thus, many or
all cell types and tissues with forced biallelic
Nf1 inactivation could demonstrate aberrant
and/or neoplastic phenotypes. However, mice
born Nf1−/− die at embryonic day 13.5 sec-
ondary to defects in developing structures of
the heart (107). In parallel with these ﬁndings,
humans are never born nullizygous for NF1;
presumably, they die in utero. Due to the de-
velopmental requirement for at least one allele
of NF1/Nf1, the investigation of biallelic Nf1
inactivation in adult mice must be performed
using chimeric or conditional knockout models.
Indeed, chimeric Nf1−/− mice (mice with
mixed Nf1+/+ and Nf1−/− somatic cells) pro-
vided direct evidence that neuroﬁbroma gen-
esis requires biallelic inactivation of Nf1. To
create this model, investigators injected Nf1−/−
embryonic stem cells into wild-type (WT) blas-
tocysts during embryogenesis (81). Moderately
chimeric animals developed several hallmark
symptoms of NF1, including neuromotor de-
fects, myelodysplasia, and neuroﬁbromas in the
tongue and limb and along the dorsal root
ganglia. By contrast, high Nf1−/− chimerism
was lethal, whereas low chimerism produced
no immediately observable phenotype. In this
study, Nf1−/− embryonic stem cells also car-
ried a β-galactosidase transgene, and tumor
histology revealed widespread β-galactosidase
expression. Conclusively, then, the neuroﬁbro-
mas arose speciﬁcally from the cell lineages de-
velopmentally derived from Nf1−/− embryonic
stem cells.

Observations from this chimeric model,
vis-`a-vis ﬁndings from the Nf1 heterozygous
mouse, validate biallelic Nf1 inactivation as a
condition that engenders and, most likely, is re-
quired for tumorigenesis. Despite these critical
insights, tumor formation in the chimera de-
pends upon an undeﬁned quantity of Nf1−/−
lineages) admixed with Nf1+/+
cells (of all

Staser· Yang· Clapp

cells (also of all
lineages). These genetic
doses do not mimic human NF1 genetics, in
which, presumably, only the tumorigenic cells
are essentially NF1−/− and the surrounding
ECs, ﬁbroblasts, pericytes, and hematopoietic
cells—namely the microenvironment—are es-
sentially NF1+/−. Although observations from
the Nf1−/− chimera have advanced the mech-
anistic understanding of neuroﬁbroma patho-
genesis, they do not allow delineation of the
speciﬁc genetic conditions and heterotypic in-
teractions that underpin tumor formation.

Nf1 Conditional Knockout
Cre-loxP site-speciﬁc recombination technol-
ogy permits tissue- and condition-speciﬁc gene
disruption, allowing researchers to circumvent
the embryonic lethality of traditional knockout
constructs and to investigate protein function
in speciﬁc cell lineages. To these ends, investi-
gators engineered a conditional Nf1 knockout
construct targeted for disruption in a subset of
Schwann cells (76, 82, 110). First, they gen-
erated a mouse harboring ﬂanking loxP ( ﬂox)
sites at Nf1’s exons 31 and 32 (Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox).
LoxP is a 34-bp recognition sequence for the
bacteriophage-derived protein Cre recombi-
nase (Cre), which mediates excision and recom-
bination at these sites (111). The investigators
then crossed this Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mouse with a mouse
carrying the Krox20Cre construct, which places
Cre downstream of the promoter element for
Krox20. Krox20 is an endogenous mammalian
gene that directs peripheral nerve myelination
(112), and it robustly expresses in approximately
10% of Schwann cells and their precursors (82).
In the Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Krox20Cre mouse, then, a sub-
set of Schwann cells harbor biallelic Nf1 dis-
ruption, while the bulk of somatic cells remain
functionally WT.

However, Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Krox20Cre mice do not
develop neuroﬁbromas. Therefore, biallelic
Nf1 inactivation in only a subset of Schwann
cells and/or Schwann cell precursors is not
tumorigenesis. By
sufﬁcient
contrast, plexiform neuroﬁbromas
readily
and reliably form in Nf1ﬂox;Krox20Cre mice

to engender

476

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

that additionally carry the Nf1 knockout
allele (Nf1ﬂox/−;Krox20Cre). In such animals,
a subset of Schwann cells are Nf1 deﬁcient,
whereas other somatic cells are phenotypically
Nf1+/− (i.e., Nf1ﬂox/− but without Cre-mediated
recombination). At approximately one year of
age, the Nf1ﬂox/−;Krox20Cre mouse develops
dorsal root ganglia tumors that grossly and his-
tologically resemble plexiform neuroﬁbromas.
Histological examination of these tumors re-
veals wavy, dysplastic Schwann cells, abundant
ﬁbroblasts, collagenization, and an inﬁltration
of degranulating mast cells. As observed in
the Nf1ﬂox/−;Krox20Cre model, then, plexiform
neuroﬁbroma genesis requires biallelic Nf1
inactivation in Schwann cells and heterotypic
interactions with an Nf1 haploinsufﬁcient
stroma, which includes the ﬁbroblasts, vascular
cells, and mast cells long known to constitute
the neuroﬁbroma microenvironment.

Notably, widespread Nf1 deletion in glial
precursor cells during embryogenesis (at ap-
proximately embryonic day 12.5), as driven
by the Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;DhhCre model, permits plexi-
form neuroﬁbroma genesis despite WT lev-
els of neuroﬁbromin in the surrounding
cells of the microenvironment (17). These
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;DhhCre-derived plexiform neuroﬁ-
bromas exhibit dysplastic Schwann cell–like
cells, aberrant collagenization, and an abundant
inﬁltration of mast cells, just as the neuroﬁbro-
mas observed in the Nf1ﬂox/−;Krox20Cre model
do. Thus, early and widespread biallelic inacti-
vation of Nf1 circumvents the requirement for
an Nf1 haploinsufﬁcient microenvironment in
plexiform neuroﬁbroma formation (17). This
model gives important insights into potential
tumor cells of origin and provides a model for
sporadic neuroﬁbroma formation as observed
in individuals without genetic NF1.

NF1 Models as Parallels to Models
of Astrocytoma Formation
A mouse model of NF1-associated optic nerve
glioma formation demonstrates a similar re-
quirement for Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in the tu-
mor microenvironment (113). To generate this

model, Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mice were intercrossed with a
transgenic mouse carrying Cre downstream of
the promoter element for glial ﬁbrillary acidic
protein (GFAP) gene, which drives Cre ex-
pression in astrocytes. Although both Nf1+/−
and Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;GFAPCre mice demonstrate in-
creased numbers of astrocytes (102, 114),
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;GFAPCre mice do not develop optic
nerve gliomas. These ﬁndings directly parallel
those in Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Krox20Cre mice, which never
develop plexiform neuroﬁbromas (113, 114). As
another direct parallel to the Krox20Cre tumor
model, additional haploinsufﬁciency in the cel-
lular background permits optic glioma forma-
tion. At approximately one year of age, these
Nf1ﬂox/−;GFAPCre mice reliably demonstrate
tumors of the optic chiasm that are histolog-
ically consistent with low-grade gliomas inﬁl-
trated by inﬂammatory microglia (113).

In another intriguing parallel, biallelic inac-
tivation in neuroglial progenitor cells induces
optic glioma formation independent of the Nf1
genetic dose in surrounding cells (87), just as in
the Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;DhhCre model of plexiform neu-
roﬁbroma genesis. These mutant mice carry
a transgenic construct that expresses Cre un-
der control of the human GFAP promoter
(hGFAPCre), which expresses in mature as-
trocytes as well as in the more primitive
radial glial cell population. In this model,
Nf1ﬂox/−;hGFAPCre and Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;hGFAPCre
mice manifest similar disease phenotypes com-
pared with their hGFAPCre-negative litter-
mates;
these phenotypes include increased
numbers of astrocytes, increased proliferation
of glial progenitor cells during brain develop-
ment, hyperplasia of the optic nerve, and short-
ened life spans (87).

Thus, multiple mouse models in two sep-
arate NF1-associated pathologies demonstrate
different Nf1 dosage requirements for tumori-
genesis that seemingly depend on the cell-
speciﬁc developmental timing of the gene’s
deletion. As a general observation, widespread
biallelic inactivation of Nf1 in precursors of the
putative tumor cell appears to bypass the re-
quirement for haploinsufﬁciency of cells in the
tumor microenvironment. Mechanistically, it is

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

477

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

unclear whether Nf1-inactivated precursor cells
harbor an intrinsic proclivity toward neoplasm,
whether they respond more aggressively to re-
cruited nontumorigenic cells, or whether they
are simply better at recruiting these cells. Above
all, given the consistent observation of invading
mast cells and microglia, all these models sug-
gest pathogenic roles for hematopoietic effec-
tors co-opted by tumorigenic cells.

SCHWANN CELLS, Nf1
HAPLOINSUFFICIENT MAST
CELLS, AND THE TUMOR
MICROENVIRONMENT
HYPOTHESIS
The Nf1ﬂox/−;Krox20Cre model, among others,
approximates the genetic conditions expected
in humans with NF1, wherein all body cells
are NF1 heterozygous and only a small fraction
of Schwann cells and Schwann cell precursors
experience biallelic NF1 inactivation. Thus,
heterozygous nontumorigenic cells, including
vascular cells, ﬁbroblasts, and mast cells, proba-
bly contribute to tumor pathogenesis and main-
tenance in the human patient. Here, we focus on
cell culture– and transplantation-based studies
that demonstrate the phenotypic consequence
of biochemical deregulation in nontumorigenic
cells, as well as the critical importance of het-
erotypic interactions between the tumorigenic
Nf1−/− Schwann cell, the recruited Nf1+/− mast
cell, and other mitogenic events within the
tumor stroma.

Schwann Cells
That the Schwann cell is the tumor cell of origin
in NF1-associated peripheral nerve tumors had
long been a matter of controversy; von Reck-
linghausen himself believed the tumors to be of
a primary ﬁbroblastic or connective tissue ori-
gin (see, for example, Reference 115 for an early
and detailed discussion of this debate). Today,
preponderant molecular evidence implicates a
Schwann cell or Schwann cell precursor cell
as the tumor cell of origin. As foundational
evidence, investigators detected NF1 LOH in

Staser· Yang· Clapp

neuroﬁbroma-derived Schwann cells but not
ﬁbroblasts (116–118), and Schwann cells cul-
tured from neuroﬁbromas demonstrate angio-
genic and invasive phenotypes in tissue cul-
ture (119). Importantly, all characterized mouse
models of plexiform neuroﬁbroma formation
depend upon biallelic Nf1 inactivation using
Cre drivers restricted primarily to neural crest–
and Schwann cell–directed cell lineages (15–17,
24, 82, 83).

However, questions still exist as to the
precise stage of Schwann cell differentiation
that gives rise to the tumor (reviewed in
Reference 120). Plexiform neuroﬁbromas
probably develop congenitally,
and thus,
neural crest stem cells or other progenitor
cells may generate tumors during embryo-
genesis, although investigators have largely
agreed that Nf1-deﬁcient fetal neural crest
stem cells cannot directly form a plexiform
neuroﬁbroma (83, 120). Moreover, aggre-
gated observations from studies of different
(Nf1ﬂox/−;Wnt1Cre,
mouse
tumor models
Nf1ﬂox/−;P0aCre, Nf1ﬂox/−;Krox20Cre,
and
Nf1ﬂox/−;3.9PeriostinCre)
implicate differenti-
ated glia,
including mature nonmyelinating
Schwann cells (i.e., Remak bundles), as the
probable tumor cells of origin (16, 24, 82,
83). However, given the observation from the
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;DhhCre model, which expresses Cre
at the late boundary cap cell stage, as well as the
fact that both P0aCre and Krox20Cre express in
Schwann cell precursors, tumorigenic events in
these precursor cells or their progeny cannot
be ruled out (17). Finally, Le et al. (15) have
created dermal and plexiform neuroﬁbromas
by autologous transplantation of neural crest–
like stem cells derived from skin [skin-derived
precursors (SKPs)] of adult Nf1ﬂox/− mice
carrying a tamoxifen-inducible Cre transgene.
This study has shown that adult-type neural
precursor cells can form tumors, and it has
demonstrated the importance of
localized
microenvironment cues whereby an SKP can
develop into a dermal neuroﬁbroma or a plexi-
form neuroﬁbroma, depending on its engrafted
location.
Intriguingly, SKP-derived tumor
formation is greatly accelerated in pregnant

478

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

females versus males and nonpregnant females,
which suggests that hormonal cues, as well as
genetic and spatial cues, dictate tumor fate.

On the basis of these studies, ﬁrm conclu-
sions cannot yet be made as to the exact tumor
cell of origin, but these models and the multiple
molecular studies in human tissues almost cer-
tainly rule out a ﬁbroblast-derived neoplasia,
as some investigators once postulated. Proba-
bly, then, biallelic Nf1 inactivation at multiple
stages of Schwann cell differentiation can ini-
tiate tumorigenesis with potentially disparate
requirements for cooperative cues, whether ge-
netic or environmental.
Because a Schwann cell or Schwann cell–like
cell is neuroﬁbroma’s tumorigenic cell, Nf1−/−
cultured primary Schwann cells have provided
critical insights into putative mechanisms of
neuroﬁbroma pathophysiology. An initial study
demonstrated that Nf1−/− Schwann cells in-
duce EC and ﬁbroblastoid cell proliferation
by secreting PDGF, ﬁbroblast growth factor 2
(FGF-2), and midkine (121). These factors may
potentially drive vascularization and collage-
nization of the growing tumor, which suggests
a mechanism by which Nf1−/− Schwann cells
orchestrate the nascent tumor microenviron-
ment. A subsequent study found that Schwann
cells derived from Nf1−/− mouse embryos pro-
liferate more quickly than do WT cells, display
an irregular morphology in cell culture, and
secrete approximately six times as much solu-
ble SCF as do Nf1+/− and WT Schwann cells
(122). Conditioned media from such Nf1−/−
Schwann cells promotes the chemotaxis of pri-
mary cultured mast cells, doing so at twice the
rate for Nf1+/− mast cells versus WT mast cells.
Recombinant SCF reproduces this chemotac-
tic effect, and genetic disruption of the mast
cell’s c-kit receptor (via Nf1+/−;W mutations)
or addition of c-kit receptor–blocking antibod-
ies abolishes Schwann cell–mediated chemo-
taxis. These data implicate a direct link between
the Nf1−/− Schwann cell and the mast cell
that is mediated mechanistically through the
SCF/c-kit signaling axis. As further evidence of
this signaling pathway’s importance in humans
with NF1, previous and subsequent studies have

shown that neuroﬁbroma tissues express SCF
messenger RNA, that human neuroﬁbroma–
derived Schwann cells secrete high levels of
SCF, and that serum from individuals with NF1
contains increased levels of SCF compared with
controls (122–125). When considered with the
well-established histological phenotype of mast
cell invasion and degranulation in tumor tissue
(as well as the mast cell’s dependency on c-kit
for its cytopoiesis), these studies roundly impli-
cate an SCF/c-kit signaling axis as a potential
pathogenic mechanism.

Nf1 Haploinsufﬁcient Mast
Cell Phenotype
SCF regulates mast cell cytopoiesis, prolifera-
tion, survival, and cytokine synthesis, functions
that Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency potentiates. In fact,
the study of SCF-stimulated Nf1+/− mast cells
provided foundational evidence that haploin-
sufﬁciency of the Nf1 tumor suppressor could
modulate multilineage cell fate and function
both in tissue culture and in vivo (100). In these
experiments, Nf1+/− mice were intercrossed
with mice that were naturally mutated at the
c-kit receptor tyrosine kinase (W 41). This
naturally occurring mutation at the W (or
white spotting) locus reduces c-kit receptor
tyrosine kinase activity by approximately 85%,
leading to albinism and tissues that are largely
devoid of mast cells (34, 126–129). Ingram et al.
(100) found that Nf1+/−;W 41/W 41 intercrossed
mice exhibit
increased numbers of dermal
and peritoneal mast cells compared with their
W 41/W 41 counterparts. Likewise, Nf1+/− mice
demonstrate increased numbers of dermal and
peritoneal mast cells. Mast cells cultured from
Nf1+/− and Nf1+/−;W 41/W 41 bone marrow
progenitor cells display several SCF-mediated
gains in function, including proliferation at
approximately twice the rate of WT and
W 41/W 41 mast cells, respectively. Nf1+/− and
Nf1+/−;W 41/W 41 bone marrow cells also form
increased numbers of mast cell colonies ex vivo
(100). In vivo, Nf1+/− mast cells and mast cell
precursors demonstrate an exquisite hypersen-
sitivity to low doses of soluble SCF, as measured

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

479

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

+/+; +/+

Nf1+/–; +/+

+/+; W 41/W 41

Nf1+/–; W 41/W 41

a

b

c

Figure 2
Effect of haploinsufﬁciency of Nf1 on coat color and total numbers of cutaneous and peritoneal mast cells. (a) Coat-color pattern of a
representative mouse from each of the following genotypes: +/+;+/+, Nf1+/−;+/+, +/+;W 41/W 41, and Nf1+/−;W 41/W 41.
Haploinsufﬁciency at Nf1 partially corrects the coat-color deﬁciency in mice homozygous for the W 41 allele in a C57BL/6 genetic
background. (b) Representative cytospins from peritoneal lavage ﬂuid stained for mast cells from individual mice of the four Nf1 and W
genotypes. Peritoneal cells were stained with toluidine blue to quantify the total number of mast cells per peritoneal lavage. A higher
magniﬁcation of a representative mast cell of the wild-type mouse is shown at left (original magniﬁcation, 3,200×). Scale bar at far left,
10 μm. Scale bar at far right, 30 μm. (c) Representative ear biopsies stained for cutaneous mast cells from individual mice of the four
Nf1 and W genotypes. Specimens were stained with hematoxylin and eosin to assess routine histology and with Giemsa to identify mast
cells. Ear biopsies were stained with Fontana-Masson to differentiate melanin-containing cells from mast cells. Cutaneous mast cells
(Giemsa positive, Fontana-Masson negative) were quantitated in a blinded fashion by counting the distal 5 mm of the ears. Black arrows
indicate Giemsa-positive mast cells, and white arrows indicate Fontana-Masson melanin–containing cells. Scale bar, 35 μm.
Reproduced from Reference 100.

implanted in dermal

by mast cell proliferation and recruitment
through the use of SCF-loaded micro-osmotic
pumps
tissue (130).
Moreover, Nf1+/−;W 41/W 41 animals have a
black mottling of their normally predominant
albino coat, which shows that Nf1 haploin-
sufﬁciency restores c-kit-impaired melanocyte
function (100), a neural crest–derived lineage
that expresses neuroﬁbromin and is relevant
to human NF1 (e.g., caf´e-au-lait macules)
(Figure 2) (131). Biochemical inquiries further
demonstrated increased latency and potency
of GTP-bound Ras in SCF-stimulated Nf1+/−
mast cells. Taken together, these data indicate

Staser· Yang· Clapp

480

that Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency restores c-kit-
dependent kinase activity to a biologically
relevant degree, alters mast cell cytopoiesis
and functional potential, and modulates fate
and function in multiple cell lineages in live
animals.

Nf1 Haploinsufﬁcient Biochemistry
in the Stem Cell Factor–Stimulated
Mast Cell
Subsequent studies have detailed the bio-
chemical mechanisms modulating
SCF-
in function in the Nf1
mediated gains

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

haploinsufﬁcient mast cell. Principally, these
alterations arise from deregulated signaling
events in Ras-dependent networks. In response
to ligand binding at diverse cell-surface re-
ceptors, Ras activates to its GTP-bound state
and promotes phosphorylation in downstream
protein networks, including those orchestrated
by MAPKs and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K) (72–75). Neuroﬁbromin, which con-
tains a highly conserved GAP-related domain
with homology to the yeast gene products
IRA1 and IRA2, markedly accelerates the
intrinsic hydrolysis of active GTP-bound Ras
to its GDP-bound state (47, 52, 65, 68, 76,
132). Generally,
loss-of-function mutations
in genes encoding Ras-GAPs promote cell
growth, proliferation, migration, and survival
(40). In myeloid progenitor cells, microglia,
and mast cells, loss of one or both alleles of
Nf1 leads to increased duration of Ras-GTP
and the activity of speciﬁc effectors within
Raf/Mek/Erk, PI3K/Rac/Pak/p38 (where Pak
refers to p21-activated kinase), and PI3K/Akt
cascades (86, 100, 105, 122, 133–138).

Cell-culture and in vivo studies of ge-
netically disrupted mast cells indicate that
the Raf/Mek/Erk pathway may primarily
modulate SCF-mediated proliferation and
that the PI3K/Rac2/Pak/p38 pathway controls
F-actin dynamics and cellular motility (130,
135, 136, 138–140). However, biochemical
investigations have also shown that the PI3K-
dependent pathway reinforces the classical
Raf/Mek/Erk cascade through the activity
of the Paks (130, 136). Thus, PI3K directly
modulates SCF-mediated proliferation. In this
schema, PI3K-activated Rac2 induces Pak1 to
phosphorylate Mek at serine 298, as well as
Raf1 at serine 338, which potentiates Raf1’s
phosphorylation of Mek at serines 217 and 222.
These activities potentiate phosphorylation of
the extracellular signal–regulated kinases, Erk1
and Erk2. Erk1/2 phosphorylate cytoplasmic
targets (e.g., p90rsk), translocate to the nucleus,
and activate multiple mitogenic transcription
factors (e.g., c-Fos, Elk1, C/EBP), although
Erk-dependent transcriptional events and gene
products are largely undocumented for the

SCF-stimulated Nf1+/− mast cell. Ultimately,
Erk activity appears to regulate SCF-mediated
cell-cycle progression, events that are poten-
tiated in the Nf1+/− mast cell. Furthermore,
these studies have suggested that SCF-
mediated hyperproliferation in the Nf1+/−
mast cell directly relies on PI3K/Rac2/Pak1’s
aberrant potentiation of Erk1/2.

In addition to promoting proliferation
through reinforcement of Raf/Mek/Erk, SCF-
dependent hyperactivation of PI3K critically
orchestrates Nf1+/− mast cell migration and
survival (130, 136, 137). Genetic and chemical
inhibitor (PD98059, SB203580, LY294002)-
based studies have described a PI3K-dependent
activation of Rac2 that controls SCF-mediated
mast cell chemotaxis as well as Nf1-dependent
gain in motility. Speciﬁcally, a Rac2/Pak1/p38
signaling pathway induces F-actin rearrange-
ment and cell motility, although the precise
downstream effectors remain unknown (136).
These cytoskeletal observations directly corre-
late with a genetic study showing that Nf1+/−
mast cells require PI3K activity for Nf1−/−
Schwann cell–conditioned, media-dependent
degranulation (140). Moreover, SCF-induced
PI3K/Rac2 activity promotes Akt’s modulation
of Bcl-2 family proteins (e.g., BAD/Bcl-XL),
thereby increasing mast cell survival through
suppression of proapoptotic pathways (139).
Taken together, these biochemical data ex-
plain SCF-mediated gains in function in the
Nf1+/− mast cell, and they illuminate potential
molecular
therapeutic targets within Ras-
dependent pathways. Figure 3 summarizes
these pathways.

The Tumor Microenvironment
Nf1−/− Schwann cells potently recruit normal
and Nf1+/− mast cells via SCF-mediated acti-
vation of Ras pathways, but what role do these
recruited mast cells play in the nascent and
mature plexiform neuroﬁbroma microenviron-
ment? The plexiform neuroﬁbroma microenvi-
ronment includes (but is perhaps not restricted
to) tumorigenic Schwann cells and/or their

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

481

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

SCF

kit

kit

Ras

GDP

G
r
b

2

S

h

c

Sos

Ras
GTP

Raf

N f1

+PS217/222

Mek1/2 

PI3K 

Rac1/2

Akt 

 

Paks

+PS338

+PS298

 
p90rsk

Erk1/2 

p38

F-actin 

Proliferation

Protein synthesis

Survival
Motility

Protein synthesis

Figure 3
Hyperactive SCF/c-kit pathways in the Nf1+/− mast cell. Kit-ligand (SCF) binding at the c-kit receptor
tyrosine kinase induces receptor dimerization, activates Ras to its GTP-bound conformation, and induces
Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk and PI3K/Rac/Pak/p38 signaling pathways. Although Mek/Erk signals may principally
mediate mast cell proliferation, PI3K mediates survival, motility, and through its Pak-dependent cross talk
with Raf/Mek, proliferation. Nf1 accelerates the intrinsic hydrolysis of Ras-GTP to inactive Ras-GDP and
serves, at least in part, to negatively regulate Mek/Erk- and PI3K-directed pathways. Although SCF/c-kit
interactions initiate other molecular events (e.g., Akt/mTOR), this schematic highlights only those known to
+/− mast cell. Dashed lines indicate multiple downstream effectors that are not
be hyperactivated in the Nf1
fully detailed. Abbreviations: Erk, extracellular signal–regulated kinase; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP,
guanosine triphosphate; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; Pak,
p21-activated kinase; SCF, stem cell factor. Modiﬁed from Reference 79.

precursors, mast cells, other hematopoietic
cells, pericytes, smooth muscle cells, ECs (i.e.,
vasculature), ﬁbroblasts, and the extracellular
matrix, including a large amount of collagen.
Indeed, ﬁbroblasts and ﬁbroblast-secreted col-
lagen are major constituents, and extracellular
matrix material typically accounts for approxi-
mately half of neuroﬁbromas’ dry weight (141).
Given that SCF-stimulated mast cells can syn-
thesize and secrete pleiotropic cytokines and
growth factors, the mast cell could promote
growth and activity in the tumor microenvi-
ronment through multiple hypothetical mech-
anisms, including nerve growth factor stimu-
lation of Schwann cells, VEGF stimulation of
vascular cells, and transforming growth factor
β (TGF-β) stimulation of ﬁbroblasts.

Staser· Yang· Clapp

482

functions

Fibroblasts
Accordingly, Yang et al. (101) have experi-
mentally demonstrated that SCF-stimulated
Nf1+/− mast cells modulate multiple ﬁbro-
blast
through secreted TGF-β.
TGF-β induces ﬁbroblasts to migrate, pro-
liferate, and synthesize collagen, which are
well-documented and critical biological pro-
cesses, especially during embryogenesis and
inﬂammatory wound healing. Not only do
SCF-stimulated mast cells secrete TGF-β,
Nf1+/− mast cells generate 2.5-fold more TGF-
β compared with WT mast cells. In response to
mast cell–conditioned media, WT and Nf1+/−
ﬁbroblasts
produce
collagen, and promote extracellular matrix
remodeling; Nf1+/− mast cell/Nf1+/− ﬁbroblast

proliferate, migrate,

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

interactions demonstrate the greatest biological
activity. Yang et al’s study directly demon-
strated TGF-β dependency by disrupting the
ﬁbroblast gain-in-function phenotype through
the addition of TGF-β blocking antibody
to the Nf1+/− mast cell–conditioned media.
Intriguingly, TGF-β-stimulated ﬁbroblasts
derived from human neuroﬁbroma samples
demonstrated gains in function similar to those
in murine Nf1+/− cultured ﬁbroblasts, and rein-
troduction of the NF1 GAP-related domain re-
stored normal activity. Mechanistically, TGF-
β induces hyperactivity of the nonreceptor
tyrosine kinase c-abl, and genetic or pharma-
cological suppression of c-abl corrects multiple
ﬁbroblast gain-in-function phenotypes. Cor-
respondingly, imatinib mesylate (Gleevec R(cid:2)), a
U.S. Food and Drug Administration–approved
inhibitor of c-abl, suppresses collagen produc-
tion and ﬁbroblast migration/invasion in mice
when implanted subcutaneously with TGF-β
and Nf1+/− mast cell–conditioned media. This
study, in conjunction with previous studies of
Schwann cells and mast cells, illuminates crit-
ical microenvironment interactions whereby
the Nf1−/− Schwann cell recruits the Nf1+/−
mast cell, which, in turn, promotes ﬁbroblast
proliferation and collagenization.

Vascular Cells
like other human tumors,
Neuroﬁbromas,
require the ingrowth of new vessels
for
(40, 142).
their expansion and metastasis
An initial study found that Nf1−/− Schwann
cells directly promote angiogenesis when
engrafted on chorioallantoic membranes of
postfertilization chicken eggs, potentially
through aberrant Ras-mediated expression
of VEGF (143). An in vivo murine study
corroborated these ﬁndings by demonstrating
that Nf1−/− Schwann cell–conditioned media
implanted into mice induce angiogenesis;
Nf1+/− mice showed a greater angiogenic
response than did WT mice (97). Likewise,
ECs cultured from Nf1+/− mice and humans
with NF1 exhibit a heightened migratory and

proliferative response to neuroﬁbroma-derived
and recombinant growth factors,
including
VEGF and basic ﬁbroblast growth factor
(bFGF). Both proliferation and migration in
patient-derived and Nf1+/− ECs appear to
require aberrant Mek/Erk activity, which is
an interesting contrast to Nf1+/− mast cells,
in which Mek/Erk are largely dispensable for
SCF-mediated migration. A concomitant study
from the same laboratory found enhanced
proliferation and migration in Nf1+/− vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in response to
PDGF/BB. Intriguingly, Nf1+/− ﬁbroblasts
secrete ﬁvefold-higher
of
PDGF/BB than their WT counterparts, which
suggests that the haploinsufﬁcient ﬁbroblast di-
rectly participates in promoting the pathogenic
microenvironment. As in ECs, this PDGF/BB-
mediated potentiation of VSMC function
requires hyperactivity in the Raf/Mek/Erk
pathway. The investigators detected no Nf1
haploinsufﬁcient enhancement of Akt activity
in either ECs or VSMCs—a surprising ﬁnding,
given Ras’s well-documented modulation of
PI3K in the mast cell and other cell types.
Thus, Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency appears to modify
biochemistry in a cell type–speciﬁc manner.

concentrations

Other Lineages
Macrophages and pericytes may also mod-
ulate plexiform neuroﬁbroma genesis and
maintenance, but their roles remain largely
undocumented. Although mast cells make
up the majority of hematopoietic cells in
the neuroﬁbroma, macrophages account for
approximately 10% to 15% of CD45+ cells,
at least in mouse models (24). Also, in some
cancers, tumor-associated macrophages medi-
ate key angiogenic and mitogenic signals that
promote tumor vascularization, remodeling,
and growth (144). Therefore, macrophages are
a reasonable target for future investigations of
pathogenic mechanisms in the neuroﬁbroma
microenvironment. Likewise, pericytes, which
are less differentiated cells that support vascular
and connective tissue growth, may modulate

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

483

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

events in the microenvironment, including an-
giogenesis. Intriguingly, intracranial tumors in
Nf1+/−;Trp53+/− mice secrete stromal-derived
factor 1, which recruits endothelial precursor
cells from the bone marrow to the tumor
site (145). These recruited precursors can
differentiate into either ECs or pericytes, al-
though this phenomenon has not been directly
studied in plexiform neuroﬁbroma formation.
In sum, complex heterotypic interactions
underlie neuroﬁbroma genesis and mainte-
nance. As a global model, tumorigenic cells
secrete SCF,
recruiting and/or activating
inﬂammatory mast cells, which then promote
ﬁbroblast proliferation and collagenization.
Tumorigenic cells and hyperactive ﬁbroblasts
can promote neoangiogenesis, potentially
through their stimulation of ECs and VSMCs
via VEGF, bFGF, and PDGF/BB. Moreover,
other cell types, including macrophages and
pericytes, may modulate
and
mitogenic events in the microenvironment,
although their roles are relatively unknown.
Figure 4 presents
the microenvironment
model, including both known and hypothetical
interactions.

angiogenic

Parallels to the Optic Glioma
Microenvironment
Mouse models of NF1-associated optic glioma
formation have demonstrated the importance
of heterotypic interactions between the tumori-
genic astrocyte and gliomagen-elaborating
microglia, hematopoietic effectors derived
from monocyte precursor cells (reviewed in
Reference 146). Neoplastic and preneoplastic
astrocytes secrete multiple factors that attract
and expand microglia populations
(146).
Similar to Nf1+/− mast cells, Nf1+/− microglia
demonstrate multiple gains in function, includ-
ing enhanced macrophage colony–stimulating
factor–mediated proliferation and produc-
tion of hyaluronidase (105). This secreted
hyaluronidase drives aberrant Nf1−/− astro-
cyte proliferation and correlates with glioma
formation in vivo, both in mouse models and
in humans with NF1. Mechanistically, Nf1+/−

Staser· Yang· Clapp

microglial gain in function appears to depend
upon the aberrant activity of c-Jun/NH2 kinase
and not upon hyperactive Mek/Erk, p38, or
PI3K/Akt, which reinforces the notion that Nf1
haploinsufﬁciency modiﬁes signaling in a cell
type–speciﬁc manner (104). Nf1+/− microglia
also express threefold more CXCL12 than do
WT microglia, which, intriguingly, promotes
astrocyte growth only in the context of Nf1
deﬁciency (CXCL12 induces apoptosis in nor-
mal astrocytes). This ﬁnding is associated with
aberrantly low cyclic AMP (cAMP) levels in the
CXCL12-stimulated Nf1-deﬁcient astrocyte
(147), and forced suppression of cAMP can
induce NF1-associated glioma formation in
brain regions that typically are not susceptible
to this tumor (148). Thus, optic gliomagenesis
demonstrates a direct parallel to neuroﬁbroma
genesis, whereby tumorigenic cells co-opt
inﬂammatory cells that, in turn, enable tumor
growth and maintenance through secreted
mitogens.

THE STEM CELL FACTOR/c-kit
AXIS IN PLEXIFORM
NEUROFIBROMA FORMATION
AND ITS THERAPEUTIC
IMPLICATIONS
Tumorigenesis Requires an Nf1+/−
Hematopoietic System
Given the requirement for an Nf1 haploin-
sufﬁcient cellular background for plexiform
neuroﬁbroma formation in multiple mouse
models,
in combination with the various
studies
showing interactions between Nf1
disrupted Schwann cells, mast cells, ﬁbroblasts,
and ECs, the question arises as to which hap-
loinsufﬁcient cell types speciﬁcally engender
tumorigenesis. To address this question, Yang
et al. (24) transplanted hematopoietic stem
cells from Nf1+/− mice into lethally irradiated
Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Krox20Cre mice, a genetic status
that, as discussed above, does not lead to
tumor formation. This Nf1+/− hematopoietic
stem cell transplant into Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Krox20Cre
mice created animals in which 5% to 10%

484

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

SCF*

CCLs

VEGF

Nf1–/– Schwann cells

Mast
cells

NGF
PDGF

TGF-β*
MMPs
Tryptase

FGF
PDGF

PDGF*

*FGF
*VEGF
PDGF

Vasculature

Macrophages

Fibroblasts

*Collagen
Fibronectin

Laminin

Figure 4
Hypothetical tumor/stromal/hematopoietic interactions in the neuroﬁbroma microenvironment. In this
tumor microenvironment model, loss of heterozygosity in Schwann cells or their precursor leads to aberrant
(i.e., increased) production and secretion of stem cell factor (SCF), the ligand for the c-kit receptor tyrosine
kinase. SCF induces maturation, proliferation, and recruitment of mast cells from bone marrow progenitor
cells and can have effects on native differentiated mast cells at the site. Such SCF-activated mast cells
generate and release multiple inﬂammatory cytokines and growth factors that act on macrophages,
vasculature, ﬁbroblasts, and the tumorigenic Schwann cells. Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β)-
stimulated ﬁbroblasts, in turn, aberrantly proliferate and produce collagen, increasing tumor bulk and
pressure. Schwann cells, ﬁbroblasts, and macrophages may directly contribute to vascularization through
various growth factors. Asterisks denote heterotypic interactions with experimental validation.
Abbreviations: CCL, CC chemokine ligand; FGF, ﬁbroblast growth factor; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase;
NGF, nerve growth factor; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth
factor. Modiﬁed from Reference 80.

of
their Schwann cells and Schwann cell
precursors were biallelically inactivated for
Nf1, their hematopoietic system was haploin-
sufﬁcient for Nf1, and all their other cells were
(i.e., Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox). Ap-
phenotypically normal
proximately six months after transplantation,
the Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Krox20Cre mice reconstituted
with an Nf1+/ hematopoietic system devel-
oped enlargements along their dorsal root
ganglia that histologically resembled plexiform
neuroﬁbromas. The tumor formation and

increased mortality were directly comparable
to the symptoms observed in the reliably tu-
morigenic Nf1ﬂox/−;Krox20Cre mice. Figure 5
presents the schematics for hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation into tumor model mice.

These transplant experiments indicate that
Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in the hematopoietic
system permits tumorigenesis in Nf1 disrupted
Schwann cells. However, these observations do
not exclude the possibility that Nf1+/− ﬁbrob-
lasts, ECs, and/or other stromal cells could

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

485

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

Nf1flox/–; Krox20Cre 

Tumors

WT HSCT 

No tumors

Schwann cells

Vasculature

Fibroblasts
Bone marrow cells

Nf1–/–

Nf1+/–

Nf1+/–

Nf1+/– 

Schwann cells

Vasculature

Fibroblasts
Bone marrow cells

Nf1–/–

Nf1+/–

Nf1+/–

Nf1+/+ 

Nf1flox/flox Krox20Cre 

No tumors

Nf1+/– HSCT 

Tumors

Schwann cells

Vasculature

Fibroblasts
Bone marrow cells

Nf1–/–

Nf1+/+

Nf1+/+

Nf1+/+ 

N
f
1
+
/
–
;
 

 

W
H
S
C
T

Schwann cells

Vasculature

Fibroblasts
Bone marrow cells

Nf1–/–

Nf1+/+

Nf1+/+

Nf1+/– 

 

No tumors

Schwann cells

Vasculature

Nf1–/–

Nf1+/+

Fibroblasts
Bone marrow cells

Nf1+/+
Nf1+/– ; W

Figure 5
Transplant experiments in the Krox20Cre tumor model. (Left) The genetic status of Schwann cells, vascular
cells, ﬁbroblasts, and bone marrow cells in two different mice genotypes: the Nf1ﬂox/−;Krox20Cre tumor
model and the Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Krox20Cre model, which did not develop tumors. The arrows indicate the genotype
of the hematopoietic stem cells transplanted into these two different genotypes of mice. W represents either
W 41 or W v c-kit receptor tyrosine kinase–deﬁcient mutations. (Right and bottom) The resultant genetic
status of each cell lineage, posttransplant. As indicated, only those mice with Nf1−/− Schwann cells and
c-kit-competent Nf1+/− bone marrow developed tumors. Abbreviations: HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell
transplant; WT, wild type. Modiﬁed from Reference 80.

permit tumorigenesis despite a genetically nor-
mal hematopoietic system. To test this hypoth-
esis, Yang et al. (24) additionally transplanted
WT hematopoietic stem cells into lethally
irradiated Nf1ﬂox/−;Krox20Cre mice, creating
mice with Nf1 disrupted Schwann cells, a WT
hematopoietic system, and all other cells phe-
notypically Nf1+/−. These mice never devel-
oped tumors. Therefore, an Nf1+/− hematopoi-
etic system is both required and sufﬁcient for
tumorigenesis in the Krox20Cre model.

Staser· Yang· Clapp

486

Similar investigations have revealed that
the P0aCre tumor model requires an Nf1+/−
hematopoietic system and that an Nf1+/−
hematopoietic system increases the penetrance
and severity of tumors in the PeriostinCre model.
Thus, in multiple murine plexiform neuroﬁ-
broma models with clear relevance to the hu-
man genetic disease, pathogenesis hinges on
the inﬂammatory cues granted by an Nf1 hap-
loinsufﬁcient hematopoietic system. We reiter-
ate, however, that the early glia-driven DhhCre

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

model does not require an Nf1 haploinsufﬁ-
cient hematopoietic system, and we emphasize
that different mouse models may distinctly in-
form the varied constellation of NF1-associated
pathologies observed in humans with or with-
out heritable NF1.

Tumorigenesis Requires
High-Functioning c-kit in an Nf1+/−
Hematopoietic System
The Nf1+/− hematopoietic stem cell transplant
experiments do not rule out possible contribu-
tions from other Nf1+/− hematopoietic cells,
such as macrophages and endothelial precur-
sor cells. To test the hypothesis that tumor for-
mation requires Nf1+/− mast cells, Yang et al.
(24) and colleagues also transplanted Nf1+/−
hematopoietic stem cells carrying one of two
naturally occurring c-kit receptor tyrosine ki-
nase mutations, either W 41/W 41 or W v/W v.
These mutations reduce kinase activity by 85%
and 92%–95%, respectively, which leads to loss
of coat color and failed mast cell cytopoiesis,
as discussed above. In these transplant experi-
ments, Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Krox20Cre mice reconstituted
with an Nf1+/−;W 41/W 41 or Nf1+/−;W v/W v
hematopoietic system protected against dorsal
root ganglia hyperplasia and mast cell invasion,
as compared with the Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Krox20Cre mice
reconstituted with an Nf1+/−-only hematopoi-
etic system. Notably, because c-kit-mutated
hematopoietic stem cells do not necessarily en-
graft as efﬁciently as WT hematopoietic stem
cells, the authors used Southern blot analysis
of myeloid colonies grown from bone mar-
row progenitor cells in Nf1+/−;W 41/W 41 or
Nf1+/−;W v/W v recipients to assay engraftment
efﬁciency. In the transplant recipients, approx-
imately 95% of the hematopoietic progenitors
originated from the Nf1+/−;W donor stem cells,
indicating successful engraftment. These data
indicate that plexiform neuroﬁbroma forma-
tion requires an Nf1 haploinsufﬁcient and c-kit-
competent hematopoietic system and, in light
of the other studies discussed above, roundly
implicate the SCF/c-kit-dependent mast cell as

a principal pathogenic effector underpinning
neuroﬁbroma genesis.

Pharmacological Modulation of the
Stem Cell Factor/c-kit Axis
Imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) inhibits multiple
receptor and nonreceptor tyrosine kinases, in-
cluding c-kit, PDGF-β, and bcr/abl and carries
U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval
for use in children and adults (149). Imatinib
mesylate is principally used to treat chronic
myelogenous leukemia, other hematological
cancers, and some solid tumors. Given the
ﬁndings that plexiform neuroﬁbroma genesis
and/or maintenance requires c-kit-mediated
signals, Yang et al. (24) used imatinib mesylate
to treat Nf1ﬂox/−;Krox20Cre mice with preex-
isting tumors, as measured by ﬂuoridated de-
oxyglucose signals in positron emission tomog-
raphy (FDG-PET). After a three-month course
of treatment, volumetric analyses on FDG-
PET demonstrated reduced tumor volume and
metabolic activity, and histology of the dorsal
root ganglia showed fewer mast cells, more or-
derly patterned Schwann cells, increased num-
bers of apoptotic cells, and diminished cellular
proliferation, compared with the placebo co-
hort. In fact, the placebo cohort showed a small
increase in glucose metabolism in affected ar-
eas, which suggests that tumor growth occurred
throughout the three-month treatment course.
Imatinib mesylate also successfully reduced
a progressively growing plexiform neuroﬁ-
broma in a pediatric patient with hallmark
symptoms of NF1. By six months of age,
the patient had developed a histologically
identiﬁed neuroﬁbroma involving the left ﬂoor
of her mouth, tongue, mastoid bone, carotid
artery, and jugular vein. As the tumor com-
pressed her airway, she showed symptoms of
drooling, insomnia, and anorexia. The tumor’s
intimate involvement of vasculature and nerve
tissue precluded surgical resection. Given the
absence of treatment options and the results
from the study of imatinib mesylate in the
mouse plexiform neuroﬁbroma model, clini-
cians discussed the risks and potential beneﬁts

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

487

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

of this experimental therapeutic with her pe-
diatrician and her parents, leading to initiation
of medical therapy. Following three months
of treatment with 350 mg m−2 per dose of
imatinib mesylate, the tumor diminished in size
to approximately one-third of its pretreatment
volume, as assessed by magnetic resonance
imaging. Importantly, the patient’s symptoms
of drooling, insomnia, and anorexia resolved,
and imatinib mesylate produced no apparent
side effects. On the basis of these ﬁndings, a
phase II trial of NF1 patients with plexiform
neuroﬁbromas was recently completed and has
been submitted for publication.

How Does Imatinib Mesylate
Treatment Reduce a Plexiform
Neuroﬁbroma?
A neuroﬁbroma’s maintenance depends upon
continual Schwann cell proliferation and/or
survival, mast cell
invasion, angiogenesis,
and ﬁbroblast proliferation and secretion of
collagen. A simplistic hypothesis suggests that
imatinib disrupts SCF/c-kit-mediated mast
cell cytopoiesis and inﬂammation, thereby in-
terrupting a key link between the tumorigenic
Schwann cell and the mitogenic cues required
to sustain itself and its microenvironment.
However, cooperating mechanisms of action
probably exist. For example, imatinib’s well-
characterized inhibitory action on the c-abl
nonreceptor tyrosine kinase may additionally
disrupt TGF-β-mediated signaling in the
biochemically deregulated ﬁbroblasts
that
constitute the tumor stroma, as has been
suggested experimentally in studies of mouse-
and patient-derived cells. Further,
imatinib
can inhibit signaling at the PDGF receptor,
which experiments have shown is expressed
by neuroﬁbroma-derived Schwann cells and
responds
in tumor
xenograft models
(27). Similarly, vascular
cells in the tumor microenvironment may
also depend on PDGF receptor signaling
(99). Accordingly,
imatinib may operate on
several cell-receptor systems that are important
for tumor growth, although the data from

to imatinib treatment

Staser· Yang· Clapp

488

transplantation-based and other studies com-
pellingly suggest that disruption of the SCF/c-
kit signaling axis may be of primary importance.

Future Targeted Therapies
In addition to imatinib mesylate, then, novel
agents targeting the c-kit receptor tyrosine
kinase and other relevant receptors and kinases
may be viable therapeutics for the medical
treatment of plexiform neuroﬁbromas. A
deeper understanding of the multiple mech-
anisms that doubtlessly underlie heterotypic
tumor interactions, as well as the discovery of
associations between genomic variation and
disease course, will permit treatments tailored
to the speciﬁc way in which a plexiform neuroﬁ-
broma manifests within the individual patient.
In a medical era that is increasingly cognizant
of the potentials of personalized medicine and
receptor-speciﬁc therapeutics, we view the
results from imatinib as a ﬁrst step. Indeed,
singular or combined use of novel antian-
giogenic drugs (e.g., bevacizumab), targeted
anti-inﬂammatory agents (e.g., inﬂiximab), and
other c-kit antibodies (e.g., sunitinib) could
prove beneﬁcial, perhaps in a case-speciﬁc
manner. Moreover, pharmacological-grade,
small-molecule kinase inhibitors, which typi-
cally modulate intracellular effectors involved
in multiple ligand-receptor systems, may be
efﬁcacious, given the observed hyperactivity
of MAPK and PI3K pathways in Nf1-deﬁcient
cell types. Notably, accurate mouse models
tumorigenesis are currently facilitating
of
the high-throughput
testing of multiple
experimental therapeutic agents.

CONCLUSION
Neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient glial cells do not grow
in isolation. Rather, they send mitogenic signals
that interact with and co-opt ECs, ﬁbroblasts,
and hematopoietic cells, orchestrating the
tumor microenvironment. As experimentally
demonstrated, SCF-recruited and activated
mast cells buttress nascent tumors and sup-
port mature microenvironments by promoting

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

ﬁbroblast expansion and collagen synthesis, and
Schwann cells and ﬁbroblasts secrete factors
that directly contribute to vascular ingrowth.
The SCF-stimulated mast cell may also release
factors that promote the recruitment and/or
growth of ECs (e.g., VEGF, PDGF, bFGF),
other hematopoietic cells (e.g., interleukin-6,
tumor necrosis factor α, MCP-1), and Schwann
cells (e.g., NGF, PDGF), but the importance
of these signals remains largely unexamined.
Thus, broadly, although the complex and co-
operating events in tumor genesis are not fully
understood, they potentially include multiple
ligand-receptor
interactions across diverse
cell types and the modulating inﬂuences of
variation in other genes. Regardless, genetic

dosage of NF1 is central to neuroﬁbroma
pathogenesis; there is a requirement for NF1
nullizygosity in the tumorigenic cell and, in sev-
eral disease models, for Nf1 heterozygosity in
the hematopoietic system. Whether or not this
requirement for Nf1 heterozygosity has special
relevance for the tumor’s medical treatment in
humans is uncertain, although these insights
have pointed to a particular importance of the
SCF/c-kit signaling axis in modulating the dis-
ease course. Above all, continued exploration
of the genomic variation among individual
phenotypes and a deeper delineation of het-
erotypic interactions underlying tumorigenesis
will propel the development and application of
targeted, effective medical therapies.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported, in part, by National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute
grants RO1 CA074177-11A1/D and P50 NS052606-04 (to D.W.C.). K.S. was additionally sup-
ported by a predoctoral fellowship from National Institutes of Health grant T32 CA111198.

LITERATURE CITED

1. Friedman J, Gutmann DH, Maccollin M, Riccardi VM. 1999. Neuroﬁbromatosis: Phenotype, Natural

History, and Pathogenesis. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press. 381 pp.

2. Lubs ML, Bauer MS, Formas ME, Djokic B. 1991. Lisch nodules in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. N. Engl.

J. Med. 324:1264–66

3. Riccardi VM. 1991. Neuroﬁbromatosis: past, present, and future. N. Engl. J. Med. 324:1283–85
4. Riccardi VM. 2010. Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 is a disorder of dysplasia: the importance of distinguishing

features, consequences, and complications. Birth Defects Res. A Clin. Mol. Teratol. 88:9–14

5. Akenside M. 1768. Observations on cancers. Med. Trans. Coll. Phys. Lond. 1:64–92
6. Tilesius von Tilenau W. 1793. Historia pathologica singularis Cutis Turpitudinis. Leipzig, Ger.: Crusius
7. Morse RP. 1999. Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Arch. Neurol. 56:364–65
8. von Recklinghausen F. 1882.
Neuromen. Berlin: Hirschwald

¨Uber die multiplen Fibrome der Haut und ihre Beziehung zu multiplen

9. Gamble HJ, Goldby S. 1961. Mast cells in peripheral nerve trunks. Nature 189:766–67
10. Baroni C. 1964. On the relationship of mast cells to various soft tissue tumours. Br. J. Cancer 18:686–91
11. Pineda A. 1965. Mast cells—their presence and ultrastructural characteristics in peripheral nerve tumors.

Arch. Neurol. 13:372–82

12. Olsson Y. 1971. Mast cells in human peripheral nerve. Acta Neurol. Scand. 47:357–68
13. Isaacson P. 1976. Mast cells in benign nerve sheath tumours. J. Pathol. 119:193–96

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

489

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

14. Greggio H. 1911. Les cellules granuleuses (Mastzellen) dans les tissus normaux et dans certaines maladies

chirurgicales. Arch. Med. Exp. 23:323–75

15. Le LQ, Shipman T, Burns DK, Parada LF. 2009. Cell of origin and microenvironment contribution for

NF1-associated dermal neuroﬁbromas. Cell Stem Cell 4:453–63

16. Zheng H, Chang L, Patel N, Yang J, Lowe L, et al. 2008. Induction of abnormal proliferation by

nonmyelinating Schwann cells triggers neuroﬁbroma formation. Cancer Cell 13:117–28

17. Wu J, Williams JP, Rizvi TA, Kordich JJ, Witte D, et al. 2008. Plexiform and dermal neuroﬁbromas

and pigmentation are caused by Nf1 loss in desert hedgehog–expressing cells. Cancer Cell 13:105–16

18. Raffensperger J, Cohen R. 1972. Plexiform neuroﬁbromas in childhood. J. Pediatr. Surg. 7:144–51
19. Serletis D, Parkin P, Bouffet E, Shroff M, Drake JM, Rutka JT. 2007. Massive plexiform neuroﬁbromas

in childhood: natural history and management issues. J. Neurosurg. 106:363–67

20. McCaughan JA, Holloway SM, Davidson R, Lam WW. 2007. Further evidence of the increased risk
for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour from a Scottish cohort of patients with neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1. J. Med. Genet. 44:463–66

21. Evans DG, Baser ME, McGaughran J, Sharif S, Howard E, Moran A. 2002. Malignant peripheral nerve

sheath tumours in neuroﬁbromatosis 1. J. Med. Genet. 39:311–14

22. Cavallaro G, Basile U, Polistena A, Giustini S, Arena R, et al. 2010. Surgical management of abdominal

manifestations of type 1 neuroﬁbromatosis: experience of a single center. Am. Surg. 76:389–96

23. Wu J, Dombi E, Jousma E, Scott Dunn R, Lindquist D, et al. 2011. Preclincial testing of Sorafenib and
RAD001 in the Nf ﬂox/ﬂox;DhhCre mouse model of plexiform neuroﬁbroma using magnetic resonance
imaging. Pediatr. Blood Cancer. In press
ronment containing Nf1+/−and c-kit-dependent bone marrow. Cell 135:437–48

24. Yang FC, Ingram DA, Chen S, Zhu Y, Yuan J, et al. 2008. Nf1-dependent tumors require a microenvi-

25. Jakacki RI, Dombi E, Potter DM, Goldman S, Allen JC, et al. 2011. Phase I trial of PEGylated interferon-

α-2b in young patients with plexiform neuroﬁbromas. Neurology 76:265–72

26. Widemann BC, Salzer WL, Arceci RJ, Blaney SM, Fox E, et al. 2006. Phase I trial and pharmacoki-
netic study of the farnesyltransferase inhibitor tipifarnib in children with refractory solid tumors or
neuroﬁbromatosis type I and plexiform neuroﬁbromas. J. Clin. Oncol. 24:507–16

27. Demestre M, Herzberg J, Holtkamp N, Hagel C, Reuss D, et al. 2010. Imatinib mesylate (Glivec)
inhibits Schwann cell viability and reduces the size of human plexiform neuroﬁbroma in a xenograft
model. J. Neurooncol. 98:11–19

28. Packer RJ, Rosser T. 2002. Therapy for plexiform neuroﬁbromas in children with neuroﬁbromatosis 1:

an overview. J. Child Neurol. 17:638–41

29. Franco CB, Chen CC, Drukker M, Weissman IL, Galli SJ. 2010. Distinguishing mast cell and granulocyte

differentiation at the single-cell level. Cell Stem Cell 6:361–68

30. Metz M, Piliponsky AM, Chen CC, Lammel V, Abrink M, et al. 2006. Mast cells can enhance resistance

to snake and honeybee venoms. Science 313:526–30

31. Kalesnikoff J, Galli SJ. 2008. New developments in mast cell biology. Nat. Immunol. 9:1215–23
32. Galli SJ, Grimbaldeston M, Tsai M. 2008. Immunomodulatory mast cells: negative, as well as positive,

regulators of immunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8:478–86

33. Galli SJ, Tsai M. 2008. Mast cells: versatile regulators of inﬂammation, tissue remodeling, host defense

and homeostasis. J. Dermatol. Sci. 49:7–19

34. Chabot B, Stephenson DA, Chapman VM, Besmer P, Bernstein A. 1988. The proto-oncogene c-kit

encoding a transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor maps to the mouse W locus. Nature 335:88–89

35. Galli SJ, Tsai M, Wershil BK. 1993. The c-kit receptor, stem cell factor, and mast cells. What each is

teaching us about the others. Am. J. Pathol. 142:965–74

36. Tsai M, Takeishi T, Thompson H, Langley KE, Zsebo KM, et al. 1991. Induction of mast cell prolif-
eration, maturation, and heparin synthesis by the rat c-kit ligand, stem cell factor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 88:6382–86

37. Taylor AM, Galli SJ, Coleman JW. 1995. Stem-cell factor, the kit ligand, induces direct degranulation
of rat peritoneal mast cells in vitro and in vivo: dependence of the in vitro effect on period of culture and
comparisons of stem-cell factor with other mast cell–activating agents. Immunology 86:427–33

Staser· Yang· Clapp

490

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

38. Coussens LM, Werb Z. 2002. Inﬂammation and cancer. Nature 420:860–67
39. Coussens LM, Werb Z. 2001. Inﬂammatory cells and cancer: Think different! J. Exp. Med. 193:F23–26
40. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. 2000. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100:57–70
41. Riccardi VM. 1981. Cutaneous manifestation of neuroﬁbromatosis: cellular interaction, pigmentation,

and mast cells. Birth Defects Orig. Artic. Ser. 17:129–45

42. Riccardi VM. 1987. Mast-cell stabilization to decrease neuroﬁbroma growth. Preliminary experience

with ketotifen. Arch. Dermatol. 123:1011–16

43. Riccardi VM. 1993. A controlled multiphase trial of ketotifen to minimize neuroﬁbroma-associated pain

and itching. Arch. Dermatol. 129:577–81

44. Barker D, Wright E, Nguyen K, Cannon L, Fain P, et al. 1987. Gene for von Recklinghausen neuroﬁ-

bromatosis is in the pericentromeric region of chromosome 17. Science 236:1100–2

45. Seizinger BR, Rouleau GA, Ozelius LJ, Lane AH, Faryniarz AG, et al. 1987. Genetic linkage of von

Recklinghausen neuroﬁbromatosis to the nerve growth factor receptor gene. Cell 49:589–94

46. Fountain JW, Wallace MR, Bruce MA, Seizinger BR, Menon AG, et al. 1989. Physical mapping of a

translocation breakpoint in neuroﬁbromatosis. Science 244:1085–87

47. Wallace MR, Marchuk DA, Andersen LB, Letcher R, Odeh HM, et al. 1990. Type 1 neuroﬁbromatosis

gene: identiﬁcation of a large transcript disrupted in three NF1 patients. Science 249:181–86

48. Viskochil D, Buchberg AM, Xu G, Cawthon RM, Stevens J, et al. 1990. Deletions and a translocation

interrupt a cloned gene at the neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 locus. Cell 62:187–92

49. Cawthon RM, Weiss R, Xu GF, Viskochil D, Culver M, et al. 1990. A major segment of the neuroﬁ-

bromatosis type 1 gene: cDNA sequence, genomic structure, and point mutations. Cell 62:193–201

50. Marchuk DA, Saulino AM, Tavakkol R, Swaroop M, Wallace MR, et al. 1991. cDNA cloning of the

type 1 neuroﬁbromatosis gene: complete sequence of the NF1 gene product. Genomics 11:931–40

51. Ledbetter DH, Rich DC, O’Connell P, Leppert M, Carey JC. 1989. Precise localization of NF1 to

17q11.2 by balanced translocation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 44:20–24

52. Fountain JW, Wallace MR, Brereton AM, O’Connell P, White RL, et al. 1989. Physical mapping of the

von Recklinghausen neuroﬁbromatosis region on chromosome 17. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 44:58–67

53. Li Y, O’Connell P, Breidenbach HH, Cawthon R, Stevens J, et al. 1995. Genomic organization of the

neuroﬁbromatosis 1 gene (NF1). Genomics 25:9–18

54. Shilyansky C, Lee YS, Silva AJ. 2010. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of learning disabilities: a focus

on NF1. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 33:221–43

55. Sergeyev AS. 1975. On the mutation rate of neuroﬁbromatosis. Humangenetik 28:129–38
56. Park VM, Pivnick EK. 1998. Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1): a protein truncation assay yielding iden-

tiﬁcation of mutations in 73% of patients. J. Med. Genet. 35:813–20

57. Messiaen LM, Callens T, Mortier G, Beysen D, Vandenbroucke I, et al. 2000. Exhaustive mutation
analysis of the NF1 gene allows identiﬁcation of 95% of mutations and reveals a high frequency of
unusual splicing defects. Hum. Mutat. 15:541–55

58. Maertens O, De Schepper S, Vandesompele J, Brems H, Heyns I, et al. 2007. Molecular dissection of

isolated disease features in mosaic neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81:243–51

59. Praxedes LA, Pereira FM, Mazzeu JF, Costa SS, Bertola DR, et al. 2010. An illustrative case of neuroﬁ-

bromatosis type 1 and NF1 microdeletion. Mol. Syndromol. 1:133–35

60. Dorschner MO, Sybert VP, Weaver M, Pletcher BA, Stephens K. 2000. NF1 microdeletion breakpoints

are clustered at ﬂanking repetitive sequences. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9:35–46

61. Wiest V, Eisenbarth I, Schmegner C, Krone W, Assum G. 2003. Somatic NF1 mutation spectra in a

family with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: toward a theory of genetic modiﬁers. Hum. Mutat. 22:423–27

62. Sabbagh A, Pasmant E, Laurendeau I, Parfait B, Barbarot S, et al. 2009. Unravelling the genetic basis of

variable clinical expression in neuroﬁbromatosis 1. Hum. Mol. Genet. 18:2768–78

63. Hawes JJ, Tuskan RG, Reilly KM. 2007. Nf1 expression is dependent on strain background: implications

for tumor suppressor haploinsufﬁciency studies. Neurogenetics 8:121–30

64. Upadhyaya M, Huson SM, Davies M, Thomas N, Chuzhanova N, et al. 2007. An absence of cutaneous
neuroﬁbromas associated with a 3-bp inframe deletion in exon 17 of the NF1 gene (c.2970–2972 delAAT):
evidence of a clinically signiﬁcant NF1 genotype-phenotype correlation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80:140–51

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

491

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

65. Xu GF, O’Connell P, Viskochil D, Cawthon R, Robertson M, et al. 1990. The neuroﬁbromatosis type

1 gene encodes a protein related to GAP. Cell 62:599–608

66. Gutmann DH, Collins FS. 1993. The neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 gene and its protein product, neuroﬁ-

bromin. Neuron 10:335–43

67. Gutmann DH, Boguski M, Marchuk D, Wigler M, Collins FS, Ballester R. 1993. Analysis of the neu-

roﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) GAP-related domain by site-directed mutagenesis. Oncogene 8:761–69

68. Martin GA, Viskochil D, Bollag G, McCabe PC, Crosier WJ, et al. 1990. The GAP-related domain of

the neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 gene product interacts with Ras p21. Cell 63:843–49

69. DeClue JE, Papageorge AG, Fletcher JA, Diehl SR, Ratner N, et al. 1992. Abnormal regulation of mam-
malian p21ras contributes to malignant tumor growth in von Recklinghausen (type 1) neuroﬁbromatosis.
Cell 69:265–73

70. McCormick F. 1989. Ras GTPase activating protein: signal transmitter and signal terminator. Cell 56:5–8
71. Vigil D, Cherﬁls J, Rossman KL, Der CJ. 2010. Ras superfamily GEFs and GAPs: validated and tractable

targets for cancer therapy? Nat. Rev. Cancer 10:842–57

72. Bourne HR, Sanders DA, McCormick F. 1990. The GTPase superfamily: a conserved switch for diverse

cell functions. Nature 348:125–32

73. Bourne HR, Sanders DA, McCormick F. 1991. The GTPase superfamily: conserved structure and

molecular mechanism. Nature 349:117–27

74. Hall A. 1990. The cellular functions of small GTP-binding proteins. Science 249:635–40
75. Hall A. 1992. Signal transduction through small GTPases—a tale of two GAPs. Cell 69:389–91
76. Le LQ, Parada LF. 2007. Tumor microenvironment and neuroﬁbromatosis type I: connecting the GAPs.

Oncogene 26:4609–16

77. Dasgupta B, Gutmann DH. 2003. Neuroﬁbromatosis 1: closing the GAP between mice and men.

Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 13:20–27

78. Costa RM, Silva AJ. 2003. Mouse models of neuroﬁbromatosis type I: bridging the GAP. Trends Mol.

Med. 9:19–23

79. Staser K, Yang FC, Clapp DW. 2010. Plexiform neuroﬁbroma genesis: questions of Nf1 gene dose and

hyperactive mast cells. Curr. Opin. Hematol. 17:287–93

80. Staser K, Yang FC, Clapp DW. 2010. Mast cells and the neuroﬁbroma microenvironment. Blood 116:157–

64

81. Cichowski K, Shih TS, Schmitt E, Santiago S, Reilly K, et al. 1999. Mouse models of tumor development

in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Science 286:2172–76

82. Zhu Y, Ghosh P, Charnay P, Burns DK, Parada LF. 2002. Neuroﬁbromas in NF1: Schwann cell origin

and role of tumor environment. Science 296:920–22

83. Joseph NM, Mosher JT, Buchstaller J, Snider P, McKeever PE, et al. 2008. The loss of Nf1 transiently

promotes self-renewal but not tumorigenesis by neural crest stem cells. Cancer Cell 13:129–40

84. Zinnamosca L, Petramala L, Cotesta D, Marinelli C, Schina M, et al. 2010. Neuroﬁbromatosis type
1 (NF1) and pheochromocytoma: prevalence, clinical and cardiovascular aspects. Arch. Dermatol. Res.
303:317–25

85. De Schepper S, Maertens O, Callens T, Naeyaert JM, Lambert J, Messiaen L. 2008. Somatic mutation
analysis in NF1 caf´e au lait spots reveals two NF1 hits in the melanocytes. J. Investig. Dermatol. 128:1050–
53

86. Bollag G, Clapp DW, Shih S, Adler F, Zhang YY, et al. 1996. Loss of NF1 results in activation of the

Ras signaling pathway and leads to aberrant growth in haematopoietic cells. Nat. Genet. 12:144–48

87. Zhu Y, Harada T, Liu L, Lush ME, Guignard F, et al. 2005. Inactivation of NF1 in CNS causes increased

glial progenitor proliferation and optic glioma formation. Development 132:5577–88

88. Stevenson DA, Zhou H, Ashraﬁ S, Messiaen LM, Carey JC, et al. 2006. Double inactivation of NF1 in

tibial pseudarthrosis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79:143–48

89. Sakamoto A, Yoshida T, Yamamoto H, Oda Y, Tsuneyoshi M, Iwamoto Y. 2007. Congenital pseu-

darthrosis of the tibia: analysis of the histology and the NF1 gene. J. Orthop. Sci. 12:361–65

90. Kolanczyk M, Kuhnisch J, Kossler N, Osswald M, Stumpp S, et al. 2008. Modelling neuroﬁbromatosis

type 1 tibial dysplasia and its treatment with lovastatin. BMC Med. 6:21

Staser· Yang· Clapp

492

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

91. Yeh TH, Lee DY, Gianino SM, Gutmann DH. 2009. Microarray analyses reveal regional astrocyte
heterogeneity with implications for neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1)-regulated glial proliferation. Glia
57:1239–49

92. Lee DY, Yeh TH, Emnett RJ, White CR, Gutmann DH. 2010. Neuroﬁbromatosis-1 regulates neuroglial
progenitor proliferation and glial differentiation in a brain region–speciﬁc manner. Genes Dev. 24:2317–
29

93. Li H, Liu Y, Zhang Q, Jing Y, Chen S, et al. 2009. Ras dependent paracrine secretion of osteopontin by
+/− osteoblasts promote osteoclast activation in a neuroﬁbromatosis type I murine model. Pediatr.

Nf1
Res. 65:613–18

94. Yan J, Chen S, Zhang Y, Li X, Li Y, et al. 2008. Rac1 mediates the osteoclast gains-in-function induced

by haploinsufﬁciency of Nf1. Hum. Mol. Genet. 17:936–48

95. Yang FC, Chen S, Robling AG, Yu X, Nebesio TD, et al. 2006. Hyperactivation of p21ras and PI3K
cooperate to alter murine and human neuroﬁbromatosis type 1–haploinsufﬁcient osteoclast functions.
J. Clin. Investig. 116:2880–91

96. Cui Y, Costa RM, Murphy GG, Elgersma Y, Zhu Y, et al. 2008. Neuroﬁbromin regulation of ERK

signaling modulates GABA release and learning. Cell 135:549–60

97. Munchhof AM, Li F, White HA, Mead LE, Krier TR, et al. 2006. Neuroﬁbroma-associated growth
factors activate a distinct signaling network to alter the function of neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient endothelial
cells. Hum. Mol. Genet. 15:1858–69
98. Lasater EA, Bessler WK, Mead LE, Horn WE, Clapp DW, et al. 2008. Nf1+/− mice have increased
neointima formation via hyperactivation of a Gleevec sensitive molecular pathway. Hum. Mol. Genet.
17:2336–44

99. Li F, Munchhof AM, White HA, Mead LE, Krier TR, et al. 2006. Neuroﬁbromin is a novel regulator

of RAS-induced signals in primary vascular smooth muscle cells. Hum. Mol. Genet. 15:1921–30

100. Ingram DA, Yang FC, Travers JB, Wenning MJ, Hiatt K, et al. 2000. Genetic and biochemical evidence
that haploinsufﬁciency of the Nf1 tumor suppressor gene modulates melanocyte and mast cell fates in
vivo. J. Exp. Med. 191:181–88
+/− mast cells induce neuroﬁbroma like

101. Yang FC, Chen S, Clegg T, Li X, Morgan T, et al. 2006. Nf1

phenotypes through secreted TGF-β signaling. Hum. Mol. Genet. 15:2421–37

102. Bajenaru ML, Donahoe J, Corral T, Reilly KM, Brophy S, et al. 2001. Neuroﬁbromatosis 1 (NF1)

heterozygosity results in a cell-autonomous growth advantage for astrocytes. Glia 33:314–23

103. Simmons GW, Pong WW, Emnett RJ, White CR, Gianino SM, et al. 2010. Neuroﬁbromatosis-1
heterozygosity increases microglia in a spatially and temporally restricted pattern relevant to mouse
optic glioma formation and growth. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 70:51–62

104. Daginakatte GC, Gianino SM, Zhao NW, Parsadanian AS, Gutmann DH. 2008. Increased c-Jun-NH2-
kinase signaling in neuroﬁbromatosis-1 heterozygous microglia drives microglia activation and promotes
optic glioma proliferation. Cancer Res. 68:10358–66

105. Daginakatte GC, Gutmann DH. 2007. Neuroﬁbromatosis-1 (Nf1) heterozygous brain microglia elab-
orate paracrine factors that promote Nf1-deﬁcient astrocyte and glioma growth. Hum. Mol. Genet.
16:1098–112

106. Jacks T, Shih TS, Schmitt EM, Bronson RT, Bernards A, Weinberg RA. 1994. Tumour predisposition

in mice heterozygous for a targeted mutation in Nf1. Nat. Genet. 7:353–61

107. Brannan CI, Perkins AS, Vogel KS, Ratner N, Nordlund ML, et al. 1994. Targeted disruption of the
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 gene leads to developmental abnormalities in heart and various neural crest–
derived tissues. Genes. Dev. 8:1019–29

108. Valero MC, Velasco E, Moreno F, Hernandez-Chico C. 1994. Characterization of four mutations in the
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 gene by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). Hum. Mol. Genet.
3:639–41

109. Lasater EA, Li F, Bessler WK, Estes ML, Vemula S, et al. 2010. Genetic and cellular evidence of vascular

inﬂammation in neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient mice and humans. J. Clin. Investig. 120:859–70

110. Zhu Y, Romero MI, Ghosh P, Ye Z, Charnay P, et al. 2001. Ablation of NF1 function in neurons induces

abnormal development of cerebral cortex and reactive gliosis in the brain. Genes. Dev. 15:859–76

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

493

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

111. Sauer B, Henderson N. 1988. Site-speciﬁc DNA recombination in mammalian cells by the Cre recom-

binase of bacteriophage P1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85:5166–70

112. Topilko P, Schneider-Maunoury S, Levi G, Baron-Van Evercooren A, Chennouﬁ AB, et al. 1994. Krox-

20 controls myelination in the peripheral nervous system. Nature 371:796–99

113. Bajenaru ML, Hernandez MR, Perry A, Zhu Y, Parada LF, et al. 2003. Optic nerve glioma in mice

requires astrocyte Nf1 gene inactivation and Nf1 brain heterozygosity. Cancer Res. 63:8573–77

114. Bajenaru ML, Zhu Y, Hedrick NM, Donahoe J, Parada LF, Gutmann DH. 2002. Astrocyte-speciﬁc
inactivation of the neuroﬁbromatosis 1 gene (NF1) is insufﬁcient for astrocytoma formation. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 22:5100–13

115. Bailey P, Herrmann JD. 1938. The role of the cells of Schwann in the formation of tumors of the

peripheral nerves. Am. J. Pathol. 14:1–38

116. Kluwe L, Friedrich R, Mautner VF. 1999. Loss of NF1 allele in Schwann cells but not in ﬁbroblasts

derived from an NF1-associated neuroﬁbroma. Genes. Chromosomes Cancer 24:283–85

117. Rutkowski JL, Wu K, Gutmann DH, Boyer PJ, Legius E. 2000. Genetic and cellular defects contributing

to benign tumor formation in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9:1059–66

118. Maertens O, Brems H, Vandesompele J, De Raedt T, Heyns I, et al. 2006. Comprehensive NF1 screening

on cultured Schwann cells from neuroﬁbromas. Hum. Mutat. 27:1030–40

119. Sheela S, Riccardi VM, Ratner N. 1990. Angiogenic and invasive properties of neuroﬁbroma Schwann

cells. J. Cell Biol. 111:645–53

120. Carroll SL, Ratner N. 2008. How does the Schwann cell lineage form tumors in NF1? Glia 56:1590–605
121. Mashour GA, Ratner N, Khan GA, Wang HL, Martuza RL, Kurtz A. 2001. The angiogenic factor
midkine is aberrantly expressed in NF1-deﬁcient Schwann cells and is a mitogen for neuroﬁbroma-
derived cells. Oncogene 20:97–105
cells secrete a potent migratory stimulus for Nf1+/− mast cells. J. Clin. Investig. 112:1851–61

122. Yang FC, Ingram DA, Chen S, Hingtgen CM, Ratner N, et al. 2003. Neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient Schwann

123. Hirota S, Nomura S, Asada H, Ito A, Morii E, Kitamura Y. 1993. Possible involvement of c-kit receptor

and its ligand in increase of mast cells in neuroﬁbroma tissues. Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 117:996–99

124. Ryan JJ, Klein KA, Neuberger TJ, Leftwich JA, Westin EH, et al. 1994. Role for the stem cell
factor/KIT complex in Schwann cell neoplasia and mast cell proliferation associated with neuroﬁbro-
matosis. J. Neurosci. Res. 37:415–32

125. Mashour GA, Driever PH, Hartmann M, Drissel SN, Zhang T, et al. 2004. Circulating growth factor

levels are associated with tumorigenesis in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Clin. Cancer Res. 10:5677–83

126. Huang E, Nocka K, Beier DR, Chu TY, Buck J, et al. 1990. The hematopoietic growth factor KL is
encoded by the SI locus and is the ligand of the c-kit receptor, the gene product of the W locus. Cell
63:225–33

127. Zsebo KM, Williams DA, Geissler EN, Broudy VC, Martin FH, et al. 1990. Stem cell factor is encoded

at the SI locus of the mouse and is the ligand for the c-kit tyrosine kinase receptor. Cell 63:213–24

128. Nocka K, Tan JC, Chiu E, Chu TY, Ray P, et al. 1990. Molecular bases of dominant negative and loss of
function mutations at the murine c-kit/white spotting locus: W37, Wv, W41 and W. EMBO J. 9:1805–13
129. Tan JC, Nocka K, Ray P, Traktman P, Besmer P. 1990. The dominant W42 spotting phenotype results

from a missense mutation in the c-kit receptor kinase. Science 247:209–12

130. Ingram DA, Hiatt K, King AJ, Fisher L, Shivakumar R, et al. 2001. Hyperactivation of p21ras and
the hematopoietic-speciﬁc Rho GTPase, Rac2, cooperate to alter the proliferation of neuroﬁbromin-
deﬁcient mast cells in vivo and in vitro. J. Exp. Med. 194:57–69

131. Malhotra R, Ratner N. 1994. Localization of neuroﬁbromin to keratinocytes and melanocytes in devel-

oping rat and human skin. J. Investig. Dermatol. 102:812–18

132. Ballester R, Marchuk D, Boguski M, Saulino A, Letcher R, et al. 1990. The NF1 locus encodes a protein

functionally related to mammalian GAP and yeast IRA proteins. Cell 63:851–59

133. Zhang YY, Vik TA, Ryder JW, Srour EF, Jacks T, et al. 1998. Nf1 regulates hematopoietic progenitor

cell growth and Ras signaling in response to multiple cytokines. J. Exp. Med. 187:1893–902

134. Ingram DA, Zhang L, McCarthy J, Wenning MJ, Fisher L, et al. 2002. Lymphoproliferative defects in
mice lacking the expression of neuroﬁbromin: functional and biochemical consequences of Nf1 deﬁciency
in T-cell development and function. Blood 100:3656–62

Staser· Yang· Clapp

494

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07CH18-Clapp

ARI

12 December 2011

10:20

135. Khalaf WF, Yang FC, Chen S, White H, Bessler W, et al. 2007. K-ras is critical for modulating multiple

136. McDaniel AS, Allen JD, Park SJ, Jaffer ZM, Michels EG, et al. 2008. Pak1 regulates multiple c-Kit

c-kit-mediated cellular functions in wild-type and Nf1
mediated Ras-MAPK gain-in-function phenotypes in Nf1+/− mast cells. Blood 112:4646–54

+/− mast cells. J. Immunol. 178:2527–34

137. Hiatt K, Ingram DA, Huddleston H, Spandau DF, Kapur R, Clapp DW. 2004. Loss of the Nf1 tumor

suppressor gene decreases fas antigen expression in myeloid cells. Am. J. Pathol. 164:1471–79

138. Hiatt KK, Ingram DA, Zhang Y, Bollag G, Clapp DW. 2001. Neuroﬁbromin GTPase-activating

protein–related domains restore normal growth in Nf1

+/− cells. J. Biol. Chem. 276:7240–5

139. Yang FC, Kapur R, King AJ, Tao W, Kim C, et al. 2000. Rac2 stimulates Akt activation affecting
BAD/Bcl-XL expression while mediating survival and actin function in primary mast cells. Immunity
12:557–68
140. Chen S, Burgin S, McDaniel A, Li X, Yuan J, et al. 2010. Nf1+/− Schwann cell–conditioned medium
modulates mast cell degranulation by c-Kit-mediated hyperactivation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.
Am. J. Pathol. 177:3125–32

141. Jaakkola S, Peltonen J, Riccardi V, Chu ML, Uitto J. 1989. Type 1 neuroﬁbromatosis: selective expression
of extracellular matrix genes by Schwann cells, perineurial cells, and ﬁbroblasts in mixed cultures. J. Clin.
Investig. 84:253–61

142. Arbiser JL, Flynn E, Barnhill RL. 1998. Analysis of vascularity of human neuroﬁbromas. J. Am. Acad.

Dermatol. 38:950–54

143. Kim HA, Ling B, Ratner N. 1997. Nf1-deﬁcient mouse Schwann cells are angiogenic and invasive and
can be induced to hyperproliferate: reversion of some phenotypes by an inhibitor of farnesyl protein
transferase. Mol. Cell. Biol. 17:862–72

144. Lewis CE, Pollard JW. 2006. Distinct role of macrophages in different tumor microenvironments.

Cancer Res. 66:605–12

145. Aghi M, Cohen KS, Klein RJ, Scadden DT, Chiocca EA. 2006. Tumor stromal–derived factor 1 recruits
vascular progenitors to mitotic neovasculature, where microenvironment inﬂuences their differentiated
phenotypes. Cancer Res. 66:9054–64

146. Pong WW, Gutmann DH. 2011. The ecology of brain tumors: lessons learned from neuroﬁbromatosis

1. Oncogene 30:1135–46

147. Warrington NM, Woerner BM, Daginakatte GC, Dasgupta B, Perry A, et al. 2007. Spatiotemporal
differences in CXCL12 expression and cyclic AMP underlie the unique pattern of optic glioma growth
in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Cancer Res. 67:8588–95

148. Warrington NM, Gianino SM, Jackson E, Goldhoff P, Garbow JR, et al. 2010. Cyclic AMP suppression
is sufﬁcient to induce gliomagenesis in a mouse model of neuroﬁbromatosis 1. Cancer Res. 70:5717–27
149. Druker BJ. 2008. Translation of the Philadelphia chromosome into therapy for CML. Blood 112:4808–17

www.annualreviews.org • Neuroﬁbroma Microenvironment

495

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07-FrontMatter

ARI

15 December 2011

8:19

Contents

Instantiating a Vision: Creating the New Pathology Department

Annual Review of
Pathology:
Mechanisms of
Disease

Volume 7, 2012

at Stanford Medical School
David Korn p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 1

The Life and Death of Epithelia During Inﬂammation:

Lessons Learned from the Gut
Stefan Koch and Asma Nusrat

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

The Cell Biology of Phagocytosis

Ronald S. Flannagan, Valentin Jaumouill´e, and Sergio Grinstein p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Human Microbiome in Health and Disease
Kathryn J. Pﬂughoeft and James Versalovic

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p35

p61

p99

Merkel Cell Carcinoma: A Virus-Induced Human Cancer

Yuan Chang and Patrick S. Moore p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Molecular Pathogenesis of Ewing Sarcoma: New Therapeutic

and Transcriptional Targets
Stephen L. Lessnick and Marc Ladanyi p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Mechanisms of Function and Disease of Natural

and Replacement Heart Valves
Frederick J. Schoen p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Pathology of Demyelinating Diseases

Bogdan F.Gh. Popescu and Claudia F. Lucchinetti

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Molecular Mechanisms of Fragile X Syndrome:

A Twenty-Year Perspective
Michael R. Santoro, Steven M. Bray, and Stephen T. Warren p

Pathogenesis of NUT Midline Carcinoma

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Christopher A. French p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Genetic Variation and Clinical Heterogeneity in Cystic Fibrosis

Mitchell L. Drumm, Assem G. Ziady, and Pamela B. Davis

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 123

p 145

p 161

p 185

p 219

p 247

p 267

v

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.PM07-FrontMatter

ARI

15 December 2011

8:19

The Pathogenesis of Mixed-Lineage Leukemia

Andrew G. Muntean and Jay L. Hess

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

ATM and the Molecular Pathogenesis of Ataxia Telangiectasia

Peter J. McKinnon p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

RNA Dysregulation in Diseases of Motor Neurons

Fadia Ibrahim, Tadashi Nakaya, and Zissimos Mourelatos

Tuberculosis Pathogenesis and Immunity

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Jennifer A. Philips and Joel D. Ernst

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Psoriasis

Gayathri K. Perera, Paola Di Meglio, and Frank O. Nestle p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Caveolin-1 and Cancer Metabolism in the Tumor Microenvironment:

Markers, Models, and Mechanisms
Federica Sotgia, Ubaldo E. Martinez-Outschoorn, Anthony Howell,

Richard G. Pestell, Stephanos Pavlides, and Michael P. Lisanti

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Pathogenesis of Plexiform Neuroﬁbroma:

p 283

p 303

p 323

p 353

p 385

p 423

Tumor-Stromal/Hematopoietic Interactions in Tumor Progression
Karl Staser, Feng-Chun Yang, and D. Wade Clapp p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 469

Indexes

Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 1–7 p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 1–7 p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p

p 497

p 500

Errata

An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Pathology: Mechanisms of Disease articles
may be found at http://pathol.annualreviews.org

vi

Contents

Annu. Rev. Pathol. Mech. Dis. 2012.7:469-495. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org Access provided by University of Alabama - Birmingham on 05/27/15. For personal use only.