ORIGINAL ARTICLE

JJBMR

Nf1 Haploinsufﬁciency Alters Myeloid Lineage
Commitment and Function, Leading to Deranged
Skeletal Homeostasis

Steven D Rhodes,1,2 Hao Yang,2,3 Ruizhi Dong,2,3 Keshav Menon,2,3 Yongzheng He,2,3 Zhaomin Li,2,3
Shi Chen,2,3 Karl W Staser,2,3 Li Jiang,2,3 Xiaohua Wu,2,3 Xianlin Yang,2,3 Xianghong Peng,4
Khalid S Mohammad,4 Theresa A Guise,4 Mingjiang Xu,2,3,5 and Feng-Chun Yang1
1Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
2Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
3Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
4Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
5Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA

ABSTRACT
Although nullizygous loss of NF1 leads to myeloid malignancies, haploinsufﬁcient loss of NF1 (Nf1) has been shown to contribute to
osteopenia and osteoporosis which occurs in approximately 50% of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) patients. Bone marrow
mononuclear cells of haploinsufﬁcient NF1 patients and Nf1+/– mice exhibit increased osteoclastogenesis and accelerated bone
turnover; however, the culprit hematopoietic lineages responsible for perpetuating these osteolytic manifestations have yet to be
elucidated. Here we demonstrate that conditional inactivation of a single Nf1 allele within the myeloid progenitor cell population
(Nf1-LysM) is necessary and sufﬁcient to promote multiple osteoclast gains-in-function, resulting in enhanced osteoclastogenesis
and accelerated osteoclast bone lytic activity in response to proresorptive challenge in vivo. Surprisingly, mice conditionally Nf1
heterozygous in mature, terminally differentiated osteoclasts (Nf1-Ctsk) do not exhibit any of these skeletal phenotypes, indicating a
critical requirement for Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency at a more primitive/progenitor stage of myeloid development in perpetuating
osteolytic activity. We further identiﬁed p21Ras-dependent hyperphosphorylation of Pu.1 within the nucleus of Nf1 haploinsufﬁcient
myelomonocytic osteoclast precursors, providing a novel therapeutic target for the potential treatment of NF1 associated osteolytic
manifestations. © 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

KEY WORDS: GENETIC ANIMAL MODELS < ANIMAL MODELS; OSTEOCLASTS < CELLS OF BONE; OSTEOPOROSIS < DISEASES AND DISORDERS
OF/RELATED TO BONE

Introduction

Myelomonocytic precursor cells give rise to multinucleated,

bone resorptive osteoclasts (OCs).(1) The physiologic
lineage commitment of monocyte-macrophage precursor cells
is pivotal to maintain skeletal homeostasis. Deregulated OC
differentiation, recruitment, and/or function can result in either
osteoporosis or osteopetrosis,(2,3) affecting not only the skeleton
but also altering the bone marrow niche.(4–6) The cytokines
macrophage–colony stimulating factor (M-CSF)(7) and receptor
activator of nuclear factor kB ligand (RANKL)(8,9) are indispens-
able for macrophage and OC development, respectively. Op/op
mice lacking M-CSF exhibit severe osteopetrosis due to an
absence of both OCs and macrophages. Adoptive transfer of
wild-type (WT) hematopoietic cells is insufﬁcient to correct
recipient mice,(10)
osteopetrotic phenotypes

in

op/op

suggesting that the failure of macrophage and OC differentia-
tion in op/op mice is contingent on the extrinsic absence of M-
CSF as opposed to intrinsic deﬁcits in either the M-CSF receptor
(c-Fms) or intracellular signaling effectors. By contrast, hyper-
sensitivity of macrophages to M-CSF and RANKL in SHIP-
deﬁcient mice has been shown to result in osteoporosis.(11)

Mutations in the NF1 tumor suppressor gene lead to
malignant and nonmalignant disease manifestations of neuro-
ﬁbromatosis type I (NF1), including cutaneous and plexiform
neuroﬁbromas, optic nerve gliomas, malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors (MPNSTs),
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
(JMML), cognitive impairment, cardiovascular disease, and
skeletal defects.(12) Neuroﬁbromin, the protein encoded by
NF1, functions as a GTPase-activation protein (GAP) for Ras,
negatively regulating its functional activity.(13) Experimental
data now indicates that Nf1 gene dose (Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency)

Received in original form November 20, 2014; revised form April 7, 2015; accepted April 17, 2015. Accepted manuscript online April 27, 2015.
Address correspondence to: Feng-Chun Yang, MD, PhD, Indiana University School of Medicine, Cancer Research Institute, 1044 W. Walnut St., Building R4, Room
427, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. E-mail: fyang@iupui.edu
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research, Vol. 30, No. 10, October 2015, pp 1840–1851
DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2538
© 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research

1840

in hematopoietic-derived cells plays a pivotal role in multiple
NF1-associated phenotypes including plexiform neuroﬁbromas,
neointima formation, and the skeletal anomalies osteopenia and
osteoporosis.(14)

Clinical studies demonstrate that approximately 50% of the
NF1 patient population suffers from osteopenia or osteoporo-
sis,(15–20) resulting in signiﬁcantly increased rates of long-bone
fracture.(20,21) Mononuclear cells cultured from the peripheral
blood of NF1 patients and the bone marrow of Nf1+/– mice
exhibit
increased OC differentiation and bone resorptive
capacity in vitro.(22–24) However, the functional requirement
for Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in perpetuating these osteolytic
manifestations has yet to be elucidated in a stepwise and
lineage-restricted fashion within the hematopoietic compart-
ment. Although Nf1+/– myelomonocytic OC progenitor cells
intrinsic, p21-Ras–dependent and PI3K-dependent
exhibit
hypersensitivity to M-CSF and RANKL,(22) the putative contribu-
tion of extrinsic alterations in cytokine levels within the
Nf1-deﬁcient bone microenvironment is difﬁcult to segregate
as a confounding factor. For
instance, hypersecretion of
osteopontin (OPN),(25)
transforming growth factor-beta1
(TGF-b1),(26) and RANKL(27) by Nf1-null osteoprogenitor cells,
together with the decreased expression of the RANKL decoy
receptor, osteoprotegerin (OPG),(27) have each been implicated
as potential paracrine factors perpetuating osteolytic activity in
murine models of the disease.

To understand the cell autonomous and stepwise role of the
Nf1 gene dose in regulating myeloid lineage commitment and
OC differentiation, we generated Nf1-LysM and Nf1-Ctsk mice
inactivation of a single Nf1 allele in
harboring conditional
myeloid progenitor (MP) cells(28) and mature OCs,(29) respective-
ly. Here we demonstrate that haploinsufﬁcient loss of Nf1 within
MP cells is necessary and sufﬁcient to perpetuate multiple OC
gains-in-function both in vitro and in vivo, reminiscent of the
phenotype of Nf1+/– mice.(22) We further delineate a mechanism
by which p21-Ras hyperactivation results in accumulation of
phosphorylated Pu.1 within the nucleus of myelomonocytic OC
precursors, which may be associated with enhanced osteoclas-
togenesis, and provide a novel therapeutic target for the
potential treatment of NF1 associated osteolytic manifestations.

Materials and Methods

Animals
Nf1-ﬂoxed (Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox) mice were generated in the laboratory of
Dr. Luis Parada (University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center) as described.(30) LysMCre mice, generated by Dr. Irmgard
(University of Duesseldorf),(28) and CtskCre mice,
Forster
generated by Dr. R.A. Davey (University of Melbourne,
Australia),(29) were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar
Harbor, ME, USA). Breeding of Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mice with LysMCre and
CtskCre mice yielded LysMCre;Nf1ﬂox/+ and CtskCre;Nf1ﬂox/+ mice
(abbreviated respectively as Nf1-LysM and Nf1-Ctsk throughout),
which were maintained at the Indiana University School of
Medicine in accordance with the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee and Institutional Review Board guidelines.
Cre-mediated recombination of the ﬂoxed Nf1 allele was
validated by PCR and Western blot (Supplemental Fig. 1A–C).
The genotype of WT mice was either Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox;Cre(–) or Nf1ﬂox/+;
Cre(–) for each colony. For all experiments, WT mice were
obtained from the same colony as the corresponding mutant
mice.

Bone marrow isolation

Bone marrow was ﬂushed from the femur, tibia, and iliac crest in
a 5-mL volume of Iscove’s Modiﬁed Dulbecco’s Media (IMDM;
Gibco/Invitrogen), supplemented with 1% fetal bovine serum
(FBS; Hyclone, ThermoScientiﬁc) using a 1.5-inch, 23G needle.
Low-density bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMMNCs) were
isolated by density gradient centrifugation for 30 min at 700 g
(gh-3.8 rotor; Beckman Coulter) on a 3.5-mL volume of
Histopaque (Sigma). The buffy coat layer was collected and
washed with IMDM or other media prior to further assays.

Colonogenic progenitor assays

To determine the frequency of MPs in bone marrow, colony-
forming unit-macrophage/monocyte (CFU-M) of BMMNCs were
performed by seeding 2.5 104 BMMNCs into 35-mm gridded
dishes containing methylcellulose supplemented with varying
doses of murine recombinant M-CSF (0.1, 1, 10, and 50 ng/mL)
for 7 days at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator.(22) Colony type and
numbers were counted on an inverted light microscope.

OC differentiation

Murine OCs were cultured in vitro from mouse BMMNCs as
described(22) using a-MEM medium supplemented with 10%
FBS in the presence of murine recombinant M-CSF (30 ng/mL)
and murine recombinant receptor activator of nuclear factor
kappa-B ligand (RANKL, 20 ng/mL). On day 3 of culture, the
cytokines were changed to M-CSF (30 ng/mL) and RANKL (60 ng/
mL) for an additional 3 days of culture. Adherent cells were then
ﬁxed and stained for tartrate resistant acid phosphatase (TRACP)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma-Aldrich,
USA). TRACP-positive staining OC cells were visualized and
photographed with a Nikon TE2000-S microscope (Nikon Inc.,
Melville, NY, USA) equipped with a QImaging camera (Fryer
Company Inc., Cincinnati, OH, USA). Mature OCs were deﬁned as
multinucleated TRACP-positive staining cells containing greater
than or equal to three nuclei. OC nuclear number and area were
scored using NIH ImageJ Software (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij).

Bone resorption assays

BMMNCs were seeded on dentine slices (ALPCO Diagnostic,
Windham, NH, USA) and cultured in the presence of M-CSF and
RANKL at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 7 days. The area of resorptive “pits”
was quantiﬁed on low power ﬁelds using NIH ImageJ Software.

Flow cytometry

BMMNCs were incubated for 45 min at 4 °C with saturating
concentrations of anti-mouse antibodies in 100 mL 3% FBS/
0.09% NaN3 in PBS with 0.25 mg anti-mouse CD16/CD32 (“Fc
Block”). For the MP analysis, the following antibodies from BD
Biosciences were used: FITC-conjugated anti-lineage markers
(CD3, CD4, CD8, B220, Mac1, Gr1, Ter119), anti-CD16/32-PE, anti-
CD34-PaciﬁcBlue, anti-Sca1-APC-Cy7, and anti-c-Kit-PerCP-
Cy5.5. For the mature lineage analysis, the following antibodies
from BD Biosciences were used: anti-CD3-FITC, anti-CD8-
PacBlue, anti-B220-V500, anti-Mac1-PE, anti-Gr1-PECy7, anti-
CD4-APC-Cy7, and anti-CD45.2-PerCP-Cy5.5. Cells were analyzed
on an LSR II 407 ﬂow cytometer, and single color compensation
controls were acquired using polystyrene microbeads (BD
Biosciences). All postacquisition analyses were performed with
FlowJo 7.6.3 software (TreeStar, Ashland, OR, USA) with gating
parameters determined by ﬂuorescence minus-one controls.

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

NF1 HAPLOINSUFFICIENCY IN MYELOID CELLS

1841

(MEPs). Multipotent progenitor cells
þ

The following gating deﬁnitions were used: MPs; granulocyte-
monocyte progenitors (GMPs); and megakaryocyte-erythroid
progenitors
(MPPs):
þ
þ
Lin–Sca1
. Common myeloid pro-
þ
þ
FcgRII/II–/lo. GMPs: Lin–-
genitors (CMPs): Lin–Sca1–c-Kit
CD34–FcgRII/
Sca1–c-Kit
II–. Hematopoietic
cell
(HSPCs):
. Myeloid cells: CD3–B220–.
CD150
þ
Mononuclear cells (Monocytes): CD3–B220–Gr1–Mac1

. MPs: Lin–Sca1–c-Kit
CD34
þ
CD34

Lin–CD48–CD41–Sca1

þ
c-Kit

FcgRII/ II

. MEPs: Lin–Sca1–c-Kit
þ

stem and progenitor

c-Kit

þ

.

þ

þ

þ

Proresorptive challenge
Twelve-week old, female WT, Nf1-LysMCre, and Nf1-CtskCre mice
underwent either ovariectomy or sham surgery.(22) Brieﬂy, mice
were anesthetized using a mixture of ketamine (150 mg/kg) and
xylazine (10 mg/kg) administered by intraperitoneal
(i.p.)
injection. A 2-cm midline dorsal skin incision was performed,
followed by incision of the peritoneal cavity to identify and
excise the ovaries. Bone mineral density (BMD) was measured
once prior to surgery and again after 6 weeks to track the
percent change in BMD over time. The mice were subsequently
euthanized and the long bones were dissected for further
analysis by micro–computed tomography (mCT) and histological
methods described below. The cohort sizes of the experimental
(OVX) and sham-operated control groups were chosen to
achieve sufﬁcient statistical power to detect a signiﬁcant
difference in BMD between genotypes within treatment groups
6 weeks post-surgery, according to our previously published
work.(22)

Peripheral dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry

BMD was measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA)
with a Lunar Piximus densitometer (GE Lunar II, Faxitron Corp.,
Wheeling, IL, USA).(22) Mice were anesthetized with a mixture of
ketamine (150 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg)
injected i.p.
Animals were scanned in the prone position with arms and legs
extended. A region of interest was deﬁned as the distal femur
adjacent to the growth plate (12 12 pixels). For OVX experi-
ments,
the percent change in BMD was determined by
comparing the initial measurement with an endpoint scan,
acquired 6 weeks following OVX or sham surgery.

mCT

Formalin ﬁxed femurs were placed in the gantry of a VivaCT
40 mCT scanner (Scanco Medical AG, Bassersdorf, Switzerland).
Images were acquired at 55 kV and 145 mA with a voxel size of
10.5 mm. A region of interest was deﬁned as 100 transverse CT
slices beginning 250 mm away from the growth plate and
extending proximally. Fractional bone volume (BV/TV, %) and
architectural properties of trabecular reconstructions: trabecular
(Tb.N, mm–1),
thickness
trabecular spacing (Tb.Sp, 1/mm), and connectivity density
(Conn.D, mm–3) were calculated as described.(31)

trabecular number

(Tb.Th, mm),

Quantitative histomorphometry

Tissues were ﬁxed in 10% formalin for 48 hours, demineralized
for 2 weeks in 10% EDTA, and embedded in parafﬁn. Then,
3.5-mm-thick longitudinal sections were cut using a rotary
microtome (Leica). Trabecular BV/TV of the secondary spongiosa
and osteoblast number (N.Ob/BS) normalized to the bone
surface were quantiﬁed on H&E stained sections of the distal
femur at 200 magniﬁcation using BIOQUANT OSTEO v11.2

software (BIOQUANT Image Analysis Inc., Nashville, TN, USA). In a
similar fashion, number of OCs normalized to the bone surface
(N.Oc/BS) was quantiﬁed on TRACP-stained sections at 200
magniﬁcation.

Western blotting

Following stimulation with M-CSF, RANKL, and various inhib-
itors, nuclear and cytoplasmic protein fractions were harvested
using a Nuclear/Cytosol Fractionation kit
(Biovision, San
Francisco, CA, USA). Isolated proteins were fractionated using
NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Gels (Invitrogen) and electrotransferred
to polyvinylidene ﬂuoride (PVDF) membranes.
Immunoblots
were carried out using antibodies speciﬁc to Pu.1 (Abcam) and
b-actin (Sigma). After incubation with anti-rabbit IgG or anti-
mouse IgG (GE Healthcare) antibodies conjugated with
horseradish peroxidase (HRP), signals were detected using
ECL chemiluminescence substrate (ECL Prime; GE Healthcare).
Intensity of bands was determined using ImageJ software.

Phosphatase treatments
Nuclear protein lysates were isolated from Nf1+/– OC progenitor
cells after 12 hours stimulation with M-CSF (30 ng/mL) and
RANKL (30 ng/mL). Potato acid phosphatase (Sigma) was
reconstituted at a concentration of 0.05 U/mL. Heat activation
was performed by heating the reconstituted phosphatase to
100 °C for 15 to 20 min prior to incubation with nuclear protein
lysates. Phosphatase treatments were performed by adding
0.05 U of either active or heat-inactivated phosphatase to
nuclear protein lysates, which were incubated at 37 °C for a
duration of 30 min. SDS was subsequently added to each
sample, followed by heating to 100 °C for 10 min to quench the
reaction prior to Western blotting.

Statistical analysis

Differences between experimental groups were interrogated
using the Student’s t test or either one-factor or two-factor
analysis of variance (ANOVA) as appropriate. In the instances
where the ANOVA was signiﬁcant, post hoc testing was
performed between individual groups using the Newman-Keuls
multiple comparison test. An alpha level of 5% was set as the
type I error rate for all studies, with p values <0.05 required to
reject the null-hypothesis.

Results

Conditional Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in MP cells promotes
expansion of the OC precursor pool, enhancing OC maturation
and bone lytic activity

Osteoclastogenesis is a dynamic process requiring the
commitment and proliferation of early MPs,
followed by
terminal myelomonocytic differentiation, and ultimately fusion
to multinucleated OCs with bone resorptive activity.(1) Mono-
nuclear cells harvested from the bone marrow of Nf1+/– mice and
peripheral blood of human NF1 patients exhibit an increased
propensity for OC differentiation and bone resorption ex vivo
due to p21-Ras mediated hypersensitivity to M-CSF and RANK-
L.(22–24) Yet no genetic study has directly assessed the stage of
myeloid or OC differentiation at which Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency is
permissive of
these gains-in-function. To investigate the
temporal role of Nf1 gene dose in regulating early-stage versus
late-stage OC development, we began by comparing myeloid

1842

RHODES ET AL.

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

lineage commitment and proliferative capacity of BMMNCs
harvested from Nf1-LysM, Nf1-Ctsk, and WT mice. When BMMNCs
isolated from these mice were cultured in semisolid methylcel-
lulose media supplemented with varying concentrations of
M-CSF, we found that the number of CFU-Ms per femur were
signiﬁcantly increased in Nf1-LysM BMMNCs versus WT with
increasing doses of M-CSF (Fig. 1A).
In a complementary
approach, ﬂow cytometric analysis of the bone marrow revealed
a signiﬁcant increase in the frequency of MPs (Fig. 1B). Thus,
conditional Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in early stage MP cells is
sufﬁcient to promote expansion of the OC precursor pool as
previously observed in Nf1+/– mice.(22) By contrast, however,
when we compared the frequency of CFU-M generated from
Nf1-Ctsk BMMNCs in M-CSF supplemented methylcellulose
culture, we observed no signiﬁcant difference as compared to
the WT control
indicating that
conditional Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency restricted to the terminal
stages of OC differentiation does not alter
the lineage
commitment or frequency of more primitive MP cells.

(Supplemental Fig. 2A),

We next sought to assess the capacity of Nf1-LysM, Nf1-Ctsk,
and WT BMMNCs to undergo terminal OC differentiation in
response to M-CSF and RANK-L. Given the increased frequency of
myelomonocytic OC progenitor cells within the bone marrow of
Nf1-LysM mice, we hypothesized that BMMNCs harvested from
these animals would concordantly exhibit enhanced osteoclasto-
genesis. Indeed, the number of TRACP-positive staining multinu-
cleated OCs (Fig. 1C), number of nuclei per OC, and mean OC size
(Fig. 1D) were signiﬁcantly increased in Nf1-LysM BMMNC cultures
as compared to WT controls, suggesting increased OC progenitor
fusion and recapitulating the hallmark features of OC cultures
derived from the bone marrow of Nf1+/– mice(22) and the
peripheral blood of human NF1 patients.(23,24) Although Nf1-Ctsk
mice do not exhibit any apparent increase in the frequency of OC
progenitors within the bone marrow, we nonetheless reasoned
that Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency, even restricted to late-stage osteo-
clastogenesis, might still be sufﬁcient to potentiate OC matura-
tion. As expected, we observed no signiﬁcant difference in the
osteoclastogenic capacity of Nf1-Ctsk BMMNCs as compared to
WT cultures (Supplemental Fig. 2B), suggesting that Nf1
haploinsufﬁciency in the terminal stages of OC development
alone is insufﬁcient to potentiate OC differentiation as compared
to genetic disruption of a single Nf1 allele in more primitive MP
cells. These data also serve as a negative control to exclude the
putative contribution of paracrine factors from Nf1 heterozygous
mature OCs that could act on immature cells of the myeloid
lineage to promote terminal differentiation.

A deﬁning morphological

feature of mature OCs is the
organization of the actin cytoskeleton to form a specialized
cell–extracellular matrix that provides the appropriate microen-
vironment for bone matrix degradation. This complex structure
is formed by the coalescence of actin cytoskeletal structures
termed podosomes that arrange into identiﬁable patterns such
as clusters, rings, and ultimately belts that constitute a functional
sealing zone.(32) Here, we show that compared to WT controls,
Nf1-LysM OC cultures exhibit signiﬁcantly higher levels of belt
formation (Fig. 1E, F), another characteristic cellular feature
observed in Nf1+/– OCs with increased bone resorptive
activity.(33)

To directly assess the functional capacity of OCs to degrade
bone matrix, OCs were cultured on dentine slices in the presence
of M-CSF and RANK-L to quantify the area of “pits” generated by
OC-mediated erosion. Consistent with previous data demon-
strating increased bone resorptive capacity of OCs cultured from

the Nf1+/– mice,(22) we observed a signiﬁcant increase in “pit”
area on dentine slices seeded with Nf1-LysM OCs as compared to
WT controls (Fig. 1G). Consistent with previous negative
ﬁndings, Nf1-Ctsk OC cultures did not exhibit a signiﬁcant
difference in “pit” resorptive capacity as compared to WT
(Supplemental Fig. 2C).

Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in MP cells is necessary and sufﬁcient to

accentuate osteolytic activity in vivo

Intriguingly, although Nf1+/– OCs exhibit multiple gains-
in-function,(22) Nf1+/– mice do not spontaneously exhibit
commensurate reductions in bone mass or quality as compared
to WT mice.(34) By contrast, we previously demonstrated that the
consequences of Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency can be unmasked in
vivo following OVX-induced proresorptive challenge, whereby
Nf1+/– mice lose bone mass at approximately double the rate of
WT littermates perpetuated by excess osteolytic activity.(22) To
characterize the functional consequences of cell-autonomous
Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in MP cells versus terminally differentiat-
ed OCs in response to proresorptive stress, we ovariectomized
Nf1-LysM and Nf1-Ctsk mice and monitored changes in their
bone mass and BMD as compared to WT controls.

Consistent with previous ﬁndings, we observed no signiﬁcant
baseline differences in BMD, bone mass, or trabecular architec-
ture between either Nf1-LysM (Supplemental Fig. 3A, B) or
Nf1-Ctsk mice (Supplemental Fig. 4A, B) versus WT controls.
However, following OVX induced proresorptive challenge, the
rate of bone loss was signiﬁcantly increased in Nf1-LysM-OVX
mice as compared to WT controls. Nf1-LysM-OVX mice exhibited
a 10.8% 1.5% (mean SE) reduction in distal femoral BMD
during the 6 weeks following OVX surgery versus WT animals,
which lost only 6.8% 0.7% of distal femoral BMD (Fig. 2B). As an
additional control group,
sham-operated animals gained
approximately 1% to 3% of femoral BMD over the 6-week
time course. Representative mCT reconstructions illustrate the
marked loss of trabecular bone in OVX Nf1-LysM mice as
compared to OVX WT controls (Fig. 2A). Corroborating these
data, quantitative mCT evaluation revealed signiﬁcant deﬁcits in
femoral BV/TV (Fig. 2C), with commensurate changes in multiple
bone microarchitecture parameters, including Tb.N, Tb.Th, and
Tb.Sp between OVX Nf1-LysM and OVX WT mice (Fig. 2D–F,
respectively). Finally, histomorphometric enumeration of
TRACP-positive multinucleated OCs lining the trabecular bone
surface revealed signiﬁcantly increased OC numbers in the
femurs of OVX Nf1-LysM mice (Fig. 2G, H), implicating enhanced
osteoclastogenesis as the pivotal factor promoting excess bone
catabolic activity in Nf1-LysM animals.

Intriguingly, when analogous studies were performed in Nf1-
Ctsk mice, whereby Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency is restricted to
mature, terminally differentiated OCs, we observed no signiﬁ-
cant differences in bone mass or microarchitecture parameters
when comparing WT-OVX and Nf1-Ctsk-OVX mice. Although
bone loss occurred in both the mutant and control animals, the
percentage reduction in femoral BMD was equivalent between
WT-OVX and Nf1-Ctsk-OVX mice (Fig. 3A). Representative mCT
reconstructions illustrate comparable bone loss in the distal
femur between ovariectomized WT and Nf1-Ctsk mice (Fig. 3B).
Quantitatively, we detected no signiﬁcant difference in femoral
BV/TV (Fig. 3C) or trabecular architecture parameters (Fig. 3D–I)
when comparing Nf1-Ctsk and WT animals following OVX.
Collectively, these data imply that conditional Nf1 haploinsufﬁ-
ciency in mature OCs is insufﬁcient to perpetuate increased
osteolytic lytic activity in response proresorptive challenge; but
rather, genetic ablation of Nf1 in more primitive MP cells appears

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

NF1 HAPLOINSUFFICIENCY IN MYELOID CELLS

1843

Fig. 1. Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in myeloid progenitor cells promotes expansion of the OC progenitor population and potentates OC differentiation.
(A) The number of CFU-Ms per femur were enumerated after 7 days culture in semisolid methylcellulose media. **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, Nf1-LysM versus
WT. n ¼ 8 mice per genotype. (B) Populations of GMP, myeloid cells, and monocytes in the bone marrow were identiﬁed by ﬂow cytometry. Fold changes
in the number of cells per femur are reported. *p < 0.05, Nf1-LysM versus WT. n ¼ 4 mice per genotype. (C) Representative photomicrographs show
TRACP staining of bone marrow–derived osteoclasts cultured in the presence of M-CSF and RANKL for 6 days. (D) The number of osteoclasts per HPF, the
number of nuclei per osteoclast, and the mean osteoclast size were quantitated as shown. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, Nf1-LysM versus WT. n ¼ 4
biological replicates per genotype. (E) Representative photomicrographs show actin ring formation in bone marrow–derived osteoclast cultures at 50
(top) and 200 (bottom) magniﬁcation. Cells were stained with Alexa Fluor 488 Phalloidin (green) and Hoechst (blue). (F) Podosome formation was
evaluated by determining the percent distribution of actin organization into clusters, rings, and belts. *p < 0.05, Nf1-LysM versus WT. n ¼ 4 biological
replicates per genotype. (G) Osteoclasts were incubated on dentine slices with representative photomicrographs showing resorptive “pits” generated by
osteoclast bone lytic activity. Resorptive “pit” area was quantiﬁed as shown in the bar graph. ***p < 0.001, Nf1-LysM versus WT. OC ¼ osteoclast; GMP ¼
granulocyte-monocyte progenitor; CFU-M ¼ colony forming unit monocyte/macrophage; TRACP ¼ tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase; HPF ¼ high
power ﬁeld; OCL ¼ osteoclast.

1844

RHODES ET AL.

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

Fig. 2. Conditional Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in myeloid progenitor cells potentiates osteolytic activity in vivo in response to OVX-mediated proresorptive
challenge. (A) Representative mCT shows reconstructed femora in longitudinal (top) and transverse (bottom) cross-sections 6 weeks postsurgery (OVX
versus sham-operated controls). (B) The OVX-induced reduction (percentage change) in BMD of the distal femur was determined by pDXA
measurements acquired before and 6 weeks after OVX versus sham surgery. *p < 0.05, OVX Nf1-LysM vs OVX WT. WT Sham (n¼ 5), Nf1-LysM Sham (n¼ 5),
WT OVX (n¼ 8), Nf1-LysM Sham (n¼ 10) mice per genotype. (C) Trabecular BV/TV was quantiﬁed by mCT. WT Sham (n¼ 6), Nf1-LysM Sham (n¼ 6), WT
OVX (n¼ 7), Nf1-LysM Sham (n¼ 12) mice per genotype. *p < 0.05, OVX Nf1-LysM vs OVX WT. Trabecular microarchitecture parameters including Tb.N (D),
Tb.Sp (E), and Tb.Th (F) were quantiﬁed by mCT. WT Sham (n¼ 6), Nf1-LysM Sham (n¼ 6), WT OVX (n¼ 7), Nf1-LysM Sham (n¼ 12) mice per genotype. *p <
0.05, OVX Nf1-LysM vs OVX WT. (G) Representative photomicrographs of TRACP-stained distal femora of WT and Nf1-LysM mice 6 weeks following either
sham or OVX surgery. (H) N.Oc/BS were manually enumerated at100 magniﬁcation on TRACP-stained sections of the distal femur. WT Sham (n¼ 5), Nf1-
LysM Sham (n¼ 5), WT OVX (n¼ 3), Nf1-LysM Sham (n¼ 5) mice per genotype. *p < 0.05, OVX Nf1-LysM vs OVX WT. OVX¼ ovariectomized/ovariectomy;
mCT¼ micro–computed tomography; BMD¼ bone mineral density; pDXA¼ peripheral dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry; BV/TV¼ bone volume
fraction; Tb.N¼ trabecular number; Tb.Sp¼ trabecular spacing; Tb.Th¼ trabecular thickness; TRACP¼ tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase; N.Oc/BS¼
number of osteoclasts per mm2 bone surface.

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

NF1 HAPLOINSUFFICIENCY IN MYELOID CELLS

1845

Fig. 3. Conditional Nf1 heterozygosity in terminally differentiated OCs is not sufﬁcient to potentiate bone catabolic activity in ovariectomized Nf1-Ctsk
mice. (A) The percentage change in BMD 6 weeks post-OVX versus sham surgery was compared between WT and Nf1-Ctsk mice. WT Sham (n¼ 7),
Nf1-Ctsk Sham (n¼ 6), WT OVX (n¼ 15), Nf1-Ctsk OVX (n¼ 10) mice per genotype. (B) Representative mCT-reconstructed femurs in longitudinal (top) and
transverse (bottom) cross-sections for WT versus Nf1-Ctsk mice 6 weeks following either sham or OVX surgery. (C) Femoral BV/TV was quantiﬁed by mCT
as shown and revealed no signiﬁcant difference between WT and Nf1-Ctsk mice. WT Sham (n¼ 5), Nf1-Ctsk Sham (n¼ 5), WT OVX (n¼ 12), Nf1-Ctsk OVX
(n¼ 12) mice per genotype. No signiﬁcant differences in trabecular microarchitecture parameters were found when comparing Conn.D (D), Tb.N (E), Tb.
Th (F), Tb.Sp (G), BS/BV (H), and SMI (I) between WT and Nf1-Ctsk mice undergoing OVX surgery. WT Sham (n¼ 5), Nf1-Ctsk Sham (n¼ 5), WT OVX (n¼ 12),
Nf1-Ctsk OVX (n¼ 12) mice per genotype. BMD¼ bone mineral density; OVX¼ ovariectomized/ovariectomy; ns¼ no signiﬁcant difference; BV/
TV¼ bone volume fraction; mCT¼ micro–computed tomography; Conn.D¼ connectivity density; Tb.N¼ trabecular number; Tb.Th¼ trabecular
thickness; Tb.Sp¼ trabecular spacing; BS/BV¼ bone surface to bone volume ratio; SMI¼ structure model index.

1846

RHODES ET AL.

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

to be required to permit expansion of the OC precursor pool
within the bone marrow, thereby promoting accelerated bone
resorption in vivo.

Previous studies have demonstrated the LysM-Cre driver to be
relatively speciﬁc to primitive myeloid lineages within the
hematopoietic compartment.(28) Nevertheless, to further con-
ﬁrm that the observed phenotype in Nf1-LysM mice was
unrelated to possible ectopic recombination or “leakage” of
the LysM-Cre driver in the osteoblast lineage, osteoblasts were
enumerated on the bone surface in WT and Nf1-LysM mice
(Supplemental Fig. 3C). We observed no signiﬁcant difference in
the number of osteoblasts per mm2 bone surface (N.Ob/BS,
mm–2) within the distal femur when comparing Nf1-LysM mice
to the WT control, suggesting that the enhanced bone loss in
Nf1-LysM mice in response to proresorptive stress is primarily
related to increased OC bone lytic activity.

Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency in OC progenitors results in Ras-
dependent accumulation of phosphorylated Pu.1 in the nucleus
Given that haploinsufﬁcient loss of Nf1 in MP cells is critical to
promoting increased osteolytic activity in vivo, we therefore
reasoned that neuroﬁbromin may play a pivotal
role in
regulating the expression and/or activity level of myeloid-
dependent transcription factors. Pu.1 transcriptional activity is
required for myelomonocytic and OC differentiation, whereby
mice lacking Pu.1 exhibit severe osteopetrosis and are deﬁcient
in both macrophages and OCs secondary to impaired expression
of the M-CSF receptor, c-Fms.(35) Here, we show that the
expression level of Pu.1 is increased in the nucleus of Nf1
haploinsufﬁcient OC progenitors relative to WT controls stained
with FITC-labeled anti-Pu.1 (green) and Hoechst (blue) (Fig. 4A).
We next performed Western blot analysis to examine Pu.1
protein levels in OC progenitors treated with M-CSF and RANKL.
When we probed with Pu.1-speciﬁc antiserum (Santa Cruz, CA,
USA), the predominant protein detected in WT nuclear lysates
migrated at an apparent molecular weight of approximately 35
kD. Intriguingly, the expression of two additional bands in the
40-kD to 55-kD range was markedly enriched in the Nf1+/–
nuclear lysates across multiple time points (Fig. 4B).

Phosphorylation of Pu.1 is known to retard its migration in
SDS-PAGE electrophoresis.(36,37) To conﬁrm that these band
shifts represent phosphorylated forms of Pu.1, nuclear lysates
were treated with potato acid phosphatase prior to electropho-
resis. Phosphatase treatment resulted in complete conversion of
the shifted bands to the lower molecular weight, unphosphory-
lated Pu.1 species (Fig. 4C). By contrast, treatment of the lysates
with heat denatured potato acid phosphatase did not alter the
migration or intensity of the shifted bands, thus validating that
these bands correspond speciﬁcally to phosphorylated Pu.1
species (Fig. 4C).

þ

hematopoietic cells with a recombinant

Given neuroﬁbromin’s function as a GTPase activating protein
(GAP) for p21-Ras, we therefore reasoned that p21-Ras hyper-
activation in Nf1 haploinsufﬁcient OCs may underlie the
accumulation of the phosphorylation form of Pu.1 in the
nucleus. To test this hypothesis, we transduced primary Nf1+/–
c-kit
retrovirus
encoding the full-length NF1 GAP-related domain (GRD) and a
selectable marker, pac, which confers resistance to puromy-
þ
cin.(38) As compared to Nf1+/– c-kit
cells expressing murine stem
cell virus (MSCV)-pac alone, reconstitution of the full-length
NF1-GRD in Nf1 haploinsufﬁcient c-kit
cells signiﬁcantly
attenuated the phosphorylation of nuclear Pu.1 (Fig. 4D). Given
recent ﬁndings
implicating Pu.1 phosphorylation in the
transcriptional activation of terminal myeloid-speciﬁc gene

þ

programs,(39,40) we postulate this to be a previously unrecog-
nized mechanism by which Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency engenders
myeloid lineage commitment, thereby promoting osteoclasto-
genesis and hyperresorptive activity.

Discussion

requirement

OCs cultured ex vivo from the bone marrow of Nf1+/– mice and
the peripheral blood of human NF1 patients exhibit multiple
gains-in-function,(22–24) consistent with clinical observations
that NF1 patients have reduced BMD(15–19,41) and are
predisposed to increased fracture risk.(20,21) However, the
for Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency within
functional
hematopoietic cells to perpetuate these osteolytic manifes-
tations has yet to be elucidated in a stepwise,
lineage-
restricted fashion. Here we demonstrate that conditional
inactivation of a single Nf1 allele within the MP cell population
(Nf1-LysM) is necessary and sufﬁcient to promote multiple OC
gains-in-function, resulting in increased OC progenitor fusion,
enhanced osteoclastogenesis, and accelerated OC bone lytic
activity in response to proresorptive challenge in vivo.
Intriguingly, mice conditionally Nf1 heterozygous in mature,
terminally differentiated OCs (Nf1-Ctsk) do not recapitulate
indicating a critical requirement for Nf1
these phenotypes,
haploinsufﬁciency at a more primitive stage of myeloid
development in perpetuating enhanced osteolytic activity.
Given that genetic ablation of a single Nf1 allele in terminally
differentiated OCs alone is insufﬁcient to augment the rate of
bone lytic activity, we thus postulate that expansion of the OC
precursor pool and an overall increase in OC numbers are the
preponderant factors driving bone resorption in the context of
Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency (Fig. 5).

In contrast to the Nf1-Ctsk model, which does not display
evidence of OC hyperactivity as observed in Nf1-LysM and Nf1+/–
animals,(22) Alanne and colleagues(42) recently reported that
transgenic mice harboring conditional Nf1 nullizygous (Nf1–/–)
OCs driven by TRAPCre exhibit increased bone resorptive
capacity and aberrant actin ring formation in vitro. Despite
differences in Nf1 gene dose (Nf1 heterozygosity in Nf1-Ctsk
mice versus biallelic Nf1 inactivation in the TRACPCre;Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox
model), we postulate that the apparent OC gains-in-function in
this mouse model are likely due to the expression of TRAPCre in
more primitive stages of OC/myeloid development as compared
to CtskCre, which is restricted to mature, terminally differentiat-
ed OCs.(29) Supporting this concept, the authors report that
TRACPCre;Nf1ﬂox/ﬂox mice exhibit a number of extraosseous
features including splenomegaly and megakaryocytosis. These
ﬁndings are reminiscent of
the juvenile myelomonocytic
leukemia (JMML)-like myeloproliferative disease (MPD) pheno-
types seen following NF1(Nf1) loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the
hematopoietic compartment,(43,44) and are suggestive of
TRAPCre recombination of Nf1 in relatively primitive myeloid
OC precursors as reported.(29) Although the physiological
relevance of the Nf1 nullizygosity within the OC lineage remains
questionable given that NF1 patients suffering from osteopenia/
osteoporosis typically retain one functional NF1 allele within the
hematopoietic compartment, these data nonetheless provide
critical insight regarding the stage of myeloid/OC differentiation
at which loss of Nf1 is permissive of OC gains-in-function.

Nf1-LysM BMMNCs exhibit increased CFU-M in methylcellu-
lose culture and enhanced osteoclastogenic capacity in
response to M-CSF and RANKL, thereby resulting in accelerated

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

NF1 HAPLOINSUFFICIENCY IN MYELOID CELLS

1847

Fig. 4. Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency drives p21-Ras–dependent phosphorylation of Pu.1 in the nucleus of myelomonocytic osteoclast precursors. Primary
osteoclast progenitors were isolated from WT and Nf1+/– mice according to the same methodology as in previous experiments. (A) Representative
photomicrographs of WT and Nf1+/– primary OC progenitors stained with FITC-labeled anti-Pu.1 (green) and Hoechst (blue). The assay was performed on
two independent occasions with similar results. (B) Phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated Pu.1 species were detected in OC progenitor nuclear lysates
by Western blot following stimulation with M-CSF and RANKL for 0, 2, 12, and 24 hours. The expression level of the phosphorylated Pu.1 species was
determined by densitometry as a ratio to the predominant non-phosphorylated Pu.1 band as in internal nuclear loading control. This experiment was
repeated three times, with similar results. (C) Nuclear protein lysates were prepared from OC progenitors following 12 hours of stimulation with M-CSF
and RANKL. Nuclear lysates were subsequently incubated at 37 °C with either phosphatase or heat-inactivated phosphatase for a duration of 30 min prior
to immunoblotting with anti-Pu.1 antibody. This experiment was performed two times, with similar results. (D) The human full-length GRD of NF1 was re-
hematopoietic cells isolated from the bone marrow of WT and Nf1+/– mice. After puromycin
expressed by retroviral transduction of primary c-kit
selection, cells were stimulated with M-CSF and RANKL and phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated Pu.1 species were detected in nuclear lysates by
Western blot. Histone H3 was detected as an additional nuclear loading control. The ratio of phosphorylated to total Pu.1 was determined by
results. OC¼ osteoclast; M-CSF¼ macrophage-colony stimulating factor;
densitometry. This experiment was performed twice, with similar
MSCV¼ murine stem cell virus; GRD¼ GTPase-activation protein–related domain; RANKL¼ receptor activator of NF-kB ligand; FITC¼ ﬂuorescein
isothiocyanate.

þ

osteolytic activity in vivo following OVX-mediated proresorptive
challenge. By contrast, Nf1-Ctsk mice did not recapitulate any of
these phenotypes in analogous experiments, indicating a critical
requirement for Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency at a more primitive stage
of myeloid development in perpetuating osteolytic activity.

the M-CSF receptor, c-Fms.(35,45)

Pu.1 transcriptional activity is indispensable for myelomono-
cytic and OC differentiation, whereby the absence of Pu.1 in
mice leads to severe osteopetrosis and combined deﬁciency of
both macrophages and OCs secondary to impaired expression
of
Intriguingly, however,
supraphysiologic levels of Pu.1 expression do not necessarily
correlate with increased myelomonocytic lineage commitment.
In fact, recent studies suggest that phosphorylation of Pu.1 plays
a central role in modulating its DNA binding afﬁnity,(37,46) and is
thereby critical to its ability to activate myeloid-speciﬁc gene
that promote terminal differentiation.(39,40) For
programs
instance, although human myeloid leukemic cell
lines have
been shown to overexpress Pu.1,(47) the transcript levels of Pu.1-

dependent myeloid genes, such as CD11b and c-fms, are
relatively low by comparison.(48,49) Carey and colleagues(37)
showed that this discrepancy between Pu.1 expression level and
transcriptional activity depends on the phosphorylation status
of Pu.1, whereby Pu.1 phosphorylation induced by tetradeca-
noylphorbol-13 acetate (TPA) led to growth arrest in leukemic
cells. A recent study by Seshire and colleagues(40)
further
showed that Pu.1 dephosphorylation at serine residues by the
leukemia-associated fusion protein promyelocytic leukemia/
retinoic acid receptor alpha (X-RARa) inhibits Pu.1 promoter
binding and transcription of c-fms among other myelomono-
cytic genes.

In the present study, we show that the Nf1 tumor suppressor
gene modulates nuclear levels of phosphorylated Pu.1 in
myeloid OC progenitors, whereby M-CSF/RANKL induced
p21Ras hyperactivation (in the context of Nf1 haploinsufﬁ-
ciency)
leads to increased levels of phospho-Pu.1 in the
nucleus. Re-expression of the human full-length GAP related

1848

RHODES ET AL.

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

Fig. 5. Haploinsufﬁcient loss of Nf1 in myeloid progenitor cells is required to potentiate osteolytic activity in a mouse model of NF1-associated
osteoporosis. Given that genetic ablation of a single Nf1 allele in terminally differentiated osteoclasts alone (Nf1-Ctsk) is insufﬁcient to augment the rate
of bone lytic activity, we postulate that expansion of the OC precursor pool (Nf1-LysM) and an overall increase in OC numbers are the preponderant
factors perpetuating excess osteolytic activity in vivo following OVX-mediated proresorptive challenge. These phenotypes are associated with p21-
Ras–dependent hyperphosphorylation of the myeloid transcription factor Pu.1 in the nucleus of Nf1 haploinsufﬁcient myelomonocytic OC precursors.
OC¼ osteoclast; OVX¼ ovariectomized/ovariectomy; HSPC¼ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell; CFU-M¼ colony forming unit monocyte/
macrophage; TRAP¼ tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase.

þ

domain (GRD) of NF1 in primary Nf1+/–c-kit
hematopoietic
cells signiﬁcantly attenuated the phosphorylation of nuclear
Pu.1, showing the Ras-dependent nature of this process. The
apparent association between increased phosphorylation of
nuclear Pu.1 and enhanced osteoclastogenesis in the context
of Nf1 haploinsufﬁciency warrants further investigation in
future studies.

Collectively, the results of this study suggest that the low
bone mass phenotype observed in Nf1+/– and Nf1– LysM mice
(and possibly the phenotype of osteopenia/osteoporosis in
NF1 patients) may be due to enhanced OC differentiation and
recruitment of OC progenitors, which occurs at a relatively
primitive stage of myeloid differentiation, driven by Ras
mediated hypersensitivity to M-CSF and RANKL. Thus, circum-
venting the early-stage recruitment and expansion of the OC
progenitor pool by targeting the molecular pathways driving
this process may represent a rational therapeutic strategy in
the treatment of NF1-associated osteoporosis. By contrast,
bisphosphonates, which have long been the clinical mainstay
of
function to induce
apoptosis of mature, terminally differentiated OCs as they
begin to resorb the bone matrix. As they accumulate at high
concentrations in the bone matrix, bisphosphonates have
been associated with a number of deleterious effects over
time,
including the accumulation of microfractures and
osteonecrosis among other complications.(50) These pitfalls
have led to the advent of other novel antiresorptive therapies
such as denosumab,(51) which acts at more primitive stage of
OC development compared to bisphosphonates by blocking
the RANKL-dependent terminal differentiation of OC progeni-
tor cells.

in the treatment of osteoporosis,

Evidence regarding the efﬁcacy of bisphosphonates in the
treatment of NF1-associated osteoporosis are inconclusive. A
recent clinical study limited to six patients with quite profound
osteoporosis did demonstrate a trend toward increased BMD in

ﬁve out of the six patients in the study, although the effect did
not reach statistical signiﬁcance after 23 months of treatment.(52)
By contrast, recent work by Heerv€a and colleagues(53) has shown
that OCs derived from human NF1 patients were resistant to
bisphosphonate-induced apoptosis compared to healthy con-
trols. As such, the application of targeted antiresorptive agents
that act at a more primitive stage of OC differentiation may hold
therapeutic promise in the treatment of NF1-associated
osteopenia/osteoporosis and warrants further exploration in
preclinical studies.

Disclosures

All authors state that they have no conﬂicts of interest.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Defense
(DOD) (NF043032 to FCY; NF073112 to FCY; Children’s Tumor
Foundation (2011-01-010 to SDR); and Indiana Clinical and
Translational Sciences Institute PHS NCCR (5TL1RR025759-03 to
SDR). We thank Heather Daniel for administrative support.

Authors’ roles: Study design: SDR, ZL, MX, and FCY. Study
conduct: SDR, HY, RD, KM, YH, ZL, SC, KWS, LJ, XW, XY, XP, KSM,
and TAG. Data analysis and interpretation: SDR, HY, RD, YH, ZL,
and KWS. Drafting manuscript: SDR and FCY. Revising manu-
script content: SDR, KSM, MX, and FCY. Approving ﬁnal version of
manuscript: FCY.

References

1. Roodman GD. Cell biology of

1999;27(8):1229–41.

the osteoclast. Exp Hematol.

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

NF1 HAPLOINSUFFICIENCY IN MYELOID CELLS

1849

2. Teitelbaum SL, Ross FP. Genetic regulation of osteoclast develop-

ment and function. Nat Rev Genet. 2003;4(8):638–49.

3. Tolar J, Teitelbaum SL, Orchard PJ. Osteopetrosis. N Engl J Med.

2004;351(27):2839–49.

4. Cackowski FC, Anderson JL, Patrene KD, et al. Osteoclasts are

important for bone angiogenesis. Blood. 2010;115(1):140–9.

5. Mansour A, Abou-Ezzi G, Sitnicka E, Jacobsen SE, Wakkach A,
Blin-Wakkach C. Osteoclasts promote the formation of hematopoietic
stem cell niches in the bone marrow. J Exp Med. 2012;209(3):537–49.
6. Blin-Wakkach C, Rouleau M, Wakkach A. Roles of osteoclasts in the
control of medullary hematopoietic niches. Arch Biochem Biophys.
2014 Nov 1;561: 29–37.

7. Yoshida H, Hayashi S, Kunisada T, et al. The murine mutation
osteopetrosis is in the coding region of the macrophage colony
stimulating factor gene. Nature. 1990;345(6274):442–4.

8. Lacey DL, Timms E, Tan HL, et al. Osteoprotegerin ligand is a cytokine
regulates osteoclast differentiation and activation. Cell.

that
1998;93(2):165–76.

9. Yasuda H, Shima N, Nakagawa N, et al. Osteoclast differentiation
factor is a ligand for osteoprotegerin/osteoclastogenesis-inhibitory
factor and is identical to TRANCE/RANKL. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S.A.
1998;95(7):3597–602.

10. Marks SC Jr, Seifert MF, McGuire JL. Congenitally osteopetrotic
(oplop) mice are not cured by transplants of spleen or bone marrow
cells from normal littermates. Metab Bone Dis Relat Res. 1984;5-
(4):183–6.

11. Takeshita S, Namba N, Zhao JJ, et al. SHIP-deﬁcient mice are severely
osteoporotic due to increased numbers of hyper-resorptive
osteoclasts. Nat Med. 2002;8(9):943–9.

12. Friedman JM, Gutmann DH, MacCollin M, Riccardi VM. Neuroﬁbro-
matosis: phenotype, natural history, and pathogenesis. 3rd ed.
Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press 1999.

13. Clark GJ, Drugan JK, Terrell RS, et al. Peptides containing a consensus
Ras binding sequence from Raf-1 and theGTPase activating protein
NF1 inhibit Ras function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S.A. 1996;93(4):
1577–81.
14. Yang FC, Ingram DA, Chen S, et al. Nf1-dependent tumors require a
microenvironment containing Nf1þ/- and c-kit-dependent bone
marrow. Cell. 2008;135(3):437–48.

15. Lammert M, Kappler M, Mautner VF, et al. Decreased bone mineral
density in patients with neuroﬁbromatosis 1. Osteoporos Int.
2005;16(9):1161–6.

16. Kuorilehto T, Poyhonen M, Bloigu R, Heikkinen J, Vaananen K,
Peltonen J. Decreased bone mineral density and content
in
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: lowest local values are located in the
load-carrying parts of the body. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16(8):928–36.
17. Dulai S, Briody J, Schindeler A, North KN, Cowell CT, Little DG.
Decreased bone mineral density in neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: results
from a pediatric cohort. J Pediatr Orthop. 2007;27(4):472–5.

18. Yilmaz K, Ozmen M, Bora Goksan S, Eskiyurt N. Bone mineral density
in children with neuroﬁbromatosis 1. Acta Paediatr. 2007;96-
(8):1220–2.

19. Stevenson DA, Moyer-Mileur LJ, Murray M, et al. Bone mineral
density in children and adolescents with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1.
J Pediatr. 2007;150(1):83–8.

20. Tucker T, Schnabel C, Hartmann M, et al. Bone health and fracture
rate in individuals with neuroﬁbromatosis 1 (NF1). J Med Genet.
2009;46(4):259–65.

21. Heerv€a E, Koffert A, Jokinen E, et al. A controlled register-based study
increased fracture risk in
of 460 neuroﬁbromatosis 1 patients:
children and adults over 41 years of age. J Bone Miner Res.
2012;27:2333–7.

22. Yang FC, Chen S, Robling AG, et al. Hyperactivation of p21ras and
PI3K cooperate to alter murine and human neuroﬁbromatosis type
1-haploinsufﬁcient osteoclast functions. J Clin Invest. 2006;116-
(11):2880–91.

23. Heerv€a E, Alanne MH, Peltonen S, et al. Osteoclasts in neuroﬁbro-
matosis type 1 display enhanced resorption capacity, aberrant
morphology, and resistance to serum deprivation. Bone. 2010;47-
(3):583–90.

24. Stevenson DA, Yan J, He Y, et al. Multiple increased osteoclast
functions in individuals with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Am J Med
Genet A. 2011; 155A(5): 1050–9.
25. Li H, Liu Y, Zhang Q, et al. Ras dependent paracrine secretion of
osteopontin by Nf1þ/- osteoblasts promote osteoclast activation in a
neuroﬁbromatosis type I murine model. Pediatr Res. 2009;65(6):613–8.
26. Rhodes SD, Wu X, He Y, et al. Hyperactive transforming growth
factor-beta1 signaling potentiates skeletal defects in a neuroﬁbro-
matosis type 1 mouse model. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Dec;28(12):
2476–89.

27. Elefteriou F, Benson MD, Sowa H, et al. ATF4 mediation of NF1
functions in osteoblast reveals a nutritional basis for congenital
skeletal dysplasiae. Cell Metab. 2006;4(6):441–51.

28. Clausen BE, Burkhardt C, Reith W, Renkawitz R, Forster I. Conditional
gene targeting in macrophages and granulocytes using LysMcre
mice. Transgenic Res. 1999;8(4):265–77.

29. Chiu WS, McManus JF, Notini AJ, Cassady AI, Zajac JD, Davey RA.
Transgenic mice that express Cre recombinase in osteoclasts.
Genesis. 2004;39(3):178–85.

30. Zhu Y, Romero MI, Ghosh P, et al. Ablation of NF1 function in
neurons induces abnormal development of cerebral cortex and
reactive gliosis in the brain. Genes Dev. 2001;15(7):859–76.

31. Wu X, Chen S, He Y, et al. The haploinsufﬁcient hematopoietic
microenvironment is critical to the pathological fracture repair in murine
models of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9): e 24917.

32. Boyle WJ, Simonet WS, Lacey DL. Osteoclast differentiation and

activation. Nature. 2003;423(6937):337–42.

33. Yan J, Chen S, Zhang Y, et al. Rac1 mediates the osteoclast gains-in-
function induced by haploinsufﬁciency of Nf1. Hum Mol Genet.
2008;17(7):936–48.

34. Yu X, Chen S, Potter OL, et al. Neuroﬁbromin and its inactivation of
Ras are prerequisites for osteoblast functioning. Bone. 2005;36-
(5):793–802.

35. Tondravi MM, McKercher SR, Anderson K, et al. Osteopetrosis in mice
lacking haematopoietic transcription factor PU.1. Nature. 1997;386-
(6620):81–4.

36. Delgado MD, Hallier M, Meneceur P, Tavitian A, Moreau-Gachelin F.
Inhibition of Friend cells proliferation by spi-1 antisense oligodeox-
ynucleotides. Oncogene. 1994;9(6):1723–7.

37. Carey JO, Posekany KJ, deVente JE, Pettit GR, Ways DK. Phorbol ester-
stimulated phosphorylation of PU.1: association with leukemic cell
growth inhibition. Blood. 1996;87(10):4316–24.

38. Hiatt KK, Ingram DA, Zhang Y, Bollag G, Clapp DW. Neuroﬁbromin
GTPase-activating protein-related domains restore normal growth
in Nf1-/- cells. J Biol Chem. 2001;276(10):7240–5.

39. Hamdorf M, Berger A, Schule S, Reinhardt J, Flory E. PKCdelta-
induced PU. 1 phosphorylation promotes hematopoietic stem cell
differentiation to dendritic cells. Stem Cells. 2011;29(2):297–306.

41.

40. Seshire A, Rossiger T, Frech M, Beez S, Hagemeyer H, Puccetti E.
Direct interaction of PU.1 with oncogenic transcription factors
reduces its serine phosphorylation and promoter binding. Leuke-
mia. 2012;26(6):1338–47.
Illes T, Halmai V, de Jonge T, Dubousset J. Decreased bone mineral
density in neuroﬁbromatosis-1 patients with spinal deformities.
Osteoporos Int. 2001;12(10):823–7.
42. Alanne MH, Siljam€aki E, Peltonen S, et al. Phenotypic characteriza-
tion of transgenic mice harboring Nf1(þ/-) or Nf1(-/-) osteoclasts in
otherwise Nf1(þ/þ) background. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Jun;113(6):
2136–46.

43. Bollag G, Clapp DW, Shih S, et al. Loss of NF1 results in activation of
the Ras signaling pathway and leads to aberrant growth in
haematopoietic cells. Nat Genet. 1996;12(2):144–8.

44. Largaespada DA, Brannan CI, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG. Nf1
deﬁciency causes Ras-mediated granulocyte/macrophage colony
stimulating factor hypersensitivity and chronic myeloid leukaemia.
Nat Genet. 1996;12(2):137–43.

45. Scott EW, Simon MC, Anastasi J, Singh H. Requirement of
transcription factor PU.1 in the development of multiple hemato-
poietic lineages. Science. 1994;265(5178):1573–7.

1850

RHODES ET AL.

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

46. Pongubala JM, Van Beveren C, Nagulapalli S, et al. Effect of PU.1
phosphorylation on interaction with NF-EM5 and transcriptional
activation. Science. 1993;259(5101):1622–5.

50. Xu XL, Gou WL, Wang AY, et al. Basic research and clinical
applications of bisphosphonates in bone disease: what have we
learned over the last 40 years? J Transl Med. 2013;11:303.

47. Hromas R, Orazi A, Neiman RS, et al. Hematopoietic lineage- and
stage-restricted expression of the ETS oncogene family member
PU.1. Blood. 1993;82(10):2998–3004.

48. Voso MT, Burn TC, Wulf G, Lim B, Leone G, Tenen DG. Inhibition of
hematopoiesis by competitive binding of transcription factor PU.1.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S.A. 1994;91(17):7932–6.

49. Sariban E, Mitchell T, Kufe D. Expression of the c-fms proto-
oncogene during human monocytic differentiation. Nature.
1985;316(6023):64–6.

51. McClung MR, Lewiecki EM, Cohen SB, et al. Denosumab in
postmenopausal women with low bone mineral density. N Engl J
Med. 2006;354(8):821–31.

52. Heerv€a E, Huilaja L, Leinonen P, Peltonen S, Peltonen J. Follow-up of
six patients with neuroﬁbromatosis 1-related osteoporosis treated
with alendronate for 23 months. Calcif Tissue Int. 2014;94(6):608–12.
53. Heerv€a E, Peltonen S, Svedstrom E, Aro HT, Vaananen K, Peltonen J.
Osteoclasts derived from patients with neuroﬁbromatosis 1 (NF1) display
insensitivity to bisphosphonates in vitro. Bone. 2012;50(3):798–803.

Journal of Bone and Mineral Research

NF1 HAPLOINSUFFICIENCY IN MYELOID CELLS

1851

