Oncogene (2005) 24, 5589–5605
& 2005 Nature Publishing Group All rights reserved 0950-9232/05 $30.00

www.nature.com/onc

Activation of the neuregulin-1/ErbB signaling pathway promotes
the proliferation of neoplastic Schwann cells in human malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors

Mark S Stonecypher1,3, Stephanie J Byer2, William E Grizzle2 and Steven L Carroll*,1,2

1Department of Cell Biology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-0017, USA; 2Department
of Pathology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-0017, USA; 3The Medical Scientist Training
Program, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-0017, USA

Patients with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 develop aggressive
Schwann cell neoplasms known as malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs). Although tumor sup-
pressor gene mutations play an important role in MPNST
pathogenesis, it is likely that dysregulated signaling by as
yet unidentiﬁed growth factors also contributes to the
formation of these sarcomas. To test the hypothesis that
neuregulin-1 (NRG-1) growth factors promote mitogen-
esis in MPNSTs, we examined the expression and action
of NRG-1 in human MPNSTs and neuroﬁbromas, the
benign precursor lesions from which MPNSTs arise.
Multiple a and b transmembrane precursors from the class
II and III NRG-1 subfamilies are present in both tumor
types. Neoplastic Schwann cells within these neoplasms
variably express the erbB kinases mediating NRG-1
responses (erbB2, erbB3 and/or erbB4). Human MPNST
cell lines (Mash-1, YST-1, NMS-2 and NMS-2PC cells)
similarly coexpress multiple NRG-1 isoforms and erbB
receptors. These MPNST lines are NRG-1 responsive and
demonstrate constitutive erbB phosphorylation. Treat-
ment with PD168393 and PD158780, two structurally and
mechanistically distinct erbB inhibitors, abolishes erbB
phosphorylation and reduces DNA synthesis in these lines.
These ﬁndings suggest that autocrine and/or paracrine
NRG-1/erbB signaling promotes neoplastic Schwann cell
proliferation and may be an important therapeutic target
in neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs.
Oncogene (2005) 24, 5589–5605. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1208730;
published online 9 May 2005

Keywords: ErbB receptors; neuregulin-1; neuroﬁbro-
matosis; malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor;
neuroﬁbroma

Introduction

type 1 (NF1)

less frequently,

Neuroﬁbromatosis
is an autosomal
dominant tumor predisposition syndrome that affects
1 in 3500 individuals (Gutmann et al., 1997; Parada,
2000; Gutmann, 2001). NF1 patients develop multiple
types of neoplasms, including benign peripheral nerve
sheath tumors known as neuroﬁbromas that occur in
skin (dermal neuroﬁbromas), spinal and cranial nerve
roots (intraneural or nodular neuroﬁbromas) and large
nerve plexuses (plexiform neuroﬁbromas). Neuroﬁbro-
mas are inﬁltrating neoplasms composed of multiple cell
types, with Schwann cells representing 40–80% of the
tumor, and ﬁbroblasts, perineurial cells, mast cells and
vascular elements making up the remainder (Tucker and
Friedman, 2002). Although dermal neuroﬁbromas
transformation, plexiform
rarely undergo malignant
and,
intraneural neuroﬁbromas may
progress and become malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors (MPNSTs), a highly aggressive form of Schwann
cell neoplasm (Ferner and O’Doherty, 2002). The
prognosis for patients with MPNSTs is poor, with only
23% of these individuals alive 10 years after diagnosis
(Ducatman et al., 1986; Woodruff et al., 2000). Beyond
surgery,
few therapeutic options are available for
patients with MPNSTs (Ferner and Gutmann, 2002).
Postsurgical irradiation of the tumor bed helps control
local disease and delays tumor recurrence, but has no
effect on overall survival (Ferner and O’Doherty, 2002).
At present, no effective chemotherapeutic regimens are
available for MPNSTs (Ferner and Gutmann, 2002).
Because of
there is considerable
interest in establishing the mechanisms responsible for
MPNST tumorigenesis and using this information to
develop new, more effective, therapies.

these limitations,

*Correspondence: SL Carroll, Division of Neuropathology, Depart-
ment of Pathology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1720
Seventh Avenue South, SC843, Birmingham, AL 35294-0017, USA;
E-mail: carroll@path.uab.edu
Received 17 November 2004; revised 29 March 2005; accepted 29 March
2005; published online 9 May 2005

Mutations in tumor suppressor genes such as NF1
(Legius et al., 1993; Metheny et al., 1995; Kluwe et al.,
1999; Lakkis and Tennekoon, 2000; Parada, 2000;
Rutkowski et al., 2000; Sherman et al., 2000; Wallace
et al., 2000; Perry et al., 2001; Zhu and Parada, 2001;
Ferner and O’Doherty, 2002; Tucker and Friedman,
2002), p53 (Menon et al., 1990; Legius et al., 1994;
Kourea et al., 1999a; Birindelli et al., 2001) and INK4A
(also known as CDKN2A/p16) (Kourea et al., 1999b;

5590

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

Nielsen et al., 1999) play an important role in the
pathogenesis of neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs. However,
it is likely that tumor suppressor mutations alone are
not sufﬁcient to induce peripheral nerve sheath tumor
formation and that other abnormalities such as dysre-
gulated growth factor signaling act cooperatively with
these mutations to promote neuroﬁbroma and MPNST
tumorigenesis (Carroll and Stonecypher, 2004; Carroll
and Stonecypher, 2005). We have hypothesized that
inappropriate signaling by proteins in the neuregulin-1
(NRG-1) family of growth and differentiation factors
contributes to the pathogenesis of peripheral nerve
sheath tumors. NRG-1 proteins stimulate the prolifera-
tion, survival and migration of developing Schwann cells
(Dong et al., 1995; Morrissey et al., 1995; Rahmatullah
et al., 1998), and activating mutations of the NRG-1
receptor subunit erbB2 promote MPNST formation in
rodents exposed to the mutagen N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea
(EtNU) in utero (Bargmann et al., 1986; Hudziak et al.,
1987; Bargmann and Weinberg, 1988; Weiner et al.,
1989; Di Marco et al., 1990; Nikitin et al., 1991;
Sherman et al., 1999). We have found that JS1 cells, a
rat cell line derived from an EtNU-induced MPNST,
lack this
erbB2 in
combination with the NRG-1 receptor subunit erbB3
and multiple NRG-1 isoforms. The NRG-1/erbB
signaling pathway is constitutively activated in JS1 cells
and the proliferation of this line is profoundly reduced
by pharmacologic inhibition of erbB signaling (Frohnert
et al., 2003a). We have also generated transgenic mice
expressing the NRG-1 isoform glial growth factor-b3
in myelinating Schwann cells (P0-GGFb3
(GGFb3)
mice) (Huijbregts et al., 2003) and have found that
these animals develop MPNST-like Schwann cell
neoplasms with a latency of 6–12 months. GGFb3
expression is maintained in these neoplasms and they
markedly overexpress NRG-1 receptor subunits, sug-
gesting that autocrine or paracrine NRG-1 signaling is
essential for tumorigenesis in P0-GGFb3 mice. Con-
sidered together, these ﬁndings indicate that constitutive

erbB2 mutation and express

activation of
promotes MPNST pathogenesis in rodents.

the NRG-1/erbB signaling pathway

It is not yet known if the rodent models noted above
are relevant
to human neuroﬁbroma and MPNST
pathogenesis. To test the hypothesis that constitutive
activation of
the NRG-1/erbB signaling pathway
promotes neoplastic Schwann cell proliferation in
human peripheral nerve sheath tumors, we have
examined human neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs
to
determine whether they express NRG-1 isoforms and
the erbB kinases necessary for NRG-1 responsiveness
and whether erbB signaling is essential for the prolifera-
tion of human MPNST cells.

Results

Neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs express multiple NRG-1
immunoreactive proteins

We prepared lysates from a series of these tumors
(Table 1) and probed immunoblots of the lysates with a
rabbit polyclonal antibody that recognizes an epitope
within the EGF-like common domain present in all
functional NRG-1 isoforms (a ‘pan’ NRG-1 antibody)
(Carroll et al., 1997); a lysate of normal human sciatic
nerve collected from an autopsied patient was included
as a positive control. Multiple NRG-1 immunoreactive
species ranging in size from 20 to 150 kDa were evident
in all of the neuroﬁbromas examined (Figure 1a). The
masses of the most abundant larger (120 and 150 kDa)
species detected in these neuroﬁbromas are consistent
with the masses of NRG-1 transmembrane precursors
we have previously detected in nervous system tissues
using this antibody (Carroll et al., 1997). Likewise, the
smaller (20, 45 and 58 kDa) NRG-1 immunoreactive
proteins migrate at
the positions expected for the
extracellular domains of proteolytically cleaved NRG-
1 transmembrane precursors or directly secreted NRG-1

Case no.

Diagnosis

Location

Age/race/gender

NF status

Table 1 Characteristics of nerve sheath tumors used for protein and RNA analyses

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma

MPNST (epithelioid)
MPNST
MPNST
MPNST
MPNST
MTT
MPNST

Back
Retroperitoneum
Sciatic
Left buttock
Cervical
Cervical
Cervical
Left buttock

Lower Abdomen/groin
Right peroneal nerve
Brain metastasis
Right posterior thigh mass
Retroperitoneal
Peritoneum
Median nerve, right arm

53/U/F
45/W/M
45/W/M
17/B/M
27/W/M
38/B/M
22/B/F
24/U/F

54/W/M
40/U/F
62/W/F
46/W/M
20/B/M
40/W/F
16/B/M

NF1
NF1
NF1
NF1
NF1
NF1
NF1
NF1

Unknown
NF1
NF1
NF1
NF1
NF1
NF1

Case numbers correspond to cases indicated in Figures 1–4

Oncogene

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

5591

(a) Immunoblot of lysates of human sciatic nerve (Sciatic) and six human neuroﬁbromas probed with a rabbit polyclonal
Figure 1
antibody recognizing an epitope within the EGF-like common domain found in all NRG-1 isoforms. (b) Immunoblot of lysates of
human sciatic nerve and human neuroﬁbromas probed with a rabbit polyclonal antibody recognizing an epitope within the subset of
NRG-1 transmembrane isoforms containing an ‘a’ variant carboxy terminus. (c) Immunoblot of lysates of human sciatic nerve (Sciatic)
and seven human MPNSTs probed with a rabbit polyclonal antibody recognizing an epitope within the EGF-like common domain
found in all NRG-1 isoforms. Arrows to the left of each panel indicate the major immunoreactive species and their molecular weights

isoforms (Ben-Baruch and Yarden, 1994; Carroll et al.,
1997; Falls, 2003). Comparing the sizes of the NRG-1-
like proteins detected in neuroﬁbromas with those
evident in normal sciatic nerve, a tissue type we have
previously shown contains multiple NRG-1 isoforms
(Carroll et al., 1997), we found that
the NRG-1
species detected in neuroﬁbromas
immunoreactive
comigrated with those evident
in sciatic nerve. To
further establish the identity of the proteins detected
with the pan NRG-1 antibody, these same lysates were
also probed with a second antibody that recognizes a
subset of NRG-1 isoforms (transmembrane precursors
with an ‘a’ variant carboxy-terminus). This antibody,
like the pan NRG-1 antibody, recognized a 120 kDa
species in the majority of the neuroﬁbromas, with a
150 kDa protein also evident
tumors
(Figure 1b). The anti-’a’ carboxy-terminus antibody
also labeled a prominent 55 kDa protein in sciatic nerve
and neuroﬁbromas and a 65 kDa polypeptide in sciatic
nerve. These latter polypeptides are too small to be full-
length NRG-1 transmembrane precursor proteins and
likely represent recently described NRG-1 proteolytic
cleavage products thought to mediate ‘back-signaling’
into the interior of NRG-1-expressing cells (Bao et al.,
2003). We conclude that neuroﬁbromas express multiple
NRG-1 immunoreactive proteins, some of which are
NRG-1 transmembrane precursors.

in some

To ascertain whether MPNSTs also express NRG-1
proteins, lysates were prepared from seven surgically
resected MPNSTs (Table 1), immunoblotted and probed
with the pan NRG-1 antibody. We found that these
neoplasms, like neuroﬁbromas, express multiple NRG-1
isoforms (Figure 1c) with masses similar to those of the
NRG-1 immunoreactive species detected in neuroﬁbro-
mas. The only difference was that the masses of the
higher molecular weight NRG-1 proteins present in
MPNSTs were more variable than those evident in
neuroﬁbromas, with a 90 kDa protein (which was also
evident in neuroﬁbromas with long exposures (data not
shown)) being much more prominent in MPNSTs. It
was thus apparent that MPNSTs, like neuroﬁbromas,
express multiple NRG-1 immunoreactive proteins.

Neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs express a complex mixture
of a and b transmembrane precursors from the class II
and III NRG-1 subfamilies

The NRG1 locus, using a combination of alternative
splicing and transcription from multiple promoters,
produces at least 15 NRG-1 isoforms with distinct
structural and functional characteristics (Falls, 2003).
To determine whether
the variably sized proteins
detected by the pan NRG-1 antibody in human
neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs represent distinct NRG-1
splice variants, we examined the structure of the NRG-1
transcripts
expressed in these neoplasms. NRG-1
activation of erbB kinases is mediated by the EGF-like
domain, which is composed of an amino-terminal
invariant (common) domain coupled to a or b variant
left panel); NRG-1 a and b
domains (Figure 2a,
isoforms are functionally distinct, differing both in their
afﬁnities for NRG-1 receptors and their ability to elicit
at least some biologic responses (Falls, 2003). The EGF-
like domain is followed by a structurally variable
juxtamembrane domain, which determines whether the
protein is synthesized as a directly secreted form or as a
transmembrane precursor requiring proteolytic cleavage
for release. As all functional NRG-1 isoforms must
contain a receptor binding domain, we used PCR to
amplify NRG-1 sequences encoding a region encom-
passing the EGF-like common, EGF-like variant (a or
b), juxtamembrane (1, 2 or 4 variant) and transmem-
brane domains
from six neuroﬁbromas and six
MPNSTs. These sequences were detectable in all of the
neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs tested (data not shown).
To further examine the protein structures predicted by
these NRG-1 sequences, the PCR products ampliﬁed
from two neuroﬁbromas and two MPNSTs were cloned
and multiple subclones sequenced. We found that
the NRG-1 transmembrane precursors expressed in
these neoplasms were structurally diverse and included
NRG-1 b1, b2 and a2 variants
In
contrast, sequences encoding the EGF-like domain of
NRG-1 secreted isoforms (isoforms with a ‘3’ variant
juxtamembrane domain) could not be ampliﬁed from

(Figure 2a).

Oncogene

5592

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

Figure 2 Neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs express mRNAs encoding a complex mixture of NRG-1 transmembrane precursors including
a and b isoforms from the class II and III NRG-1 subfamilies. (a) Structures of the EGF-like and adjacent domains hypothetically
possible in NRG-1 isoforms expressed in MPNSTs. Domain designations: Common, the NRG-1 EGF-like common domain; a or b,
EGF-like variant domains; 1, 2 or 4, juxtamembrane domains; TM, transmembrane domain. Ratios to the right of each diagram
indicate the number of times a structural variant was isolated divided by the total number of clones sequenced. (b) PCR analysis of
class II NRG-1 (GGF) mRNA expression in human neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs. DRG cDNAs from two autopsied patients were
included as positive controls. (c) PCR analysis of class III NRG-1 (SMDF/cysteine-rich domain NRG-1) mRNA expression in human
neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs. Images in panels b and c are photographs of ethidium bromide-stained gels

neuroﬁbroma and MPNST cDNAs, although these
primers did produce a PCR product of the appropriate
size from control cDNAs (data not shown).

Three NRG-1 subfamilies (class I, II and III NRG-1
isoforms) are known, each deﬁned by a unique amino-
terminal
sequence that confers distinctive biologic
characteristics on the protein (Falls, 2003). To establish
which NRG-1 subfamilies are expressed in human
neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs, PCR was performed with
cDNAs derived from six neuroﬁbromas and six
MPNSTs using primers speciﬁc for sequences encoding
each of
the three distinct NRG-1 amino-terminal
domains. Class II (GGF) NRG-1 transcripts were
detected in two of six neuroﬁbromas and in all six
MPNSTs (Figure 2b). RNA encoding class III (sensory
and motor neuron-derived factor (SMDF)/cysteine-rich
domain) NRG-1 isoforms was present in all neuroﬁ-
bromas and MPNSTs tested (Figure 2c). In contrast,
although readily ampliﬁed from control specimens, class
I (neu differentiation factor (NDF)) NRG-1 transcripts
were not detected in any of the neuroﬁbromas and
MPNSTs examined (data not shown). We conclude that
human neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs express a complex
mixture of a and b transmembrane precursors from the
class II and III NRG-1 subfamilies.

Human neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs express the erbB
membrane tyrosine kinases necessary for NRG-1
responsiveness

NRG-1 binds directly to the erbB3 (HER3) or erbB4
(HER4) membrane tyrosine kinases, an event
that
promotes homo- or heterodimerization with other erbB
family members (Yarden and Sliwkowski, 2001), with
erbB2 (c-neu, HER2) being the preferred partner for
both NRG-1 receptors (Tzahar et al., 1996; Graus-Porta
et al., 1997). The erbB kinases mediating NRG-1
responses are also capable of heterodimerizing to and
thus ‘crosstalking’ with the EGF receptor (EGFR,
erbB1), a molecule whose expression is
increased
(DeClue et al., 2000) in many peripheral nerve sheath
tumors (Perry et al., 2002). To determine whether NRG-
1 receptors are expressed in peripheral nerve sheath
tumors and to examine the relationship between the
expression of receptors for NRG-1 and EGF, we
immunoblotted lysates of surgically resected neuroﬁ-
bromas and MPNSTs and probed them with antibodies
recognizing EGFR, erbB2, erbB3 or erbB4. In human
neuroﬁbromas, EGFR was detected in ﬁve of six tumors
examined (Figure 3) and was expressed at very high
levels in two neoplasms and at moderate levels in several

Oncogene

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

5593

others. ErbB2 (c-neu) was evident in two neuroﬁbromas
(Figure 3), while erbB3 was present in all six neuroﬁ-
bromas, with strikingly high levels of expression in four
tumors (Figure 3). A protein of the expected 185 kDa
mass was also detected in two neuroﬁbromas with an
anti-erbB4 antibody (Figure 3). PCR analyses of erbB
expression in these neoplasms conﬁrmed the expression
patterns observed by immunoblot analyses and indi-
cated that erbB2 and erbB3 mRNA was detectable in all
six neuroﬁbromas (data not shown), suggesting that
some neoplasms expressed relatively low levels of these
kinases or that erbB2 and erbB3 expression is conﬁned
to a subpopulation of cells within these tumors.

studied (Figure 4);

In human MPNSTs, EGFR was present in six of the
seven tumors
this kinase was
expressed at very high levels in three neoplasms. ErbB2
was detected in ﬁve tumors (Figure 4), with erbB2 levels
in three of the neoplasms being comparable to those in
JS1 MPNST cells, a line we have shown overexpresses
both erbB2 and erbB3 relative to non-neoplastic adult
Schwann cells (Frohnert et al., 2003a). ErbB3 was

readily detected in six of seven human MPNSTs, with
strikingly high levels of expression observed in four
tumors (Figure 4). The anti-erbB4 antibody detected a
protein of the expected 185 kDa mass in two MPNSTs
(Figure 4), with a slightly smaller erbB4 immunoreactive
protein evident in a third tumor.

To establish whether erbB kinases and NRG-1 within
peripheral nerve sheath tumors were predominantly
associated with tumor cells or non-neoplastic elements
such as the abundant vasculature characteristic of these
neoplasms, sections of a second series of neuroﬁbromas
and MPNSTs (Table 2) were immunostained with the
‘pan’ NRG-1 antibody or antibodies
recognizing
EGFR, erbB2, erbB3 or erbB4. EGFR immunoreactiv-
ity was detected in a subset of neuroﬁbromas (three of
seven tumors; Figure 5 and Table 2) and MPNSTs
(three of ﬁve tumors; Figure 5 and Table 2), while erbB2
labeling was uniformly present in neuroﬁbromas and
MPNSTS (Figure 5 and Table 2). Expression of the
direct NRG-1 receptor, erbB3, was detected in ﬁve out
of seven neuroﬁbromas and in three out of ﬁve MPNSTs

Figure 3 EGFR, erbB2, erbB3 and erbB4 protein expression in human neuroﬁbromas. Arrows to the left of each panel indicate the
expected position of each erbB kinase; in our experience, minor variability in the size of erbB kinases (potentially resulting from
differences in post-translational modiﬁcation) is frequently encountered in tumors overexpressing an erbB kinase. Lysates of human
sciatic nerve and, in some blots JS1 MPNST cells, were included as controls. Numbers above each lane indicate the case number
corresponding to the clinical information presented in Table 1. Longer exposures of the erbB2 blot showed that erbB2 expression was
also present in sciatic nerve (data not shown; see also Figure 4). The quantity of lysate available from tumors 2 and 3 was insufﬁcient
for examination of erbB4 expression, so two additional tumors (7 and 8) were obtained and probed for this receptor

Figure 4 EGFR, erbB2, erbB3 and erbB4 protein expression in human MPNSTs. Arrows to the left of each panel indicate the
expected position of each erbB kinase. Lysates of human sciatic nerve and, in some blots JS1 MPNST cells or 293 cells, were included
as positive controls. Numbers above each lane indicate the case number corresponding to the clinical information presented in Table 1.
Longer exposures of the erbB4 blot (not shown) showed low levels of erbB4 expression in sciatic nerve as were observed in Figure 3

Oncogene

5594

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

Case no.

Diagnosis

Location

Age/race/gender

NF status

ErbB-1

ErbB-2

ErbB-3

ErbB-4

NRG-1

Table 2 NRG-1 and ErbB immunoreactivity in human neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs

9
10
11
12
13
14
15

8
9
10
11
12

Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma
Neuroﬁbroma

C1–C2 nerve root
C1–C2 nerve root
Cervical nerve root
Gastric plexus
Left leg
Right neck
C1–C2 nerve root

MPNST
MPNST
MPNST
MPNST
MPNST

Left buttock
Left buttock
Left thigh
Brain metastasis
Right thigh

38M
63M
21F
43/W/F
43/W/F
42/B/M
74M

33/B/F
33/B/F
31/B/F
62/W/F
14/B/M

Unknown
Unknown
NF1
NF1
NF1
NF1
Unknown

Unknown
Unknown
NF1
NF1
NF1

 
 
 
+
+
+
 

+
+
+
 
 

+
+
+
+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+
+

 
 
+
+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+
 

 
 
 
+
+
+
+

+
+
 
+
 

 
+
+
+
+
+
 

+
+
+
+
+

Figure 5 ErbB and NRG-1 immunoreactivity in human neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs. Shown are representative photomicrographs of
neuroﬁbromas (left column) and MPNSTs (middle column) immunostained for EGFR, erbB2, erbB3, erbB4 or the NRG-1 EGF-like
common domain (indicated to the left of each row). The right column demonstrates the staining evident in control sections (either
immunostains in which the primary antibody was replaced with nonimmune immunoglobulin (EGFR and erbB3) or immunostains in
which the primary antibody was preincubated with the immunizing peptide (erbB2, erbB4 and NRG-1). These sections have been
lightly counterstained with hematoxylin. Scale bar, 50 mm

Oncogene

(Figure 5 and Table 2). ErbB4 immunoreactivity was
less common, being found in four neuroﬁbromas and
one MPNST. NRG-1 and each of the erbB receptors
were predominantly associated with cells within the
tumor mass, demonstrating distinct cellular distribu-
tions in neuroﬁbroma and MPNST cells. EGFR, erbB2
and erbB3 immunoreactivity was evident as cytoplasmic
and membranous staining. In contrast, erbB4 immunor-
eactivity was predominantly associated with nuclei and
surface membranes; the presence of nuclear immunor-
eactivity is consistent with previous studies demonstrat-
ing that activated erbB4 is proteolytically cleaved and its
carboxy terminus translocated to the nucleus (Carpen-
ter, 2003). NRG-1 immunoreactivity was also associated
with the cytoplasm and surface membranes of tumor
cells and thus has a distribution similar to that of
EGFR, erbB2 and erbB3. These results, considered
together with our PCR and immunoblot analyses,
indicate that the majority of human MPNSTs express
NRG-1 in combination with the erbB kinases necessary
for NRG-1 responsiveness.

MPNST cell lines express multiple NRG-1 isoforms and
the erbB membrane kinases mediating NRG-1 responses

The coexpression of multiple NRG-1 isoforms and their
receptors in neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs raised the
question whether these molecules are expressed by the
same cells and thus capable of stimulating proliferation
or other effects by autocrine and/or paracrine signaling.
To test this hypothesis, we assembled a panel of human
MPNST cell lines derived from NF1-associated (Mash-1
(Endo et al., 2002), NMS-2 (Imaizumi et al., 1998) and
NMS-2PC (Imaizumi et al., 1998) cell
lines) or
sporadically arising (YST-1 cells; Nagashima et al.,
1990) MPNSTs. Prior to examining NRG-1 and erbB
expression in these lines, we veriﬁed their lineage by
immunostaining cells grown in chamber
slides or
embedded in tissue arrays with a panel of antibodies
recognizing Schwann cell, neuronal or muscle markers.
Mash-1 (Figure 6a), YST-1 (Figure 6b), NMS-2
(Figure 6c) and NMS-2PC (Figure 6d) cells all demon-
strated cytoplasmic and nuclear immunoreactivity for
the Schwann cell marker S100b, which was abolished
when the primary antibody was replaced with non-
immune IgG (Figure 6e). All four lines also showed
cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for collagen type IV (data
not shown), a basal
lamina protein elaborated by
Schwann cells. Immunoreactivity for glial ﬁbrillary
acidic protein (GFAP), the neuronal marker neuron-
speciﬁc enolase (NSE) and the muscle marker desmin
was not evident in any of these lines. However, a
subpopulation of cells within three of the MPNST lines
stained for smooth muscle actin (Figure 6f), suggesting
that these lines, like a subset of MPNSTs (e.g. malignant
Triton tumors), have a potential for divergent differ-
entiation. To further test this hypothesis, we examined
the expression of mRNAs encoding 18 Schwann cell,
neuronal and muscle markers in all four lines using RT-
PCR (Figure 6g). In addition to the markers noted
above, we found that these lines uniformly express

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

5595

four

in all

transcripts encoding the Schwann cell markers myelin
protein zero (P0), p75LNTR, Sox10 and Krox 20, with
several lines additionally expressing myelin basic pro-
tein, peripheral myelin protein-22 (PMP22), Pax3 and
GAP43. mRNAs encoding the light neuroﬁlament
subunit were also present
lines, with
transcripts for a second neuronal intermediate ﬁlament,
peripherin, weakly detectable in YST-1 and NMS-2
cells. The muscle marker SM22a (transgelin) was
additionally expressed by all four MPNST cell lines;
other muscle markers were detectable only with
difﬁculty in some lines (calponin-1, desmin) or com-
pletely undetectable (MyoD1). We conclude that Mash-
1, YST-1, NMS-2 and NMS-2PC cells express multiple
Schwann cell markers and variably express neuronal and
muscle markers, as expected for neoplastic elements
derived from MPNSTs. Of note, the pattern of marker
expression observed in these four human MPNST cell
lines is similar to that found in cell lines derived from the
MPNST-like tumors that develop in Nf1þ / :p53 þ / 
mice (Vogel et al., 1999).

Probing lysates of the human MPNST cell lines with
the ‘pan’ NRG-1 antibody, we found that multiple
NRG-1 immunoreactive proteins were present in all
four lines (Figure 7a). The major NRG-1 like proteins
evident in these lines had masses of 45, 58, 120 and
150 kDa and thus comigrated with several of the NRG-1
species detected in surgically resected human neuroﬁ-
bromas and MPNSTs. Probing these same lysates with
the antibody recognizing the subset of NRG-1 trans-
membrane precursors with an ‘a’ carboxy-terminal
domain, we found that this antibody recognized proteins
migrating at the same position as the two larger (120
and 150 kDa) NRG-1 proteins detected by the pan
NRG-1 antibody (Figure 7b). As in tumor tissue and
sciatic nerve, this antibody also labeled a 55 kDa protein
in all four lines and a 65 kDa polypeptide present in
YST-1 cells; the sizes of these immunoreactive species
are consistent with those of
intracellular domain
fragments released from mature NRG-1 transmembrane
precursors by proteolytic cleavage (Bao et al., 2003).
Preincubation of the pan NRG-1 and ‘a’ carboxy-
terminus antibodies with their immunizing peptide
abolished or markedly diminished the NRG-1 immu-
noreactivity detected in these MPNST cell line lysates
(Figure 7a and b), while preincubation with an unrelated
antigen had no effect on the detected signals (data not
shown).

The presence of variably sized NRG-1 immunoreac-
tive proteins in the human MPNST lines suggested that
these cells, like neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs in vivo,
express multiple NRG-1 isoforms. To test this hypoth-
esis, we examined the structure of the NRG-1 mRNAs
expressed in each MPNST cell line. Using primers that
amplify sequences encoding the EGF-like common,
EGF-like variant, juxtamembrane and transmembrane
domains, we detected NRG-1 transmembrane precursor
transcripts in all four MPNST cell lines (Figure 7c, top
panels). Expression of mRNAs
encoding NRG-1
secreted isoforms was more limited, being evident only
(Figure 7c, bottom panels). PCR
in YST-1 cells

Oncogene

5596

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

Figure 6 Human MPNST cell lines express multiple Schwann cell markers in combination with some neuronal and muscle markers.
Shown are immunostains for the Schwann cell marker S100b in Mash-1 (a), YST-1 (b), NMS-2 (c) and NMS-2PC (d) cells. This
immunoreactivity was not evident when the primary antibody was replaced with nonimmune IgG (e, representative photo of Mash-1
cells stained with nonimmune IgG). Tissue array section of NMS-2PC cells demonstrating immunoreactivity for smooth muscle actin
in a subpopulation of these cells (f, arrows). Scale bar, 50 mm. (g), RT–PCR analyses of the expression of mRNAs encoding Schwann
cell, neuronal and muscle markers in human MPNST cell lines. The identity of the tested cell lines is indicated above each lane, with
markers indicated to the left of each panel. P0, myelin protein zero; MBP, myelin basic protein; PMP22, peripheral myelin protein-22;
p75, the p75 low-afﬁnity neurotrophin receptor; GFAP, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein; NF-L, light neuroﬁlament subunit; aSMA, a-
smooth muscle actin

class

performed with primers hybridizing to sequences
encoding the amino-terminal domain of
II
(GGF) NRG-1 isoforms demonstrated that the NRG-
1 transcripts detected in all four MPNST cell
lines
included members of this NRG-1 subfamily (Figure 7d,
top panels), with class III (SMDF) NRG-1 mRNAs also
present
in NMS-2, NMS-2PC and YST-1 cells
(Figure 7d, bottom panel). In contrast, class I (NDF)
NRG-1 sequences were detectable only in YST-1 cells
(data not shown). We conclude that NMS-2, NMS-2PC
and YST-1 MPNST cells, like MPNSTs in vivo, express
predominantly class II and III NRG-1 transmembrane
precursor proteins. The diversity of NRG-1 isoforms
expressed in Mash-1 cells is more restricted, consisting
solely of class II NRG-1 transmembrane isoforms.

To establish whether each of the four MPNST cell
lines expressed the erbB receptors necessary for NRG-1
responsiveness, we probed lysates of these cells with
antibodies recognizing EGFR, erbB2, erbB3 or erbB4.
We found that all four of these MPNST cell
lines
express a combination of erbB receptors that renders

them potentially NRG-1 responsive (Figure 8a). Two
lines (Mash-1 and NMS-2PC) express erbB2 together
with erbB3, a combination of NRG-1 receptor subunits
identical to that in non-neoplastic Schwann cells (Car-
roll et al., 1997), while a third (NMS-2 cells) expresses
erbB2, erbB3 and erbB4. Although YST-1 cells did not
contain detectable levels of erbB2, these cells coexpress
erbB3 and erbB4; erbB4 is capable of heterodimeriza-
tion with erbB3 or homodimerization with itself to form
a functional NRG-1 receptor (Carpenter, 2003). Two
MPNST cell lines (NMS-2 and NMS-2PC cells) also
expressed EGFR, indicating that erbB signaling in these
lines is potentially enhanced by coactivation of EGFR.
EGFR was undetectable in lysates of Mash-1 and YST-
1 cells.

In at least some cell types, erbB4 undergoes proteo-
lytic cleavage and fragments from its carboxy terminus
are transported to the nucleus, where they are thought
to participate in as yet undeﬁned signaling events
(Carpenter, 2003). Probing immunoblots of NMS-2
and YST-1 lysates with an antibody recognizing the

Oncogene

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

5597

Figure 7 Human MPNST cell lines express multiple class II and III NRG-1 isoforms. (a), Lysates of human MPNST cell lines
(indicated above each lane) probed with an antibody recognizing an epitope in the EGF-like common domain found in all NRG-1
isoforms (left panel). A longer exposure (middle panel) is included to better demonstrate the higher molecular weight NRG-1 proteins
in each cell line. Preincubation with the immunizing peptide abolished labeling of these proteins (right panel). Arrows to the left of
these three panels indicate the position and molecular weight of each protein. (b) A second antibody recognizing an epitope at the
carboxy terminus of a major subset of NRG-1 isoforms (transmembrane precursors with an ‘a’ carboxy terminus) labels proteins with
molecular weights similar to some detected with the pan NRG-1 antibody (left panel) as well as potential cleavage products (55 and
65 kDa species). Preincubation with the immunizing peptide abolished or markedly reduced labeling with this antibody (right panel).
(c) PCR analyses of the expression of transmembrane and secreted NRG-1 isoforms in human MPNST cell lines. The identity of the
cell lines is indicated above each lane; reverse-transcribed RNAs and reverse transcription reactions performed identically except for
the addition of reverse transcriptase are indicated as þ and  , respectively. Blank is a PCR reaction performed with distilled water
substituted for cDNA. YST-1 cDNA was included in the second set of PCR reactions for secreted NRG-1 isoforms (right panel) as a
positive control. (d) PCR detection of sequences encoding class II (upper panels) and III (lower panel) NRG-1 isoforms. A cDNA
produced by reverse transcription of 293 cells (293) and a water blank (H2O) were included as negative controls

Oncogene

5598

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

Figure 8 Human MPNST cell
lines express varying combinations of the erbB kinases mediating NRG-1 responsiveness. (a)
Immunoblot analyses of erbB expression in four human MPNST cell lines. The identity of the cell lines is indicated above each lane,
with the speciﬁc full-length erbB receptor-(a 170 kDa protein for the EGFR; 185 kDa species for the other three erbB kinases) labeled
by each antibody indicated to the left of the blots. GAPDH loading controls are shown below the erbB immunoblots. (b) Immunoblot
analyses of the erbB4 immunoreactive species detectable in NMS-2 and YST-1 cells. Left panel, blots probed with anti-erbB4 antibody
alone detect the 185 kDa full-length protein as well as some smaller species (indicated by arrows to the left of the panel). Right panel,
preincubating the primary antibody with the immunizing peptide blocks the labeling of these species. GAPDH loading controls are
indicated below each panel. (c, d), YST-1 and NMS-2 cells immunostained with the erbB4 antibody demonstrate prominent nuclear
labeling in combination with cytoplasmic and/or membranous labeling

erbB4 carboxy terminus, we found that this antibody
recognized both the full-length 185 kDa species and
several smaller proteins (Figure 8b). These smaller
polypeptides included a fragment similar in mass to a
previously described erbB4 cleavage product (80 kDa;
Carpenter, 2003) and a prominent 55 kDa species
(Figure 8b, left panel). Preincubation with the immuniz-
ing peptide abolished labeling of both the full-length
erbB4 protein and the smaller proteins (Figure 8b, right
panel). Consistent with the hypothesis that erbB4 is
proteolytically cleaved in MPNST cells and its carboxy
terminus transported to the nucleus, prominent erbB4
immunoreactivity was found in the nuclei of YST-1
(Figure 8c) and NMS-2 (Figure 8d) cells, with lighter
staining also evident in association with the cytoplasm
and/or cellular membranes. As shown above,
this
pattern of erbB4 immunoreactivity is similar to that
in vivo (see
seen in neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs
Figure 5).

Constitutive activation of erbB receptors promotes DNA
synthesis in human MPNST cell lines

To determine whether human MPNST cells are respon-
sive to NRG-1, Mash-1 cells, which express erbB2 and
erbB3 in the absence of EGFR expression, were
stimulated for 15 min with vehicle or NRG-1b (1, 10
or 50 nM). The direct NRG-1 receptor erbB3 was then
immunoprecipitated from lysates of these cells, immu-
noblotted and probed with an antibody recognizing
phosphotyrosine. Phosphorylated erbB3 was detected in
these experiments as a band of the expected 185 kDa
mass that increased in intensity with increasing con-
centrations of NRG-1b (Figure 9a). Pretreating cells
with PD168393, a 6-acrylamido-4-anilinoquinazoline
compound that irreversibly inhibits erbB receptors by
forming a covalent bond with a critical cysteine residue
in the tyrosine kinase domain (Fry et al., 1998), blocked
NRG-1b-induced phosphorylation of
this 185 kDa

Oncogene

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

5599

Figure 9 Human MPNST cells are NRG-1 responsive and demonstrate constitutive erbB tyrosine phosphorylation that is abolished
by treatment with the pharmacologic inhibitor PD168393. (a) (Left panel), To examine NRG-1 responsiveness, Mash-1 cells were
stimulated with vehicle (0) or 1, 10 or 50 nM recombinant NRG-1b in the presence (þ ) or absence ( ) of 1 mM PD168393. ErbB3 was
immunoprecipitated from lysates of these cells and the blotted immunoprecipitates probed with an anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (top
panel), with phosphorylated erbB3 evident as a 185 kDa band. The bottom panel represents the top panel reprobed with an anti-erbB3
antibody. NS, control immunoprecipitation performed using nonimmune rabbit IgG. An induction of erbB phosphorylation is evident
in cells stimulated with 10 or 50 nM NRG-1b. Right panel, control neonatal Schwann cells stimulated with NRG-1b. (b) Possible
constitutive erbB tyrosine phosphorylation in YST-1 MPNST cells was examined by immunoprecipitating erbB4 from lysates of
unstimulated YST-1 cells and probing immunoblotted immunoprecipitates with an anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (top panel).
Phosphorylated erbB4 was evident as a 185 kDa species that was abolished by pretreating cells with PD168393. Longer exposures of
the unstimulated Mash-1 immunoprecipitates illustrated in panel a likewise show evidence of constitutive erbB3 phosphorylation in
this line (right panel). (Bottom panels), Reprobe of the blots shown in the top panels with an anti-erbB4 (left) or anti-erbB3 (right)
antibody

protein (Figure 9a), conﬁrming its identiﬁcation as
erbB3.

The coexpression of NRG-1 and its receptors in
human MPNST cell
lines suggests that autocrine or
paracrine NRG-1 signaling may promote constitutive
activation of erbB receptors expressed by neoplastic
Schwann cells in MPNSTs. To test this hypothesis, we
immunoprecipitated erbB4 from unstimulated YST-1
cells (a line that expresses erbB3 and erbB4 in the
absence of detectable EGFR) and probed the blotted
immunoprecipitates with an anti-phosphotyrosine anti-
body. A phosphorylated protein of
the expected
185 kDa mass was readily detectable in unstimulated
YST-1 cells (Figure 9b, left panel). The presence of this
phosphorylated species was abolished by pretreating
YST-1 cells with PD168393 (Figure 9b,
left panel).
Longer exposures of the blots shown in Figure 9a
likewise demonstrated the presence of a lower level of
phosphorylated erbB3 in unstimulated Mash-1 cells
(Figure 9b,
right panel). We conclude that erbB
receptors expressed in Mash-1 and YST-1 cells are
constitutively phosphorylated.

To test the hypothesis that human MPNST mitogen-
esis is dependent on constitutive activation of the NRG-
1/erbB signaling pathway, we challenged Mash-1, NMS-
2, NMS-2PC and YST-1 cells with 1, 10, 100 or 1000 nM
PD168393. After 24 h of
[3H]thymidine
incorporation in cells receiving vehicle was compared
to that in cells treated with PD168393. We found that
treatment with PD168393 reduced DNA synthesis in all

inhibition,

four MPNST cell
lines in a concentration-dependent
manner (Figure 10), although some cell lines were more
sensitive to this treatment than others (e.g., compare
Mash-1 and YST-1 cells). We also examined the effects
that treatment with 1, 10 or 20 mM concentrations of
PD158780, a 4-[ar(alk)ylamino]pyridopyrimidine deri-
vative that
speciﬁcally inhibits erbB receptors by
competing with ATP for binding to the erbB tyrosine
kinase domain (Fry et al., 1997), had on DNA synthesis
in these human MPNST cell lines. Consistent with our
previous demonstration that PD158780 effectively
reduces erbB tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA
synthesis in JS1 cells (Frohnert et al., 2003a) (a line
derived from a chemically induced rodent MPNST), we
found that this mechanistically distinct erbB inhibitor
also markedly reduced DNA synthesis in all four human
MPNST cell lines (data not shown).

Discussion

We have previously shown that constitutive activation
of the NRG-1/erbB signaling pathway is essential for
the proliferation of an MPNST cell line derived from an
EtNU-induced rodent tumor (Frohnert et al., 2003a)
and that NRG-1 overexpression in the Schwann cells of
transgenic mice induces the formation of MPNST-like
neoplasms (Huijbregts et al., 2003). The results pre-
sented here demonstrate that human neuroﬁbromas and

Oncogene

5600

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

Figure 10 The erbB inhibitor PD168393 inhibits DNA synthesis in human MPNST cells in a concentration-dependent fashion. Bars
indicate [3H]thymidine incorporation relative to controls (untreated cells) in Mash-1, YST-1, NMS2 and NMS2-PC cells (indicated
above each graph). Standard errors of the mean are indicated for each condition. P-values for the indicated treatment conditions are
for comparisons to control. Experiments were performed in triplicate, with 6–8 replicates per condition performed in each experiment

MPNSTs likewise express multiple NRG-1 isoforms in
combination with the erbB membrane tyrosine kinases
mediating NRG-1 responses. We have also found that
four human MPNST cell
lines similarly coexpress
multiple NRG-1 isoforms and erbB kinases, that erbB
receptors expressed by these cells are constitutively
phosphorylated and that two structurally and mechan-
istically distinct pharmacologic inhibitors of erbB
kinases reduce erbB phosphorylation in these cells and
inhibit their proliferation. Considered together, these
observations support the hypothesis that inappropriate
activation of
the NRG-1/erbB signaling pathway
promotes neoplastic Schwann cell proliferation in
human MPNSTs. Our results also raise some intriguing
new questions
regarding the role speciﬁc NRG-1
isoforms and erbB receptors play in human peripheral
nerve sheath tumorigenesis and the possible signiﬁcance
of their coexpression with the EGFR.

Three lines of evidence indicate that NRG-1 is locally
synthesized by Schwann cells within neuroﬁbromas and
MPNSTs. First, using an antibody recognizing the
EGF-like common domain present within all functional
NRG-1 isoforms, we identiﬁed multiple NRG-1-like
immunoreactive proteins in all of the neuroﬁbromas and
MPNSTs we examined. Since NRG-1 mRNAs are also
present within neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs, it is likely
that much of the NRG-1 detected within each tumor
was locally synthesized rather than representing NRG-1
protein derived from the circulation. This hypothesis is
further substantiated by our ﬁnding that a second
antibody recognizing the carboxy terminus of NRG-1
isoforms with an ‘a’ variant carboxy terminus also labels
a subset of the NRG-1 proteins detected by the pan

Oncogene

NRG-1 antibody in neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs;
the ‘a’ variant carboxy-terminal domain is intracellular
and is not thought to be released from cells synthe-
sizing NRG-1 transmembrane precursors (Bao et al.,
2003). Finally, we have demonstrated that multiple
NRG-1 proteins and mRNAs are expressed by four
permanent cell
lines derived from human MPNSTs.
Taken together, these ﬁndings support the hypothesis
that neoplastic Schwann cells
themselves produce
NRG-1, which then acts
in an autocrine and/or
paracrine manner to promote neoplastic Schwann cell
proliferation.

important

for

implications

The structure of the NRG-1 isoforms predicted by
neuroﬁbroma- and MPNST-derived NRG-1 cDNAs
also has
the potential
signaling capabilities of these proteins. We have found
that mRNAs encoding NRG-1 transmembrane precur-
sors predominate in peripheral nerve sheath tumors,
with transcripts encoding directly secreted NRG-1
isoforms being undetectable in these neoplasms. NRG-
1 transmembrane precursors are thought to act when
they are proteolytically cleaved, releasing the NRG-1-
extracellular domain containing the receptor-binding
EGF-like domain. The released extracellular domain
then binds to and activates erbB receptors expressed on
the same or neighboring cells. It has recently been found
that this proteolytic cleavage also releases the intracel-
lular domain of NRG-1 transmembrane precursors
from the surface membrane, allowing it to be translo-
cated into the nucleus of the NRG-1-expressing cell,
where this domain is thought to mediate poorly under-
stood ‘backsignaling’ events (Bao et al., 2003). Although
our demonstration that erbB signaling is required for

the proliferation of MPNST cells argues that ‘forward’
signaling by the NRG-1 extracellular domain is essential
for peripheral nerve sheath tumorigenesis, the prefer-
ential expression of NRG-1 transmembrane precursors
in peripheral nerve sheath tumors raises the question of
whether backsignaling by the NRG-1 intracellular
domain also makes an important contribution to this
process. As NRG-1 signaling in peripheral nerve sheath
tumors is potentially dependent on proteolytic cleavage
of transmembrane precursors, inhibitors of the enzymes
that cleave NRG-1 transmembrane isoforms
(e.g.,
matrix metalloproteases; Montero et al., 2000; Wakat-
suki et al., 2004) may be useful agents for the treatment
of neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs.

In 1986, Brockes et al. (1986) reported that a heparin-
binding GGF-like activity was present
in a single
MPNST and that two of the ﬁve neuroﬁbromas they
studied contained intermediate to high levels of a similar
activity. We have found that mRNAs encoding class II
(GGF) NRG-1 isoforms are expressed in human
neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs. We did not detect mRNA
encoding NRG-2, a related factor with similar biochem-
ical properties, in any of these tumors using RT–PCR
(data not shown). Considered together, these ﬁndings
suggest that the GGF-like proteins detected by Brockes
et al. were class II (GGF) NRG-1 isoforms, a group of
molecules that act as secreted factors and accumulate at
high concentrations in structures such as Schwann cell
basement membranes. We also found that the NRG-1
isoforms expressed by neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs
include class III (SMDF/CRD-NRG) NRG-1 variants.
Unlike GGF isoforms, class III NRG-1 proteins remain
membrane-associated (Falls, 2003) and thus,
likely
function solely as juxtacrine signaling molecules. The
differing phenotypes of transgenic mice overexpressing
class II (Huijbregts et al., 2003) and class III (Michailov
et al., 2004) NRG-1 isoforms in the peripheral nervous
system also indicate that members of these NRG-1
subfamilies have distinct effects on the phenotype of
Schwann cells. Given these functional differences, it will
be of great interest to establish what role class II and III
NRG-1 isoforms play in the pathogenesis of peripheral
nerve sheath tumors.

Our ﬁndings demonstrate that cells within neuroﬁ-
bromas and MPNSTs express combinations of erbB
receptors that render them potentially NRG-1 respon-
sive. As the human MPNST cell lines we have studied
also express these receptors, it seems likely that a major
portion of the erbB protein expressed in neuroﬁbromas
and MPNSTs is associated with neoplastic Schwann
cells. These observations, considered together with our
ﬁndings that NRG-1 is expressed in neuroﬁbromas and
MPNSTs, that the erbB receptors expressed in human
MPNST cell lines are constitutively phosphorylated and
that two mechanistically distinct ErbB kinase inhibitors
inhibit DNA synthesis in these lines, support
the
hypothesis that neoplastic Schwann cell proliferation is
driven by autocrine and/or juxtacrine signaling in these
peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Interestingly, however,
the particular combination of erbB kinases expressed in
an individual tumor is variable. Since erbB2, erbB3 and

5601

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

erbB4 differ in their ability to activate speciﬁc cytoplas-
mic signaling pathways (Yarden and Sliwkowski, 2001),
it is likely that NRG-1 signaling will have overlapping,
but distinct, effects on the phenotype of neoplastic
Schwann cells expressing different proﬁles of erbB
receptors. Consistent with previous observations
in human neoplasms and transgenic mouse models
(DeClue et al., 2000; Li et al., 2002), we have also found
that EGFR is present in many human neuroﬁbromas
and MPNSTs, commonly being coexpressed with NRG-
1 receptors. Although the EGFR does not bind NRG-1,
it is capable of interacting with other activated erbB
receptors, allowing the EGF and NRG-1 receptor
systems to ‘crosstalk’ and modify the cellular responses
evoked by EGFR and NRG-1 receptor ligands (Yarden
and Sliwkowski, 2001). These ﬁndings thus suggest that
effects mediated through the erbB kinases expressed by
human neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs may be variable,
with the phenotype of neoplastic Schwann cells being
determined,
in part, by the combination of erbB
receptors expressed by individual cells.

In summary, our ﬁndings support the hypothesis that
constitutive activation of the NRG-1/erbB signaling
pathway promotes
the proliferation of neoplastic
Schwann cells in human neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs.
The effectiveness erbB neutralizing antibodies (e.g.,
trastuzumab (Herceptin)) and small molecular erbB
inhibitors (e.g., PD168393 and PD158780) have shown
in preclinical and/or clinical studies with other tumor
types raises the intriguing question of whether agents
such as these may be effective in treating human
neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs. Determining the role
speciﬁc NRG-1 isoforms and erbB kinases play in the
pathogenesis of human peripheral nerve sheath tumors
will also be essential for developing new, more effective
treatments
these
challenging
Schwann cell neoplasms.

therapeutically

for

Materials and methods

Study cases

Protocols for studies with human tissue were approved by the
University of Alabama at Birmingham Institutional Review
Board for Human Use. Frozen neuroﬁbroma and MPNST
tissue was provided by the Southern Division of
the
Cooperative Human Tissue Network/University of Alabama
at Birmingham Tumor Bank (Director: William Grizzle, MD,
PhD). Parafﬁn-embedded blocks of neuroﬁbroma and
MPNST tissue were obtained from the ﬁles of the Department
of Pathology of the University of Alabama School of Medicine
(Birmingham, AL, USA). Patient ages, sex, race, NF1 status,
and tumor location for the fresh and parafﬁn-embedded
tissues used in our studies are provided in Tables 1 and 2,
respectively.

Antisera and immunohistochemical reagents

We have previously described the production and character-
ization of a rabbit polyclonal antibody that speciﬁcally
recognizes
the EGF-like common domain found in all
biologically active NRG-1 isoforms (a ‘pan’-NRG antibody)

Oncogene

5602

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

(Carroll et al., 1997). A mouse monoclonal antibody recogniz-
ing an epitope in the EGFR (residues 996–1002) was obtained
from MP Biomedicals (clone c11; Irvine, CA, USA). A mouse
monoclonal antibody directed toward the C-terminus of
human erbB2 (residues 1242–1255) was purchased from
Oncogene Research Products (Ab-3; La Jolla, CA, USA).
The mouse IgM monoclonal antibody RTJ.1 recognizes the
C-terminal domain of erbB3; this antibody and an isotype-
matched negative control clone (C48-6) were obtained from
BD Biosciences PharMingen (San Diego, CA, USA). Afﬁnity-
puriﬁed rabbit polyclonal antisera for EGFR (sc-03), ErbB3
(sc-285), erbB4 (sc-283) and the NRG-1 ‘a’-carboxy-terminal
domain (sc-348) were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnol-
ogy (Santa Cruz, Ca, USA). Rabbit polyclonal antibodies
recognizing S100b (#Z0311) and GFAP (#Z0334) and an anti-
desmin mouse monoclonal antibody (clone D33) were
purchased from Dako (Carpinteria, CA, USA). The mouse
anti-collagen type IV monoclonal antibody (clone PHM-12)
used in our studies was from Ventana Medical Systems
(Tucson, AZ, USA). A mouse monoclonal antibody recogniz-
ing smooth muscle actin (clone 1A4) was purchased from
NeoMarkers (Fremont, CA, USA). A rabbit anti-NSE anti-
body was obtained from Chemicon International (Temecula,
CA, USA). The mouse monoclonal antibody recognizing
GAPDH (clone 6C5) was purchased from Advanced Immu-
noChemical Inc. (Long Beach, CA, USA). Nonimmune mouse
and rabbit IgGs were obtained from Pierce (Rockford, IL,
USA). Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated donkey
anti-rabbit secondary antibody was from Jackson Immunor-
esearch Inc.
(West Grove, PA, USA). Tyramide signal
ampliﬁcation reagents, including streptavidin-HRP, biotinyl
tyramide, ampliﬁcation diluent, and blocking reagent were
purchased from Perkin-Elmer Life and Analytical Science
Products (Renaissance TSA-Indirect kit, Boston, MA, USA).
DAB peroxidase substrate (SK-4100) was obtained from
Vector Laboratories (Burlingame, CA, USA).

RT–PCR analyses of NRG-1 isoforms expressed in peripheral
nerve sheath tumors and MPNST cell lines

cDNAs

Our designation of NRG-1 domains follows the nomenclature
of Peles and Yarden (1993). The common forward oligonu-
cleotide used for ampliﬁcation of sequences encoding the
EGF-like and juxtamembrane domains of NRG-1 corresponds
to nucleotides 631–648 of human NDF (also known as class I
NRG-1 isoforms; GenBank accession no. U02326) (Wen et al.,
1994). The reverse oligonucleotide for PCR of NRG-1
transmembrane precursor
represents nucleotides
811–828 (encoding a portion of the transmembrane domain
sequence) of human NDF. This oligonucleotide pair will
amplify sequences encoding all possible combinations of EGF-
like and juxtamembrane sequences found in NRG-1 trans-
membrane isoform mRNAs. Secreted NRG-1 isoform cDNAs
were ampliﬁed using the common forward oligonucleotide in
combination with a reverse oligonucleotide corresponding to
nucleotides 482–502 of a human NDFb3 splice variant
(GenBank accession no. U02327)(Wen et al., 1994). NDF
amino-terminal sequences were ampliﬁed using oligonucleo-
tides corresponding to nucleotides 484–504 and 887–867 of
human NDFb3 (GenBank accession no. BC006492). GGF
(class II NRG-1 isoform) amino-terminal sequences were
ampliﬁed using oligonucleotides
representing nucleotides
429–452 and 900–877 of a human GGFb3 cDNA (GenBank
accession no. L12260). SMDF (class III NRG-1 isoform)
NRG-1 amino-terminal
sequences were ampliﬁed using
oligonucleotides corresponding to nucleotides 806–822 and

1231–1210 of a human SMDFb3 cDNA (GenBank accession
no. BC007675).

Single-stranded cDNA for use as a PCR template was
synthesized from total cellular RNA isolated from tumor
tissue or cultured tumor cells using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen).
RNA was reverse transcribed in a 20 ml reaction using random
hexamer primers and Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse
transcriptase (Superscript Plus, Life Technologies, Gaithers-
burg, MD, USA). After completion of reactions, samples were
diluted to 100 ml with distilled water, boiled for 5 min and
stored at  801C until use.

A 2 ml portion of each cDNA was used as a PCR template in
reactions performed for 35 cycles of 941C for 1 min, 551C for
1 min and 721C for 2 min. PCR products were ligated into
pCR4-TOPO and ligations transformed into Escherichi coli
(Top10 strain) as recommended by the manufacturer (Invitro-
gen Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The sequence of
these clones was determined by cycle sequencing using an
automated sequencer (ABI Model 373A DNA Sequencing
System, Applied Biosystems Inc. Foster City, CA, USA).

Immunohistochemistry for erbB kinases and NRG-1 in tumor
sections

Immunohistochemical detection of erbB and NRG-1 proteins
was performed on 4- to 5-mm-thick sections of parafﬁn-
embedded tissue using a modiﬁed protocol we have previously
developed and validated (Gerecke et al., 2001). In brief, after
deparafﬁnization of sections in xylenes and graded alcohols,
antigen rescue was performed by gently boiling slides in 10 mM
citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 15 min and then allowing them to
cool to room temperature for 15 min. Nonspeciﬁc binding was
blocked by incubating sections for 15 min with TNB blocking
buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5)/0.15 M NaCl/ 0.5% blocking
reagent) at room temperature. Sections were then incubated
overnight at 41C with primary antibodies diluted in blocking
buffer (1 : 100 dilution, EGFR clone c11; 1 : 100 dilution,
erbB2 Oncogene Ab-3; 1 : 100–1 : 250 dilution, erbB3 mono-
clonal RTJ.1; 1 : 500 dilution, ErbB4 rabbit polyclonal anti-
body; 1 : 250–1 : 500 dilution, pan NRG-1 rabbit polyclonal
antibody). After three rinses in phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS; 10 min per rinse), sections were incubated for 1 h at
room temperature with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody
(diluted 1 : 250–1 : 500 in blocking buffer). After three washes
in PBS, biotinyl
tyramide (diluted 1 : 50 in ampliﬁcation
diluent) was applied to tissue sections for 10 min at room
temperature. Sections were again washed three times in PBS
and then incubated with streptavidin-HRP (diluted 1 : 100 in
TNB) for 45 min. After three ﬁnal washes with PBS, immu-
noreactive structures were visualized by diaminobenzidine
deposition. To conﬁrm the speciﬁcity of staining, control slides
were treated identically except that primary antibody was
replaced with blocking buffer alone. As an additional control,
some sections were processed with nonimmune mouse IgG (for
EGFR and ErbB2 controls), nonimmune isotype-matched
IgM (for erbB3 controls) or nonimmune rabbit IgG (for erbB4
and pan NRG controls) in place of the primary antibodies. No
staining was observed in these experiments. For the erbB2,
erbB4 and pan NRG-1 antigens, speciﬁcity of staining was
further conﬁrmed by preincubating antisera with either the
immunizing peptide or a nonrelated peptide (10 ng/ml); in all
instances, preincubation with the immunizing peptide, but not
the nonrelated peptide, abolished the staining pattern observed
with primary antibody alone. Following immunostaining,
slides were lightly counterstained with hematoxylin, cover-
slipped and mounted with Permount (Fisher).

Oncogene

Immunoblotting

Lysates for immunoblotting were prepared by homogenizing
specimens in Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. Protein pellets were dissolved in 1%
SDS supplemented with protease
(Sigma #P8340) and
phosphatase (Sigma #P5726) inhibitors diluted 1 : 100–1 : 250.
Protein concentrations were determined with a modiﬁed
Lowry method (DC Protein Assay; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA,
USA). Equivalent quantities of protein lysates were resolved
on 8% SDS polyacrylamide gels. Membranes were blocked in
5% nonfat dry milk in TBST (0.15 M NaCl, 10 mM Tris (pH
8.0), 0.05% Tween 20) prior to incubation with primary
antibody. The following primary antibody concentrations were
used for immunoblotting: EGFR (Santa Cruz sc-03; 1 : 1000),
erbB-2 (Oncogene Ab-3; 1 : 500–1 : 1000), erbB3 (Santa Cruz
sc-285; 1 : 1000), erbB4 (Santa Cruz sc-283; 1 : 1000), pan
NRG-1 (1 : 5000) and NRG-1 ‘a’ carboxy terminus (Santa
Cruz sc-348; 1 : 1000). HRP-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit
and donkey anti-mouse secondary antibodies were used at a
1 : 10000 dilution in 5% milk/TBST. Immunoreactive species
were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce). In
preliminary experiments, we examined the feasibility of using
immunoreactivity for GAPDH, b-actin and ERK-2 to verify
loading of neuroﬁbroma and MPNST lysates.
equivalent
However, we found that
the highly variable degree of
collagenization in neuroﬁbromas and MPNSTs rendered
normalization to intracellular housekeeping protein levels
problematic. Consequently, equivalent loading and transfer
of tumor lysates was veriﬁed by Coomassie staining of the
PVDF membrane post-transfer, while equivalent loading and
transfer of cell line lysates was veriﬁed by reprobing blots with
an anti-GAPDH antibody. Speciﬁcity of
immunoblotting
was determined for each immunoblot by preincubating the
blotting antibody with a 5–10-fold excess of the appropriate
immunizing peptide.

MPNST cell lines, neonatal Schwann cells and their culture
conditions

The Mash-1 cell line is a human MPNST cell line derived from
a skin/chest metastasis in a male NF1 patient (Endo et al.,
2002) and was obtained from the Cell Bank of the RIKEN
BioResource Center (Ibaraki, Japan). The NMS-2 cell line was
established from an MPNST arising in the right thigh of a 30-
year-old man with NF1 and the NMS-2PC cell
line was
derived from a retroperitoneal metastasis occurring 9 months
later in the same patient (Imaizumi et al., 1998). NMS-2 and
NMS-2PC cells were generously provided by Dr Akira Ogose
(Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Niigata University,
Niigata, Japan). The YST-1 cell line was derived from an
epithelioid MPNST that occurred in the upper arm of an
8-year-old girl with no clinical evidence of NF1 (Nagashima
et al., 1990). YST-1 cells were kindly provided by Dr Yoji
Nagashima (Department of Pathology, Yokohama City
University School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan). NMS-2,
NMS-2PC and YST-1 cell lines were maintained in RPMI
medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine
serum (FBS), 10 IU/ml penicillin and 10 mg/ml streptomycin.
Mash-1 cells were maintained in a 1 : 1 mixture of Keratinocyte
SFM medium (Invitrogen; supplemented with 5 ng/ml EGF
and 50 mg/ml bovine pituitary extract) and DMEM (supple-
mented with 5% heat-inactivated FBS). Cultures of neonatal
Schwann cells were established from the sciatic nerves of
postnatal day 0–2 Sprague–Dawley rat pups using our
previously described methodology (Frohnert et al., 2003a)
and maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS.

5603

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

Immunostaining and RT–PCR analyses of marker expression
in MPNST cell lines
To detect S100b immunoreactivity, MPNST cells were plated
at low density in chamber slides and allowed to adhere
overnight. The next morning, slides were ﬁxed for 30 min at
room temperature with 4% paraformaldehyde and then rinsed
three times with PBS (5 min per wash). Nonspeciﬁc binding
was blocked by incubating cells for 30 min in blocking buffer
(PBS containing 1% bovine serum albumin, 0.2% nonfat dry
milk and 0.3% Triton X-100). Cells were then incubated
overnight at 41C with anti-S100b antibody diluted 1 : 200 in
blocking buffer. The next morning, cells were rinsed three
times with PBS and then incubated for 1 h at
room
temperature with Cy3-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit second-
ary antibody (Jackson Immunoresearch) diluted 1 : 250 in
blocking buffer. Following three more rinses in PBS, slides
were mounted using 1 : 1 PBS : glycerol and examined by
ﬂuorescence microscopy.

To construct tissue arrays, MPNST cells were grown to
conﬂuence and then removed from their substrate none-
nzymatically using Cellstripper (Mediatech, Herndon, VA,
USA). Cells were pelleted and mixed with an equal volume of
HistoGel specimen processing gel (Richard-Allan Scientiﬁc,
Kalamazoo, MI, USA). After coagulation at 41C, cell pellets
were transferred to cassettes and ﬁxed in 10% formalin. Fixed
pellets were then dehydrated through graded alcohols and
xylenes and parafﬁn embedded. Then, 1.5 mm cores were taken
in triplicate from donor blocks of MPNST cell pellets and
human controls (parafﬁn blocks of normal adrenal medulla, a
breast carcinoma, normal pituitary, normal kidney, SKOV-3
ovarian carcinoma cells, MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells, PC-3
prostate carcinoma cells and DU145 prostate carcinoma cells)
and used to construct tissue arrays. Sections (4–5 mm) were
prepared, deparafﬁnized with xylene and rehydrated through
graded ethanol to PBS. After blocking nonspeciﬁc binding by
incubating rehydrated sections for 30 min in blocking buffer,
sections were incubated with primary antibody or nonimmune
IgG for 2 h at room temperature. Dilutions of primary
antibodies were: collagen type IV, 1 : 50; GFAP, 1 : 500;
NSE, 1 : 1000; smooth muscle actin, 1 : 1000; and desmin,
1 : 50. Following incubation with primary antibodies, sections
were rinsed three times with PBS and then incubated with
room
HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies
temperature. Following three more washes with PBS,
im-
munoreactivity was detected by diaminobenzidine deposition.
Sections were lightly counterstained with hematoxylin and
mounted with Permount for light microscopic examination.

for 1 h at

For RT–PCR analyses, 2 ml of cDNAs synthesized from
total cellular RNA as described above was used as a PCR
template in reactions performed for 35 cycles of 94oC for
1 min, 55oC for 1 min and 721C for 2 min. Primers were
designed from the reference sequence deposited for each tested
marker in Entrez Gene using PrimerSelect software (Version
3.10; DNAStar Inc.).

DNA synthesis assays

To assay DNA synthesis in human MPNST cell
lines,
40 000 cells/well were plated in 24-well plates in RPMI medium
containing 10% FBS and allowed to attach overnight. The
next morning, PD168393 (Calbiochem, La Jolla, CA, USA),
PD158780 (Calbiochem) or vehicle (DMSO) was added to
each well. At 12 h after addition of vehicle or erbB inhibitors,
1 mCi/ml of [3H]thymidine was added to each well. After
12 h,
[3H] thymidine incorporation was assayed using our
previously described methodology (Frohnert et al., 2003a, b).

Oncogene

5604

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

All experiments were performed in triplicate, with six
replicates/condition performed in each experiment. One-way
ANOVA, followed by a Tukey post hoc test, was performed on
the resulting data, with Po0.05 considered statistically
signiﬁcant.

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Kevin A Roth (Department of Pathology, UAB)
for helpful comments on this manuscript. This work was
supported by National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke Grant R01 NS048353.

References

Bao J, Wolpowitz D, Role LW and Talmage DA. (2003).

Huijbregts RPH, Roth KA, Schmidt RE and Carroll SL.

J. Cell Biol., 161, 1133–1141.

(2003). J. Neurosci., 23, 7269–7280.

Bargmann CI, Hung MC and Weinberg RA. (1986). Cell, 45,

Imaizumi S, Motoyama T, Ogose A, Hotta T and Takahashi

649–657.

HE. (1998). Virchows Arch., 433, 435–441.

Bargmann CI and Weinberg RA.

(1988). EMBO J., 7,

Kluwe L, Friedrich R and Mautner VF.

(1999). Genes

2043–2052.

Chromosomes Cancer, 24, 283–285.

Ben-Baruch N and Yarden Y. (1994). Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol.

Kourea HP, Cordon-Cardo C, Dudas M, Leung D and

Med., 206, 221–227.

Birindelli S, Perrone F, Oggionni M, Lavarino C, Pasini B,
Vergani B, Ranzani GN, Pierotti MA and Pilotti S. (2001).
Lab. Invest., 81, 833–844.

Woodruff JM. (1999a). Am. J. Pathol., 155, 1885–1891.

Kourea HP, Orlow I, Scheithauer BW, Cordon-Cardo C and

Woodruff JM. (1999b). Am. J. Pathol., 155, 1855–1860.

Lakkis MM and Tennekoon GI. (2000). J. Neurosci. Res., 62,

Brockes JP, Breakeﬁeld XO and Martuza RL. (1986). Ann.

755–763.

Neurol., 20, 317–322.

Carpenter G. (2003). Exp. Cell Res., 284, 66–77.
Carroll SL, Miller ML, Frohnert PW, Kim SS and Corbett JA.

(1997). J. Neurosci., 17, 1642–1659.

Legius E, Dierick H, Wu R, Hall BK, Marynen P, Cassiman JJ
and Glover TW. (1994). Genes Chromosomes Cancer, 10,
250–255.

Legius E, Marchuk DA, Collins FS and Glover TW. (1993).

Carroll SL and Stonecypher MS. (2004). J. Neuropathol. Exp.

Nat. Genet., 3, 122–125.

Neurol., 63, 1115–1123.

Li H, Velasco-Miguel S, Vass WC, Parada LF and DeClue JE.

Carroll SL and Stonecypher MS. (2005). J. Neuropathol. Exp.

(2002). Cancer Res., 62, 4507–4513.

Neurol., 64, 1–9.

DeClue JE, Heffelﬁnger S, Benvenuto G, Ling B, Li S, Rui W,
Vass WC, Viskochil D and Ratner N. (2000). J. Clin. Invest.,
105, 1233–1241.

Di Marco E, Pierce JH, Knicley CL and Di Fiore PP. (1990).

Mol Cell Biol, 10, 3247–3252.

Menon AG, Anderson KM, Riccardi VM, Chung RY, Whaley
JM, Yandell DW, Farmer GE, Freiman RN, Lee JK, Li FP,
Barker DF, Ledbetter DH, Kleider A, Martuza RL, Gusella
JF and Seizinger BR. (1990). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 87,
5435–5439.

Metheny LJ, Cappione AJ

and Skuse GR.

(1995).

Dong Z, Brennan A, Liu N, Yarden Y, Lefkowitz G, Mirsky

J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol., 54, 753–760.

R and Jessen KR. (1995). Neuron, 15, 585–596.

Ducatman BS, Scheithauer BW, Piepgras DG, Reiman HM

and Ilstrup DM. (1986). Cancer, 57, 2006–2021.

Endo H, Utani A and Shinkai H. (2002). Br. J. Dermatol., 147,

821–822.

Falls DL. (2003). Exp. Cell Res., 284, 14–30.
Ferner RE and Gutmann DH.

(2002). Cancer Res., 62,

1573–1577.

Ferner RE and O’Doherty MJ. (2002). Curr. Opin. Neurol., 15,

679–684.

Frohnert PW, Stonecypher MS and Carroll SL. (2003a). Glia,

43, 104–118.

Frohnert PW, Stonecypher MS and Carroll SL. (2003b).

J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol., 62, 520–529.

Fry DW, Bridges AJ, Denny WA, Doherty A, Greis KD,
Hicks JL, Hook KE, Keller PR, Leopold WR, Loo JA,
McNamara DJ, Nelson JM, Sherwood V, Smaill JB,
Trumpp-Kallmeyer S and Dobrusin EM. (1998). Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 12022–12027.

Fry DW, Nelson JM, Slintak V, Keller PR, Rewcastle GW,
Denny WA, Zhou H and Bridges AJ. (1997). Biochem.
Pharmacol., 54, 877–887.

Michailov GV, Sereda MW, Brinkmann BG, Fischer TM,
Haug B, Birchmeier C, Role L, Lai C, Schwab MH and
Nave KA. (2004). Science, 304, 700–703.

Montero JC, Yuste L, Diaz-Rodriguez E, Esparis-Ogando A
and Pandiella A. (2000). Mol. Cell. Neurosci., 16, 631–648.
Morrissey TK, Levi ADO, Nuijens A, Sliwkowski MX
and Bunge RP. (1995). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 92,
1431–1435.

Nagashima Y, Ohaki Y, Tanaka Y, Sumino K, Funabiki T,
Okuyama T, Watanabe S, Umeda M and Misugi K. (1990).
Virchows Archiv. B., 59, 321–327.

Nielsen GP, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Ino Y, Moller MB,
Rosenberg AE and Louis DN. (1999). Am. J. Pathol., 155,
1879–1884.

Nikitin AY, Ballering LAP, Lyons J and Rajewsky MF.

(1991). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 88, 9939–9943.

Parada LF. (2000). Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1471, M13–M19.
Peles E and Yarden Y. (1993). BioEssays, 15, 815–824.
Perry A, Kunz SN, Fuller CE, Banerjee R, Marley EF, Liapis
H, Watson MW and Gutmann DH. (2002). J. Neuropathol.
Exp. Neurol., 61, 702–709.

Perry A, Roth KA, Banerjee R, Fuller CE and Gutmann DH.

Gerecke KM, Wyss JM, Karavanova I, Buonanno A and

(2001). Am. J. Pathol., 159, 57–61.

Carroll SL. (2001). J. Comp. Neurol., 433, 86–100.

Graus-Porta D, Beerli RR, Daly JM and Hynes NE. (1997).

EMBO J., 16, 1647–1655.

Gutmann DH. (2001). Hum. Mol. Genet., 10, 747–755.
Gutmann DH, Aylsworth A, Carey JC, Korf B, Marks J,
Pyeritz RE, Rubenstein A and Viskochil D. (1997). JAMA,
278, 51–57.

Rahmatullah M, Schroering A, Rothblum K, Stahl RC,
(1998). Mol. Cell. Biol., 18,

Urban B and Carey DJ.
6245–6252.

Rutkowski JL, Wu K, Gutmann DH, Boyer PJ and Legius E.

(2000). Hum. Mol. Genet., 9, 1059–1066.

Sherman L, Sleeman JP, Hennigan RF, Herrlich P and Ratner

N. (1999). Oncogene, 18, 6692–6699.

Hudziak RM, Schlessinger J and Ullrich A. (1987). Proc. Natl.

Sherman LS, Atit R, Rosenbaum T, Cox AD and Ratner N.

Acad. Sci. USA, 84, 7159–7163.

(2000). J. Biol. Chem., 275, 30740–30745.

Oncogene

NRG-1/erbB signaling in MPNSTs
MS Stonecypher et al

5605

Tucker T and Friedman JM. (2002). Clin. Genet., 62, 345–357.
Tzahar E, Waterman H, Chen X, Levkowitz G, Karunagaran
D, Lavi S, Ratzkin BJ and Yarden Y. (1996). Mol. Cell.
Biol., 16, 5276–5287.

Vogel KS, Klesse LJ, Velasco-Miguel S, Meyers K, Rushing

EJ and Parada LF. (1999). Science, 286, 2176–2179.

Wakatsuki S, Kurisaki T and Sehara-Fujisawa A. (2004).

J. Neurochem., 89, 119–123.

Wallace MR, Rasmussen SA, Lim IT, Bray BA, Zori RT and

Wen D, Suggs SV, Karunagaran D, Liu N, Cupples RL, Luo
Y, Janssen AM, Ben-Baruch N, Trollinger DB, Jacobsen
VL, Meng S-Y, Lu HS, Hu S, Chang D, Yang W,
Yanigahara D, Koski RA and Yarden Y. (1994). Mol. Cell.
Biol., 14, 1909–1919.

Woodruff JM, Kourea HP, Louis DN and Scheithauer BW.
(2000). Pathology and Genetics of Tumours of the Nervous
System, First Edition. Kleihues P and Cavenee WK (ed).
IARC Press: Lyon, pp. 172–174.

Muir D. (2000). Genes Chromosomes Cancer, 27, 117–123.

Yarden Y and Sliwkowski M. (2001). Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.,

Weiner DB, Liu J, Cohen JA, Williams WV and Greene MI.

2, 127–137.

(1989). Nature, 339, 230–231.

Zhu Y and Parada LF. (2001). Exp. Cell Res., 264, 19–28.

Oncogene

