65

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Neurofibromatosis type 1 and sporadic optic gliomas
S Singhal, J M Birch, B Kerr, L Lashford, D G R Evans
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ArchDisChild 2002;87:65–70

Aims: To compare the natural history of sporadic optic glioma with those associated with
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1).
Methods: Optic glioma cases were identified using both the Manchester Children’s Tumour Registry
(CTR) and the North West Regional NF1 Database (NF1DB), with detailed information on natural his-
tory available from the former (in 34 of 36 cases identified).
Results: A total of 52 cases over a period of 41 years were identified. From the 34 whose natural his-
tory was known, almost all (n = 31) were symptomatic, with mean ages of presentation of 4.5 and 5.1
years for NF1 and sporadic cases respectively. The majority (n = 22) presented with visual impairment,
seven of whom were blind in at least one eye. Sporadic cases were over twice as likely as NF1 to have
visual impairment. Recurrence occurred in 12 patients. Fewer NF1 patients died as a direct result of
their optic glioma, but overall mortality and 5 and 10 year survival rates between the two groups were
similar. All five primary (non-metastatic) second central nervous system (CNS) tumours occurred in NF1
cases, two of these following radiotherapy.
Conclusions: Symptomatic sporadic optic gliomas presented with impaired vision more frequently and
were more aggressive than NF1 optic gliomas. Only optic glioma cases with NF1 were at risk of
developing a second CNS tumour. Aggressive treatment of sporadic optic gliomas and early surveil-
lance of NF1 optic gliomas may be required. The use of radiotherapy in these children requires further
clarification.

See end of article for
authors’ affiliations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Correspondence to:
Dr D G R Evans,
Department of Medical
Genetics, St Mary’s
Hospital, Manchester
M13 0JH, UK;
gevans@
central.cmht.nwest.nhs.uk

Accepted 6 March 2002
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) makes up 90% of the

genetic disorders known clinically as the neuroﬁ-
bromatoses. It has a prevalence of about 1 in 3000,
making it one of the most common genetic disorders.1 NF1 is
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and gene
penetrance is such that almost all cases show sufﬁcient
evidence of the disorder to allow diagnosis in childhood.1
Complications of NF1 provide a more sinister slant to this
otherwise relatively benign condition. One of the most notori-
ous complications is that of the central nervous system (CNS)
tumour. Optic nerve gliomas were initially reported in less
than 5% of NF1 cases, but this was before the advent of com-
puted tomography and magnetic resonance imaging.1 More
recent estimates from longitudinal studies using modern
neuroimaging techniques have put the prevalence between
11% and 19% of NF1 cases,1–3 although higher estimates have
come from retrospective analyses of referral clinics.4 5 As the
occurrence of other CNS tumours is thought to be well below
5%,6 this makes optic glioma the most common CNS tumour
to complicate NF1. The natural history of optic gliomas has
been increasingly studied in recent years, but it is not clear if
these tumours produce signiﬁcant morbidity or are relatively
indolent. Some studies have found the former,7–9 but the
majority have found the latter and do not see a case for
screening or monitoring.1 2 10 However, this may depend on
adequacy of treatment,7 11 12 and treatment itself is not without
risk.7 11 13 The discrepancy in natural history may relate to dif-
ferences in study design, with prospective studies picking up
more non-progressive asymptomatic tumours.7 11 13 Some have
found that the presence of NF1 in children with optic glioma
confers a protective beneﬁt.9 12 We have therefore used
retrospective data to establish the natural history of optic glio-
mas and whether NF1 related cases require a different clinical
approach to sporadic ones. This also enabled assessment of the
overall prevalence of mainly symptomatic optic gliomas in a
large population based register of NF1 patients.

PATIENTS AND METHODS
This study was carried out in the North West of England
(population 4 million). Patients were identiﬁed from two
sources: the North West Regional NF1 Database and the
Regional Children’s Tumour Registry (CTR).

The NF1 Database (NF1DB)
This consisted of 501 patients by study day. All had been diag-
nosed by clinical geneticists as part of a regional genetic regis-
ter. The diagnosis of NF1 was made in accordance with the
National Institutes of Health Consensus Criteria.6 All affected
NF1DB cases identiﬁed had their clinic notes re-evaluated to
provide information concerning their optic gliomas. Unfortu-
nately, those 16 cases only identiﬁed via the NF1DB and not
the CTR could not be used in the ﬁnal analysis. This was
because of
lost notes, unavailable notes, or incomplete
information in the notes, either because of failure to attend
follow up or lack of relevant detail in the case notes as regards
the natural history of the glioma.

The Children’s Tumour Registry (CTR)
This details children under 15 years of age, resident in the
North West region, and referred to the main paediatric centres
for tumour management. Information is available from 1954
onwards and consists of typed case notes detailing events
from the ﬁrst presentation of the tumour. A search for optic
gliomas included the headings “juvenile astrocytomas” and
“neuroﬁbromatosis—tumours not otherwise speciﬁed” to
ensure as many cases as possible were identiﬁed. All relevant
details about the diagnosis of both optic glioma and possible
NF1 were taken from the case notes and other available

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; CT, computed
tomography; CTR, Children’s Tumour Registry; MRI, magnetic resonance
imaging; NF1; neurofibromatosis type 1; NF1DB; North West Regional
NF1 Database

www.archdischild.com

66

Singhal, Birch, Kerr, et al

sources such as genetics ﬁles. Consequently, 34 of the 36 cases
found on the CTR had sufﬁcient information for detailed
analysis.

Some presenting symptoms were categorised together to
ease analysis. Hence, raised intracranial pressure was inferred
from presenting complaints of headache and nausea or vom-
iting, or evidence of papilloedema or hydrocephalus. Endo-
crine disturbances at presentation included precocious pu-
berty, obesity, polydipsia, and growth hormone deﬁciency, all
suggestive of involvement of the hypothalamopituitary axis. A
further case had hypercalcaemia of uncertain origin.

RESULTS
The regional NF1 database numbered 501 affected individuals
on 1 November 1995. On the study day, 487 cases were still
living. This represents a diagnostic prevalence of NF1 of 1 in
8000 for the North West region.

One hundred and nine individuals on the NF1DB had had
computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI); an optic glioma was identiﬁed in 25 of these, giving a
NF1DB prevalence for these tumours of about 5%.

Because of incomplete information as explained above, 16

cases were excluded from further detailed analysis.

A total of 52 patients with optic gliomas were identiﬁed
from the two databases. Of these, 36 were identiﬁed through
the CTR, 18 of which were sporadic and 18 NF1 related. Nine
were also found on the NF1DB. Hence, nine patients with NF1
related optic gliomas were identiﬁed only by the CTR. One of
each group of sporadic and NF1 related gliomas was excluded
from further analysis on the basis of insufﬁcient information.
This left 34 cases, all identiﬁed on the CTR and featuring 17 of
each type of glioma, on which detailed analysis could be
undertaken.

NF1 optic gliomas
Distribution
Of the 17 total cases with an optic glioma associated with NF1
in whom detailed case notes were available, there was a fairly
even sex distribution, with seven male and 10 female patients.
All were of white European extraction. Only one child
presented over the age of 10, and in his case the glioma which
was diagnosed when he was 14 was only an incidental ﬁnding
on an MRI scan.

Presentation—age
The mean, median and modal ages of presentation were 4.5,
4.0, and 4.0 (range 1–14) years respectively. In only two cases
were symptoms in evidence more than a year before the pres-
entation that led to diagnosis. One had had deteriorating
vision for about 2.5 years, the other had had photophobia for
almost two years before visual deterioration was noted.

Presentation—symptoms
Visual disturbance was the most common presentation,
occurring in seven cases (41%); two children presented with at
least one blind eye. A further four children presented with
proptosis. Developmental delay and symptoms suggestive of
raised intracranial pressure each occurred in ﬁve cases; endo-
crine disturbance occurred in four (obesity in three, gigantism
in one). Only two gliomas were asymptomatic at diagnosis,
both being incidental ﬁndings on CT or MRI. Although it is not
clear what the indications were for scanning in these cases,
one was found to have inﬁltrating cerebellar masses, the
symptoms of which presumably brought him to medical
attention.

Diagnosis
There was relatively little delay in reaching a diagnosis once
the child had presented, the mean time being just over six
months. The mean and median ages of diagnosis were 5.0 and

www.archdischild.com

4.0 years
radiological (9/17) or histological (8/17) evidence.

respectively. Diagnosis was based on either

Treatment
A total of 11 children received speciﬁc treatment for their
glioma: either surgical excision of part or all of the glioma
(7/17) or radiotherapy (4/17). In one of the children treated
with radiation, there was a period of abnormally excessive
growth during the following year. He went on to develop an
asymptomatic recurrence and a cerebellopontine angle
schwannoma 17 years later. Another case had a recurrence at
the age of 12, six years after radiotherapy; he died of multiple
intracranial tumours, aged 21. The other two appeared not to
have had any untoward complications of cerebral irradiation.
One of the children initially treated surgically developed a cer-
ebellar astrocytoma at age 10, which was irradiated. Two years
after this, his vision began to deteriorate and a recurrent optic
glioma was diagnosed at age 17. Follow up information is
lacking for one treated and one untreated case. For those on
whom we have such data, ﬁve of the 10 treated were dead by
study day compared with two of ﬁve untreated.

Complications
Four gliomas recurred with new symptoms, three following
radiotherapy (two, six, and 17 years later), and the other nine
years after surgery. A further child who actually died from an
axillary neuroﬁbrosarcoma was found to have an incidental
chiasmal glioma 17 years after his initial glioma was
irradiated. Two children developed endocrinological disorders
following glioma diagnosis. One underwent excessive growth
from the age of 8, a year after he had received radiotherapy.
The other child, who was female, had had radiotherapy for an
optic glioma at the age of 7, and was then diagnosed with
glioma recurrence at the age of 14 following investigation of
primary amenorrhoea. She later developed epilepsy, which by
the time she was 36 was described as “uncontrolled”. A
further child, whose glioma was initially excised when she
was aged 1, developed aqueduct stenosis, a recognised
complication of NF1, at the age of 7. This was complicated by
hydrocephalus, and despite shunt insertion she died a few
days later. Complications were not inevitable and seven
children had no further serious problems. Of these, two had
been treated surgically, two with radiotherapy, and three had
not had speciﬁc therapy.

Second tumours
Five children (29%) with NF1 went on to develop second pri-
mary CNS tumours, all of which were intracranial and
occurred between seven and 32 years from initial treatment.
Two of these ﬁve occurred in cases treated with initial
radiotherapy. One of these was the aforementioned boy who
died aged 24 from an axillary neuroﬁbrosarcoma and was
found to have, in addition, both a cerebellopontine neurilem-
moma (schwannoma) and a chiasmal glioma. He had received
radiotherapy at the age of 7. Two of the ﬁve also suffered with
recurrent optic gliomas. Only one of the ﬁve appeared to sur-
vive his second tumour (a cerebellar astrocytoma), through a
combination of radiotherapy and surgery which he received in
1977 at the age of 10. It may be of note that two years after this
treatment his vision began to deteriorate and he went on to
have further radiotherapy for a recurrent optic glioma in 1984.

Mortality
Overall there was a 47% mortality rate among the 15 of 17 NF1
patients with an optic glioma whose survival was recorded.
However, of these seven deaths only two were directly attrib-
utable to the optic gliomas. The remaining causes of death
were intracranial neoplasia (n = 3), the neuroﬁbrosarcoma
(n = 1), and the girl with aqueduct stenosis who had a shunt
inserted to drain her hydrocephalus and who died from bilat-
eral subdural haemorrhaging following a ﬁt postoperatively.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 and sporadic optic gliomas

67

Survival
The 5 and 10 year survival rates from ﬁrst presentation prob-
ably give the most realistic idea of the severity of an individual
child’s condition. These are 77% and 67% respectively, with
two outcomes unknown and three cases not applicable (being
diagnosed within 10 years of study day).

Location
Further subanalysis using site of glioma was conducted. Using
the categories intraorbital (that is, chiasm spared) and chias-
matic (that is, chiasm with or without one or both optic nerves
involved), 10 children had chiasmatic gliomas. In addition,
two had “bilateral gliomas”, but no reference to the chiasm
was made. Four chiasmatic and both bilateral cases presented
with visual symptoms, ﬁve chiasmatic and one bilateral had
endocrine abnormalities, and both asymptomatic patients
were chiasmatic. Only one recurrent glioma appeared to have
involved new territory, initially affecting the left optic nerve.
Nine years after glioma excision and two years following
radiotherapy (for a cerebellar tumour), the optic glioma
recurred in the chiasm. Of the 10 with deﬁnite and initial chi-
asm involvement, three received radiotherapy, three were
excised, and four were left untreated. Information regarding
survival in these cases is complete for only ﬁve, two of whom
died within 10 years of diagnosis (giving a 10 year survival
rate of 60%).

recurrence ﬁve years after that. Of the six who initially
received radiotherapy, three went on to have a recurrent
glioma (four, four, and 23 years later). Six of the 12 treated for
whom we have follow up information were dead by study day,
compared with two of the three who were untreated.

Complications
A minority (6/17) of sporadic gliomas failed to show disease
progression, four having had their tumour excised, one having
had radiotherapy, and one having been untreated. Four
gliomas recurred. Of these, two may have had a second recur-
rence. The ﬁrst was a girl treated initially at 16 months with
radiotherapy who then developed bilateral nerve gliomas at
age 7, for which she was treated surgically. She died at the age
of 10 following an acute right middle cerebral artery infarct,
and was found on postmortem examination to have a
chiasmal glioma. It is not clear if this was remnant tumour
from the previous surgery or true recurrence. The other child
had his glioma excised at the age of 4, and was then treated
with radiotherapy for its ﬁrst recurrence at the age of 16. He
had a second recurrence at the age of 21, which was untreated
and from which he died. The same boy had required shunt
insertion at the age of 11 to drain hydrocephalus. Endocrine
dysfunction occurred in two cases, one with growth hormone
deﬁciency and one with secondary amennorhoea. Both had
received radiotherapy, respectively, 9 and 14 years previously.

Sporadic optic gliomas
Distribution
Of the 17 cases without a diagnosis of NF1, eight were male
and all were white Europeans. Three children presented over
the age of 10, being 11, 12, and 13. The youngest presented at
3 months with apparent visual symptoms and hypercalcae-
mia, but was not diagnosed until 12 months old.

Second tumours
None of the sporadic gliomas appeared to develop another
primary CNS tumour, although one boy who was diagnosed
on biopsy at the age of 11 months died ﬁve months later and
the cause of death given was “cerebral tumour”. Most likely
this referred to the known glioma as there was no postmortem
examination.

Presentation—age
The mean and median ages of presentation were 5.1 and 5.0
(range 0.25–13) years respectively. Only two patients had ini-
tial symptoms predating presentation by greater than a year.
One had poor growth for probably two years prior to presenta-
tion, the other had various endocrine symptoms starting
about 15 months earlier. A further ﬁve children had a 12
month history of symptoms at presentation, four of these
being visual in nature and one having symptoms of raised
intracranial pressure.

Presentation—symptoms
The most common presenting symptom was again visual dis-
turbance (15/17 or 88%), with ﬁve of these having one blind
eye. Proptosis (7/17), endocrine disturbance (5/17, of which
two had precocious puberty), and raised intracranial pressure
(5/17) were also common, with two cases having nystagmus.
Only one case was asymptomatic and picked up via a routine
eye check that revealed optic atrophy. Despite no presenting
symptoms and receiving radiotherapy, he still went on to
develop a blind eye.

Diagnosis
Time to diagnosis from ﬁrst presentation was just under nine
months, with mean and median ages of diagnosis being 5.8
and 5.0 years respectively. Most cases were diagnosed on
biopsy (11/17), the remainder either seen on scan (4/17) or
directly visualised at craniotomy (2/17).

Treatment
A large majority of these children (14/17) received speciﬁc
treatment. Most underwent surgery alone (8/17), four had
radiotherapy alone, and two children had both kinds of treat-
ment. One of those surgically treated went on to have
radiotherapy for recurrence 12 years later and had a second

Mortality
Of seven deaths, ﬁve were deﬁnitely directly related to the
optic glioma; one other had a fatal complication at the time of
her second glioma recurrence in that she sustained a stroke at
the age of 10. The ﬁnal death was a result of a fall from a bike,
but no further
information is available. Hence, overall
mortality was approximately 44%. The ﬁve year survival rate at
study day was 80%, with one case discounted because of diag-
nosis after 1991. This fell to 57% for 10 year survival rate, with
a further case discounted because of diagnosis within 10 years
of study day.

Location
Six sporadic cases involved the chiasm. Four presented with
visual symptoms, one had endocrine symptoms, and one was
asymptomatic. Three recieved radiotherapy, two were un-
treated, and one was excised. Ten year survival for these six
cases was 67%.

Comparative analysis
Table 1 presents a comparative analysis of the patients. The
gender and racial distributions in our study were similar for
sporadic and NF1 optic gliomas. Mean and median ages at
presentation, time from presentation to diagnosis, and age at
diagnosis were not signiﬁcantly different between the groups,
although sporadic gliomas tended to occur later in all three
categories. Two cases in each group recalled symptoms begin-
ning over a year before they presented to the medical profes-
sion. Five further sporadic cases noted symptoms had started
about a year previously, four of these visual in nature.

One sporadic and two NF1 gliomas were asymptomatic. Of
the remaining 31 gliomas, signiﬁcantly more sporadic (15/16
or 94%) than NF1 (7/15 or 47%) presented with visual symp-
toms (p = 0.01). A total of seven sporadic (41%) and four NF1
(24%) cases presented with proptosis. Fewer numbers

www.archdischild.com

68

Singhal, Birch, Kerr, et al

Table 1 Comparisons of NF1 and sporadic gliomas for presentation, diagnosis,
and complications

NF1 cases

Sporadic cases

Presentation and diagnosis

Asymptomatic
Visual: non-blind/blind
Proptosis
Raised intracranial pressure
Developmental delay
Endocrine
Epilepsy
Space occupying symptoms
Age at presentation in years—mean
Age at presentation in years—median
Age at presentation in years—mode
Time from presentation to diagnosis in years—mean
Age at diagnosis in years—mean

Complications
Recurrence
Non-CNS tumour
Intracranial neoplasm
Hydrocephalus
Endocrinological
Epilepsy
Death
None

2
5/2
4
5
5
2
2
1
4.47
4 (1–14)
4
0.53
5.00

5
1
5
0
2
1
2
7

1
10/5
7
5
3
1
1
2
5.11
5 (0.25–13)
5
0.72
5.83

4
0
0
1
2
0
6
6

Table 2 Investigation on which diagnosis was based

Diagnostic tool

Radiological
Histological (+/-
Macroscopic evaluation (surgically)
Radiological with macroscopic
confirmation (surgically)

radiological)

NF1
cases

9
8
0
0

Sporadic cases

4
11
1
1

presented with endocrine symptoms, raised intracranial pres-
sure symptoms, and focal neurology, and these were evenly
distributed between the groups. Both glioma types presented
with a variety of symptoms, with 16 sporadic gliomas produc-
ing 39 different symptoms, and 15 NF1 gliomas producing 31
symptoms. Deﬁnitive diagnosis was made mainly by histologi-
cal examination, but there was a tendency to rely on imaging
alone for NF1 related tumours (table 2).

Treatment approach favoured surgical excision over radio-
therapy approximately twice as often in both groups. Twice as
many NF1 than sporadic gliomas were left untreated (6 v 3).
Despite this, there was a non-signiﬁcant trend towards fewer
NF1 patients dying speciﬁcally of their gliomas than their
sporadic counterparts (2 v 6; p = 0.22). This contrasts with
absolute mortality and 5 and 10 year survival rates which are
remarkably similar (respectively 44%, 80%, 58% for sporadic;
44%, 77%, 67% for NF1).

The overall glioma complications rate was similar for the
two groups. However, visual symptoms were signiﬁcantly
more common among sporadic cases, as was mortality from
the glioma. There was a trend towards chiasmatic involvement
in NF1 cases (10 v 6). Symptom and treatment type were
similar in kind and number, except for a propensity of NF1
cases to have endocrine disturbances on presentation (5 v 1).
The only two cases of bilateral optic nerve involvement were in
NF1 children.

(Note: All p values refer to probabilities calculated using

Fisher’s exact test).

www.archdischild.com

DISCUSSION
Optic gliomas account for less than 5% of childhood brain
tumours. Their prevalence in the general population is
thought to be around 1 in 100 000. The estimated prevalence
of neuroﬁbromatosis in patients with optic gliomas ranges
from 10% to 70%.1 11 From our population, the most accurate
estimate of prevalence looks at the number of NF1 related
cases from the CTR alone, as using NF1DB cases would intro-
duce selection bias. This gives a population based value of
18/36 or 50%.

In patients with NF1, the lifetime risk of developing an
optic glioma has generally been found to be between about 10
and 20%,1 2 3 although estimates range from under 5%1 14 to as
high as 28%.4 8 12 15 In our NF1 database, the prevalence was
5%. Although we lack sufﬁcient data on the reasons for scan-
ning the group of children with NF1 from which the 25 glio-
mas were identiﬁed, it is likely that the majority were sympto-
matic in order to merit special investigation. Indeed, only two
cases were recorded as not having symptoms attributable to an
optic glioma at diagnosis. Hence, our ﬁgures are likely to
reﬂect prevalence of symptomatic rather than all gliomas.

Particular signiﬁcance has traditionally been attached to
chiasmal involvement of optic gliomas.1 7–9 11 16–18 In contrast to
previous studies we found a preference towards chiasm
involvement in NF1 but not in sporadics,9 and identiﬁed cases
of isolated nerve gliomas causing precocious puberty, suggest-
ing compression of the hypothalamus might not be solely a
manifestation of chiasmal involvement.17 There was no clear
evidence that location affected either management or survival
in either group. Nor was there evidence that treatment altered
long term outcome, although this is bound to be affected by
selection bias, the more aggressive tumours probably being
more often treated but also probably having a worse prognosis.
Although chemotherapy is a promising new addition to thera-
peutic options,17 19 20 the cases in our study predated the
chemotherapy era.

Nine of our cases had a lag of a year or more between ﬁrst
symptoms and diagnosis, suggesting insidious growth. How-
ever, seven of these were sporadic cases where the index of
suspicion would be expected to be low. Nonetheless, visual
symptoms and mortality directly caused by the glioma were
signiﬁcantly more common among sporadic cases. This

Neurofibromatosis type 1 and sporadic optic gliomas

69

Table 3 Subsequent occurrence of second CNS
tumours, recurrence of optic glioma, or both among all
patients who ever received cranial irradiation

Tumour event

Irradiated
NF1 cases
(n=5)

Irradiated
sporadic
cases (n=6)

Second CNS tumour only
Recurrent and second CNS tumour
Recurrent tumour only
No recurrent or second tumour

0
2
1
2

Note: second recurrences are excluded.

0
0
3
3

suggests that sporadic gliomas are more aggressive than their
NF1 counterparts. Despite this, absolute mortality ﬁgures and
5 and 10 year survival rates were very similar. The reason for
this disparity is the high preponderance of fatal second
primary CNS tumours in patients with NF1. Thus, ﬁve NF1
children with optic gliomas developed an intracranial neo-
plasm (aged 10–34 years). Conversely, no sporadic case was
deﬁnitely diagnosed with a second CNS tumour. The propen-
sity of second CNS tumour development in NF1 optic gliomas
has been noted before,5 21 and the NF1 gene has been
putatively considered tumour suppressant,17 although the only
other direct comparative study of NF1 and sporadic optic glio-
mas did not identify any second malignancies.9 These ﬁndings
go against the prevailing attitude that CNS tumours in NF1
regress or
require
intervention.22

indolent and hence do not

are

Whether the presence of an optic glioma in NF1 children is
in itself a marker of tumour susceptibility was not speciﬁcally
tested by this study. It would require for comparison a group
of NF1 patients who developed any other type of tumour and
who did not have evidence of an optic glioma. It has been sug-
gested that CNS tumours are speciﬁc to those NF1 cases with,
as opposed to without, optic glioma.5 In conjunction with our
ﬁnding of CNS tumours being speciﬁc to optic glioma cases
with, as opposed to without, NF1, it could be extrapolated that
a dual diagnosis of NF1 and optic glioma is the critical factor
for CNS tumour development.

One of the ﬁve NF1 children with a second CNS tumour was
a boy who later died from an axillary sarcoma at the age of 24.
He was found on postmortem examination to have an
incidental chiasmal glioma and a cerebellopontine angle
schwannoma. This latter tumour may have been related to
radiation exposure as its presence contrasts sharply with the
absence of other schwannomas on the NF1DB or
in
population studies of NF1.23 Our study found that three of the
ﬁve NF1 children receiving cranial
irradiation for a CNS
tumour developed further intracranial tumours: an optic
glioma, a posterior fossa tumour, or a combination of these.
They occurred as long as 17 years after treatment in the case
of recurrent glioma and 18 years after treatment in the case of
a second CNS tumour. Three of the six sporadics who were
initially irradiated developed a recurrent glioma, from a total
of only four sporadic ﬁrst recurrences (see table 3). Three of
ﬁve irradiated NF1 cases went on to develop another CNS
tumour, compared with only two of the remaining 12 not irra-
diated; this contrasts strongly with the fact that none of the
six irradiated sporadic cases developed second CNS tumours.
It may be that the presence of NF1 is necessary for second
tumour development in irradiated patients with optic glioma.
Taken in conjunction with the ﬁndings of Cappelli et al of a
much higher rate of cerebrovascular complications in irradi-
ated NF1 as opposed to sporadic optic glioma cases; this
underlines the need for caution over the use of radiotherapy in
these NF1 children.19

The only previous study to speciﬁcally compare these types
of optic glioma concluded that clinical differences existed

between the two groups which should “dictate separate
concerns in their follow up”.9 In particular, while precocious
puberty, the main presenting endocrine abnormality, was
exclusive to the NF1 group, symptoms of raised intracranial
pressure and nystagmus occurred only in sporadics. Although
in our study both cases presenting with nystagmus were spo-
radic, we found that almost equal numbers of children in the
two groups presented with symptoms of raised intracranial
pressure or endocrine abnormalities, and neither of the two
children with precocious puberty had NF1.

In conclusion, these data suggest that NF1 related optic
gliomas are less aggressive than their sporadic counterparts.
They are less often aggressively treated, but still less likely to
recur or shorten life expectancy. Nonetheless, they produce
the same constellation of symptoms and are still responsible,
from an early age, for much morbidity and mortality through
both visual
loss and in particular second CNS tumour
development. The implications for management are twofold.
Firstly, an aggressive management approach directed at
sporadic optic gliomas should be considered in line with
improvements in therapeutic efﬁcacy given the higher
mortality directly attributable to these tumours. Secondly, in
young children with NF1, we agree with the North American
consensus statement of 199717 that serial ophthalmological
examinations should be carried out in NF1 from an early age
if we wish to be able to detect and treat early optic gliomas. For
practical reasons the target age group could be limited to those
under 6 years old as most cases were diagnosed by this age in
our and previous studies.17 24 However, follow up of identiﬁed
cases with particular attention to second CNS tumour
development should be mandatory. This expectant manage-
ment strategy with recommendations for treatment is part of
an international study under the auspices of the International
Society for Paediatric Oncologists.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Authors’ affiliations
S Singhal, D G R Evans, Department of Medical Genetics, St Mary’s
Hospital, Manchester M13 0JH, UK
J M Birch, The Children’s Tumour Register, Royal Manchester Children’s
Hospital, Pendlebury, Manchester, UK
B Kerr, Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal Manchester Children’s
Hospital
L Lashford, Department of Paediatric Oncology, Christie Hospital,
Manchester M20 4BX, UK

REFERENCES

1 Lewis RA, Gerson LP, Axelson KA, etal. Von Recklinghausen

neurofibromatosis: II. Incidence of optic gliomata. Ophthalmology
1984;91:929–35.

2 Listernick R, Charrow J, Greenwald M, etal. Natural history of optic

pathway tumours in children with neurofibromatosis type 1: a
longitudinal study. JPediatr 1994;125:63–6.

3 Cnossen MH, de Goede-Bolder A, van den Broek KM, etal. A

prospective 10 year follow up study of patients with neurofibromatosis
type 1. ArchDisChild 1998;78:408–12.

4 Brzowski AE, Bazan C III, Mumma JV, etal. Spontaneous regression of

optic glioma in a patient with neurofibromatosis. Neurology
1992;42:679–81.

5 Friedman JM, Birch P. An association between optic glioma and other

tumours of the central nervous system in neurofibromatosis type 1.
Neuropediatrics 1997;28:131–2.

6 Evans G. Neurofibromatosis. CurrPaediatr 1992;2:83–5.
7 Flickinger JC, Torres C, Deutsch M. Management of low-grade gliomas

of the optic nerve and chiasm. Cancer 1988;61:635–42.

8 Lund AM, Skovby F. Optic gliomas in children with neurofibromatosis

type 1. EurJPaediatr 1991;150:835–8.

9 Listernick R, Darling C, Greenwald M, etal. Optic pathway tumors in
children: the effect of neurofibromatosis type 1 on clinical manifestations
and natural history. JPediatr 1995;127:718–22.

10 Listernick R, Charrow J. Neurofibromatosis type 1 in childhood. J

Pediatr 1990;116:845–53.

11 Pierce SM, Barnes PD, Loeffler JS, etal. Definitive radiation therapy in

the management of symptomatic patients with optic glioma: survival and
long-term effects. Cancer 1990;65:45–52.

12 Rush JA, Young BR, Campbell RJ, etal. Optic glioma: long-term

follow-up of 85 histopathologically verified cases. Ophthalmology
1982;89:1213–19.

www.archdischild.com

70

Singhal, Birch, Kerr, et al

13 Pascual-Castroviejo I, Martinez BA, Lopez MV, etal. Optic gliomas in

neurofibromatosis type 1: presentation of 31 cases. Neurologia
1994;9:173–7.

14 Huson SM, Harper PS, Compston DA. Von Recklinghausen

neurofibromatosis. A clinical and population study in south-east Wales.
Brain 1988;111:1355–81.

15 Menor F, Marti-Bonmati L, Arana E, etal. Neurofibromatosis type 1 in

children: MR imaging and follow-up studies of central nervous system
findings. EurJRadiol 1998;26:121–31.

16 Brown EW, Riccardi VM, Mawad M, etal. MR imaging of optic
pathways in patients with neurofibromatosis. AmJNeuroradiol
1987;8:1031–6.

17 Listernick R, Louis DN, Packer RJ, etal. Optic pathway gliomas in

children with neurofibromatosis 1: consensus statement from the NF1
Optic Pathway Glioma Task Force. AnnNeurol 1997;41:143–9.
18 McCullough DC, Epstein F. Optic pathway tumors. A review with

proposals for clinical staging. Cancer 1985;56:1789–91.

19 Cappelli C, Grill J, Raquin M, etal. Long-term follow up of 69 patients

treated for optic pathway tumours before the chemotherapy era. ArchDis
Child 1998;79:334–8.

20 McGaughran JM, Harris DI, Donnai D, etal. A clinical study of type 1

neurofibromatosis in north west England. JMedGenet
1999;36:197–203.

21 Sorensen SA, Mulvihill JJ, Nielsen A. Long-term follow-up of von

Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis. Survival and malignant neoplasms. N
EnglJMed 1986;314:1010–15.

22 Korf BR. Malignancy in neurofibromatosis type 1. Oncologist

2000;5:477–85.

23 Huson SM, Compston DAS, Harper PS. A genetic study of von

Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis in south east Wales: II. Guidelines for
genetic counselling. JMedGenet 1989;26:712–21.

24 De Bella K, Szudek J, Friedman JM. Use of the National Institutes of
Health Criteria for diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1 in children.
Pediatrics 2000;105:608–14.

ARCHIVIST ........................................................................................................

Feeding infants of diabetic mothers

In general, breast feeding protects against later obesity and diabetes. Infants of diabetic mothers have

an increased risk of later obesity and glucose intolerance. It might be thought, therefore, that breast
feeding might protect the infants of diabetic mothers from these later developments but the milk of
diabetic mothers contains more glucose, insulin, and energy than that of nondiabetic mothers, especially
in the early neonatal period, and could be harmful. A study in Berlin (Andreas Plagemann and colleagues.
Diabetes Care 2002;25:16–22) has suggested that early breastfeeding by diabetic mothers may have adverse
consequences.

Between 1980 and 1989 112 infants of diabetic mothers (83 type 1 diabetes, 29 gestational diabetes)
were followed up at a clinic in the then East Berlin. The mothers were encouraged to breastfeed and sup-
plements of banked donor breast milk were given when deemed necessary. Infants who took more of
their mother’s milk were more likely to be overweight at age 2 years (proportions overweight in ﬁrst, sec-
ond, and third centiles for weight of mother’s breast milk taken in the ﬁrst week were 5/37, 11/38. and
14/37). The weight of mother’s milk taken in the ﬁrst week correlated directly with relative body weight
at age 2 years whereas the weight of banked donor breast milk taken correlated inversely with relative
body weight at age 2 years. Similar associations were found between amounts of mother’s and donor milk
taken in the ﬁrst week and the 120 minute blood glucose concentration on oral glucose tolerance testing
at 2 years. The risk of impaired glucose tolerance at age 2 years was inversely related to the amount of
donor breast milk taken.

Breast feeding by diabetic mothers may increase the risks of later overweight and glucose intolerance
in their infants. (The authors of this article are careful to point out that in their opinion the advantages
of breastfeeding still outweigh the disadvantages even for diabetic mothers.)

www.archdischild.com

