R E V I E W S

 M O D E L S  O F  C A N C E R

Harnessing transposons for  
cancer gene discovery

Neal G. Copeland and Nancy A. Jenkins

Abstract | Recently, it has become possible to mobilize the Tc1/mariner transposon, Sleeping 
Beauty (SB), in mouse somatic cells at frequencies high enough to induce cancer. Tumours 
result from SB insertional mutagenesis of cancer genes, thus facilitating the identification of 
the genes and signalling pathways that drive tumour formation. A conditional SB 
transposition system has also been developed that makes it possible to limit where SB 
mutagenesis occurs, providing a means to selectively model many types of human cancer.  
SB mutagenesis has already identified a large collection of known cancer genes in addition 
to a plethora of new candidate cancer genes and potential drug targets.

The development of agents, such as monoclonal antibodies, 
small molecules, peptide memetics and antisense oligo­
nucleotides, which enable the specific modulation of 
aberrant signalling pathways and mutated genes that 
cause cancer, has sometimes had great success in the 
clinic without causing the deleterious side effects that are 
often associated with conventional cancer chemothera­
peutics1. This has spurred a worldwide effort to identify 
all of the genes and signalling pathways that cause cancer 
with the hope that this will lead to the identification of 
new drug targets that are amenable to molecular thera­
pies. Although still in their infancy, these efforts have 
already provided surprising results2. These efforts sug­
gest that the cancer genome is composed of hundreds 
of infrequently mutated genes in addition to a few com­
monly mutated genes. They also show that there is much 
heterogeneity in the genes that cause cancer, even in two 
cancers of the same type. Some researchers have argued, 
however, that many of these infrequently mutated genes 
are not true cancer­causing genes but are, instead, statis­
tical artefacts3–5. It will therefore be important to validate 
a role for each of these genes in cancer, a difficult task 
given the large number of infrequently mutated genes. 
One way of doing this is to sequence the entire genome 
of hundreds of tumours of each type of human cancer. 
This is the approach currently used by the International 
Cancer Genome Consortium (see Further information), 
which aims to study more than 25,000 cancer genomes, 
representing 50 different cancer types and/or subtypes 
at the genomic, epigenomic and transcriptomic levels. 
Another method is through comparative genomics; for 
example, by identifying whether these genes are also 
mutated in cancers that arise in mice.

Genomics and Genetics 
Division, Institute of 
Molecular and Cell Biology, 
Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research,  
61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, 
Singapore 138673.
Correspondence to N.A.J.  
e‑mail:  
njenkins@imcb.a‑star.edu.sg
doi:10.1038/nrc2916
Published online  
16 September 2010

Insertional mutagenesis
A valuable, high­throughput method for cancer gene 
discovery in the mouse has been retroviral insertional 
mutagenesis (RIM)6. Retroviruses can induce cancer as 
a result of their normal life cycle: the proviral DNA inte­
grates into the mouse genome and can deregulate the 
expression of an oncogene or inactivate the expression 
of a tumour suppressor gene. The retroviral integration 
sites in tumours thus mark the location of candidate can­
cer (CAN) genes. High­throughput methods have also 
been developed for PCR­amplifying and sequencing of 
retroviral integration sites from tumours. This technol­
ogy, and the availability of the mouse genome sequence, 
has made it possible to identify hundreds of CAN genes 
using RIM7.

There are, however, several limitations to the use of 
RIM. First, retroviruses preferentially target the 5′ end 
of expressed genes8,9, which limits the number of CAN 
genes accessible to RIM. Second, retroviruses also carry 
strong enhancers in their long terminal repeats (LTRs) 
and can deregulate the expression of oncogenes located 
hundreds of kilobases (kb) away10, which can greatly 
complicate the identification of CAN genes using RIM. 
Last, retroviruses induce haematopoietic and mammary 
tumours but little else. RIM is therefore not of great gen­
eral use for modelling most solid cancers, which are the 
most common cancers that affect humans.

Transposon­based insertional mutagenesis (TIM) 
provides an alternative high­throughput platform for 
cancer gene discovery. Transposable elements are dis­
crete DNA elements that have the unique ability to 
change their genomic position. Excluding transposable 
elements like retrotransposons, the vast majority of 

696 | OCTOBER 2010 | VOLUME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 20  Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

10

R E V I E W S

 At a glance
•	Transposon-based	insertional	mutagenesis	(TIM)	can	be	used	to	model	many	types	of	

cancer	in	mice	and	facilitates	the	rapid	identification	of	genes	that	cause cancer.

•	Comparison	of	the	genes	mutated	by	TIM	with	the	genes	mutated	in	human	cancer	
can	help	to	discriminate	between	those	that	are	driver	and	those	that	are	passenger	
mutations	in	human cancer.

•	TIM	can	identify	new	human	cancer	genes	that	have	so	far	been	missed	in	human	

cancer	genome	sequencing	studies,	that	are	difficult	to	identify	because	they		
are	epigenetically	regulated	and	that	are	located	in	large	amplified	or	
deleted regions.

•	TIM	induces	tumours	at	all	stages	of	tumour	progression,	sometimes	in	a	single	

animal.	By	identifying	the	genes	mutated	by	TIM	at	each	stage	of	progression	it	might	
be	possible	to	determine	the	order	in	which	the	mutations	were	acquired	and	
whether	they	are	involved	in	tumour	initiation,	progression	and	metastasis.

•	Mouse	cancer	models	induced	by	TIM	provide	a	plethora	of	new	models	for	studying	

the	biology	of	cancer	and	for	testing	new	cancer	therapeutics	before	they	go	into	
the clinic.

transposable elements use a ‘cut and paste’ mechanism 
for transposition, in which the transposable element­ 
encoded transposase catalyses the excision of the trans­
poson from its original location in the genome and 
then promotes its reintegration elsewhere. There are 
two types of transposons: autonomous transposons, 
which encode an active transposase and are thus capa­
ble of transposing on their own, and nonautonomous 
transposons, which lack a functional transposase but 
retain the cis­acting DNA sequences that are neces­
sary for transposition. Nonautonomous transposons 
are therefore active only when transposase is sup­
plied in trans, which in principle allows one to con­
trol the tissue in which TIM occurs by limiting where  
the transposase is expressed. Therefore, TIM can be 
used to selectively model many types of cancer, including 
solid cancers.

The awakening of Sleeping Beauty (SB)
Tc1/mariner transposons are the most widespread 
transposons found in nature11, suggesting that they 
might be less dependent on the host factors required 
for transposition than other transposable elements and 
could therefore potentially provide an alternative inser­
tional mutagen for cancer gene discovery in the mouse. 
Although a few active Tc1/mariner elements have been 
isolated from invertebrates11, no active Tc1/mariner ele­
ments have been isolated from vertebrate cells. This is 
probably because transposons can be detrimental to the 
host and are not subject to positive selection. Mutations 
in transposons thus accumulate in a time­proportional 
manner 12, limiting their use for genetic studies in 
vertebrates.

The best­characterized Tc1/mariner elements are 
those found in teleost fish. These transposable elements 
are classified into three major types: zebrafish, salmo­
noid and Xenopus laevis TXr13, of which the salmonoid 
subfamily is probably the youngest and the most recently 
active14. These elements are small, ranging from 1.3 kb 
to 2.4 kb in length, and encode a single transposase gene 
that is flanked by inverted terminal repeats (FIG. 1a). Each 
inverted terminal repeat contains two imperfect direct 

repeats, which are the binding sites for the transposase15. 
Tc1/mariner elements have little overt target site prefer­
ence — with the exception that they always integrate into 
a TA dinucleotide (FIG. 1b).

In a landmark paper, Ivics and colleagues16 compared 
the sequences of 12 partial salmonoid­type transposable 
element sequences from 8 different fish species, and used 
the accumulated phylogenetic data to predict the con­
sensus sequence of an active transposase. Genetic engi­
neering was then used to construct a synthetic active 
transposase. This transposase, designated SB10, could 
bind to inverted terminal repeats of salmonoid trans­
posons when supplied in trans in a substrate­specific 
manner, and could mediate its precise cut and paste 
transposition in cells from all the major vertebrate 
classes17. This transposition system, which was ‘awak­
ened’ from 10 million years of evolutionary sleep14, was 
aptly named Sleeping Beauty (SB)16.

SB can transpose in mouse somatic18, embryonic stem 
(ES)19 and germ cells20–23, although the transposition fre­
quency varies greatly among these cell types. In ES cells, 
the frequency of SB excision, a measure of SB transposi­
tion, is 3.5 x 10–5 excisions per cell per generation, and 
the frequency of SB transposition in mouse spermatids 
is orders of magnitude higher (0.2 to 2.0 transposition 
events per spermatid). One explanation for these dif­
ferences is the differential expression of the host factors 
required for transposition, such as the DNA­bending, 
high­mobility group B1 (HMGB1) protein. In mouse cells 
deficient in HMGB1, SB transposition has been shown to 
be severely reduced compared with that in mouse cells 
that overexpress HMGB1, in which SB transposition is 
increased24. HMGB1 stimulates the preferential binding 
of the transposase to the direct repeat furthest from the 
cleavage site at the end of the transposon and promotes 
bending of DNA fragments containing the transposon 
inverted terminal repeat24 (FIG. 1c). This is thought to 
help ensure that transposase–transposon complexes are 
first formed at the internal direct repeats, which sub­
sequently promote the juxtaposition of functional sites 
in transposon DNA, thereby assisting the formation of 
synaptic complexes that are required for transposon exci­
sion. Another host factor that has been shown to affect 
SB transposition is the MYC­interacting protein zinc fin­
ger 1 (MIZ1). MIZ1 downregulates cyclin D1 expression 
through its interaction with the transposase, resulting 
in a prolonged G1 phase of the cell cycle and retarded 
growth of transposase­expressing cells25. This tempo­
rary G1 arrest enhances SB transposition at a phase in 
the cell cycle in which the non­homologous end joining 
(NHEJ) pathway of DNA repair is preferentially active. 
This is the major cellular pathway that repairs the free 
3′ overhangs that remain after SB excision26,27 (FIG. 1b). 
This transposase­induced G1 slowdown is thought to be 
a transposon function that has evolved to maximize the 
chance for a successful transposition event25.

Another factor that affects the frequency of SB trans­
position is methylation of the transposon. Increased 
DNA methylation has been shown to cause the trans­
poson to adopt a heterochromatic confirmation, which 
has a greatly increased affinity for transposase28,29. 

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 

 VOLUME 10 | OCTOBER 2010 | 697

© 20  Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

10

R E V I E W S

This has been shown to lead to an 11­fold to 100­fold 
increase in the frequency of SB transposition compared 
with the transcriptionally active euchromatic transpo­
son DNA found in ES cells. Contrary to this, SB trans­
posons often undergo post­integrative silencing owing 
to increased DNA methylation and histone deacetylation 
once they have been incorporated into the germ line, 

which is not observed in ES cells30–32. This is thought to be 
part of a host survival pathway that targets invading trans­
posons for transcriptional silencing33,34. These two seem­
ingly contradictory results are difficult to reconcile. One 
possibility is that the increased affinity of the transposase 
for heterochromatic DNA is an attempt to overcome 
the silencing effects of the host survival pathway.

TA

TA

TA
AT

CAG
GTC

CTG
GAC

TA
AT

Excision

CAG

TA
AT

GTC

CTG

TA
AT

GAC

NN
NN

TA
AT

NN
NN

Integration

NN
NN

AT

GTC

CTG

TA

NN
NN

NN
NN

TA
AT

CTG
CAG
GTC
GAC
Reintegrated transposon

TA
AT

NN
NN

CAG

TA
AT

TA
AT

GAC

NHEJ

TA
AT

TA
AT

CAG TA
AT
GTC
or
CTG TA
AT
GAC

Transposon footprint

a

b

c

DR

HDR

DR

DR

DR

HMGB1

Tnpase

Nature Reviews | Cancer

Figure 1 | SB structure and mechanism of transposition. a | The Sleeping Beauty (SB) 
inverted terminal repeats (light blue arrows) each contain two direct repeats (DRs) (light 
and dark blue triangles) that are the binding sites for the transposase. The genomic TA 
dinucleotide that is duplicated during integration and flanks the transposon is shown in 
red. b | Cut and paste mechanism of SB transposition. The transposase (blue triangles) 
initiates transposition by cleaving both ends of the transposon to generate 3 base pair (bp) 
5′ overhangs (purple) and also cleaves a genomic TA dinucleotide at the integration site 
(yellow) to create a gap with a 3′ TA overhang at both ends. The host non-homologous end 
joining (NHEJ) DNA repair machinery then repairs the single-stranded gaps at the 
integration site and the double-strand breaks in the donor DNA. A small 5 bp footprint 
(one TA and 3 bps from the end of the transposon) remains at the excision site. c | Proposed 
model for the role of DNA-bending, high-mobility group B1 (HMGB1) in SB synaptic 
complex formation. SB transposase (blue circle) recruits HMGB1 (purple cross) to the 
transposon DRs furthest from the transposon ends. HMGB1 stimulates binding of the 
transposase to the inner DRs. Once in contact with DNA, HMGB1 bends the spacer region 
between the DRs, thereby helping to correctly position the outer DRs for binding by the 
transposase. Cleavage occurs only if complex formation is complete. The complex 
includes four transposase binding sites (red, pointed squares), the HMGB1 direct repeat 
(HDR) enhancer sequence (dark blue circle) and four transposase subunits. Figure is 
reproduced, with permission, from REF. 24 © (2003) Oxford University Press.

SB insertion site preference
Sequence analysis of SB integration sites from somatic 
and germ cells showed that they are AT­rich; with the 
sequence ANNTANNT favoured over other TA dinucleo­
tides35–37. Moreover, target site sequences tend to have a 
bendable structure and a palindromic pattern of poten­
tial hydrogen­bonding sites in the major groove of DNA. 
These features are conserved in the Tc1/mariner family 
of transposons and could be preferred either because 
they favour the formation and stability of the integration 
complex or because they promote SB­mediated cleavage 
through the distortion and twisting of the target DNA. 
These results confirm earlier suggestions that SB trans­
posons do not integrate randomly on a micro­scale, even 
though, at the genome level, integration, with respect to 
genes and intergenic regions, is fairly random36,38,39.

Although random genomic insertion of SB is observed 
when transposition takes place from transfected plas­
mids, SB demonstrates a strong propensity for local hop­
ping when transposition takes place from a chromosomal 
site19,21,22. Local hopping refers to a process in which the 
transposon, once excised from the genome, preferentially 
reintegrates near its original location. In germline muta­
genesis screens, 50–80% of SB transposons reinsert within 
~6 megabases (Mb) either side of the donor locus36,38,39. 
This local hopping interval is much larger than that for 
other transposons, such as P elements, for which the local 
hopping interval is ~100 kb40. Outside the local hopping 
interval, SB insertions are distributed across the genome 
and no chromosome is favoured.

SB transposition induces cancer in mice
Because of the low transposition frequency of SB in 
somatic cells and the requirement for multiple coop­
erating mutations to produce cancer 41, it was clear 
early on that several modifications would need to be 
made to the SB transposition system before it could be 
used to induce cancer in mice. The first modification 
was the development of a new mutagenic transposon,  
T2/Onc2, which could deregulate the expression of a 
proto­oncogene or inactivate the expression of a tumour 
suppressor gene42 (FIG. 2). In addition, T2/Onc2 was also 
reduced in size to ~2.0 kb, its optimal size for transposi­
tion43. T2/Onc2 has optimized transposase binding sites 
that increase SB transposition compared with other SB 
transposons that have been used previously44. T2/Onc2 
was introduced into the mouse germ line by microin­
jection, and three transgenic lines carrying high copy 
numbers of the transposon linked together at a single 
site in the genome were selected for further experi­
ments (FIG. 3). Transgenic lines with high copy num­
bers of T2/Onc2 were selected because SB is a cut and 
paste transposon and not a copy and paste transposon, 

698 | OCTOBER 2010 | VOLUME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 20  Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

10

R E V I E W S

and there is only a 40% to 50% probability that an 
excised transposon will reintegrate into the genome30,45. 
Therefore, once transposition is initiated the number 
of transposons integrated in the genome will decrease 
over time. In order to insertionally mutate enough 
cooperating cancer genes to induce cancer before 
all transposons disappear from the genome, a large 
starting number of transposons would theoretically 
be needed.

To mobilize T2/Onc2 in all somatic cells, a geneti­
cally enhanced transposase, SB11 (REF. 43), was knocked 
in to the mouse Rosa26 locus (Rosa26–SB11)42 (FIG. 4). 
Genes targeted to Rosa26 are widely expressed during 
development and in adult tissues46,47, but are not subject 
to the epigenetic silencing that often occurs with con­
ventional transgenes. Hopefully, therefore, this would 
drive SB11 expression in all somatic cells beginning 
early in development and in adult tissues.

When Rosa26–SB11 mice were crossed to high copy 
T2/Onc2 transgenic mice, half to three­quarters of the 
double transgenic embryos died from developmental 
defects at embryonic day 10–16 (REF. 42). One possible 
cause for these developmental defects is double­strand 
DNA breaks resulting from SB excision that are left 
unrepaired because the NHEJ repair pathway is over­
whelmed by the massive mobilization of so many SB 
transposons. Genomic rearrangements located near 
the site of the transposon concatamer have also been 
reported following mobilization of SB transposons from 
concatamers48 and this could also account for some of 
these developmental defects, although the rearrange­
ments reported to date have all been shown to induce 
recessive phenotypes.

a

Oncogene

SA MSCV SD pA
pA

En2-SA

Promoter

Exon 1

Exon 2

Promoter

Exon 1

SA MSCV SD pA
pA

En2-SA

Exon 2

Exon 3

b

Tumour suppressor gene

Promoter

Exon 1

Exon 2

STOP
SA MSCV SD pA
pA

En2-SA

Exon 3

Promoter

Exon 1

Exon 2

En2-SA

STOP
pA
pA

SAMSCVSD

Exon 3

Nature Reviews | Cancer
Figure 2 | T2/Onc2 can deregulate the expression of oncogenes or inactivate 
expression of tumour suppressor genes. a | T2/Onc2 contains a murine stem cell virus 
(MSCV) 5′ long terminal repeat (LTR) derived from the MSCVneo vector (Clontech) and a 
splice donor (SD) site derived from exon 1 of the mouse Foxf2 gene50. T2/Onc2 can thus 
promote the expression of an oncogene when integrated upstream of or within the gene 
in the same transcriptional orientation. T2/Onc2 is flanked by optimized SB transposase 
binding sites (light and dark blue triangles) that are located within the transposon 
inverted terminal repeats (light blue arrows), which increase the frequency of SB 
transposition44. b | T2/Onc2 also contains two splice acceptors and a bi-directional polyA 
(pA) and can thus prematurely terminate transcription of a tumour suppressor gene 
when integrated within the tumour supressor gene in either orientation. One splice 
acceptor is derived from exon 2 of mouse engrailed 2 (En2-SA) and the other from the 
carp b-actin gene (SA)50.

The double transgenic mice that made it to birth 
were monitored for tumour development and began to 
show signs of illness by 7 weeks of age42. By 17 weeks, 
all of these mice had died from cancer. Haematopoietic 
tumours largely of T cell origin predominated, but some 
solid tumours, including medulloblastoma, pituitary and 
intestinal neoplasia, were also detected at low frequen­
cies. Southern blot analysis of tumour DNA showed mul­
tiple clonal and subclonal SB integrations, which were 
consistent with an insertional mutagenesis mechanism 
of tumour induction.

To confirm that the tumours were induced by 
insertional mutagenesis, the transposon­mouse DNA 
junction fragments from 16 tumours (primarily T cell 
lymphomas) were amplified by PCR and sequenced 
(FIG. 5). In total, 781 unique SB insertion sites were 
sequenced from these 16 tumours (49 insertions per 
tumour). Several factors account for the amplification 
of so many unique insertions from a small number of 
tumours. First, tumour cells contain multiple clonal 
and subclonal disease­causing insertions (driver 
mutations), which mark the location of cooperating 
cancer­causing genes. Clonal insertions are thought 
to be involved in tumour initiation and subclonal 
insertions in tumour progression. Second, tumour 
cells contain multiple non­disease­causing insertions 
(passenger mutations). Last, tumours contain con­
taminating normal cells that also harbour different 
SB insertion patterns.

Genomic regions in tumour cells that contained a 
higher frequency of SB insertions than predicted by 
chance were then identified by statistical means (BOX 1) 
and CAN genes in these regions were noted as com­
mon insertion sites (CIS). Unlike retroviruses, there 
is little evidence to indicate that T2/Onc2 contains 
strong enhancer activity even though T2/Onc2 con­
tains a murine stem cell virus (MSCV) LTR. Therefore, 
SB insertions located in or near oncogenes are almost 
always oriented in the same transcriptional orienta­
tion as the oncogene, near the 5′ end or in an intron, 
whereas insertions located in tumour suppressor genes 
show little directional bias and are scattered throughout 
the coding region (FIG. 2b). It is therefore much easier to 
identify CAN genes that are mutated by SB as opposed 
to retroviruses, and the pattern of SB insertions at 
each locus can provide a strong predictor of whether 
a CAN gene functions as an oncogene or a tumour 
suppressor gene.

Among the 20 CAN genes identified in these 16 
tumours, 7 are validated human cancer genes and 
another 7 are mutated by retroviral insertional mutagen­
esis in mouse leukaemias42. This demonstrated for the 
first time the power of SB mutagenesis for cancer gene 
discovery. Another six CAN genes were not implicated 
in human cancer. These are the most interesting, as they 
are the genes that represent potential new therapeutic 
targets. Of the ten T cell leukaemias analysed, six (60%) 
contained insertions in intron 27 of Notch1. All inser­
tions were oriented in the same transcriptional direction 
as Notch1 and resulted in the expression of a truncated 
Notch1 transcript containing the MSCV promoter and 

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 

 VOLUME 10 | OCTOBER 2010 | 699

© 20  Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

10

R E V I E W S

SA MSCV SD pA
pA

En2-SA

Transposon
excision

SA MSCV SD pA
pA

En2-SA

SA MSCV SD pA
pA

En2-SA

SA MSCV SD pA
pA

En2-SA

SA MSCV SD pA
pA

En2-SA

n

TA

SA MSCV SD

pA
pA

En2-SA

TA

Transposon
integration

TA

Figure 3 | High copy T2/Onc2 transgenic lines. T2/Onc2-containing plasmid DNA was linearized by cleavage with 
Nature Reviews | Cancer
ScaI, which cuts only within the plasmid sequences (dashed line)42, and microinjected into (B6C3) F2 hybrid embryos using 
standard techniques. Three high copy T2/Onc2 transgenic founder mice (with 148, 214 and 358 copies) were subsequently 
identified and transgenic lines established. The T2/Onc2 transposon concatamers within each transgenic line were 
transmitted at normal Mendelian frequencies, mapped to different mouse chromosomes, and had no heterozygous 
phenotypes42. Mobilization of an individual transposon from the concatamer leaves behind flanking plasmid sequences, 
which are then joined to create a concatamer of n-1. The excised transposon is then free to reintegrate at a TA 
dinucleotide elsewhere in the genome, either near the concatamer (local hopping) or on a different chromosome. Mouse 
genomic DNA is highlighted in yellow. MSCV, murine stem cell virus; pA, polyA; SD, splice donor.

the 3′ end of Notch1. This was remarkable as NOTCH1 is 
also mutated in ~60% of human T cell acute leukaemias 
(T­ALL). The fusion transcript induced by the SB inser­
tions also mimicked that seen in patients with T­ALL 
with t(7;9), in which the translocation drives the over­
expression of an activated NOTCH1 carboxy­terminal 
protein fragment49.

There were also several instances in which two or 
more mouse CAN genes were mutated in the same 
tumour, suggesting that they cooperate to induce 
cancer. In addition, there were many genes that were 
mutated in a single tumour only and thus did not meet 
the statistical criteria for inclusion on the CAN gene 
list. However, pathway analysis showed that many of 
these genes function in a limited number of signalling 
pathways (such as receptor recycling, cellular transport, 
tumour necrosis factor (TNF), Ras, Jak–signal trans­
ducer and activator of transcription (STAT), Ets tran­
scription factor and Wnt), suggesting that some might 
also be disease causing. By analogy, human tumours  
are also known to contain a large number of infrequently 
mutated genes that function in a restricted number of 
signalling pathways2.

SB mutagenesis identifies ARF cooperating genes
Collier and colleagues50 showed that SB mutagenesis can 
also accelerate the formation of soft tissue sarcomas in 
Arf­deficient mice. In these studies, Arf­deficient mice 
carrying an SB10 transposase transgene under the con­
trol of the ubiquitous CAGGS promoter (CAGGS–SB10) 
were crossed with Arf­deficient mice carrying a low 
copy T2/Onc2 transposon concatamer (~25 copies). 
Although mobilization of T2/Onc2 by CAGGS–SB10 
was too low to induce tumours in wild­type mice,  
it was sufficient to accelerate the formation of sarco­
mas in Arf­deficient mice. The most frequently mutated 
gene was Braf, which was mutated in 22 of 28 tumours. 
All SB insertions were located in intron 9 and were ori­
ented in the same transcriptional direction as Braf. The 
truncated BRAF produced by these insertions contained 

the kinase domain but lacked the amino­terminal 
negative  regulatory  elements  of  wild­type  BRAF, 
and was capable of morphological transformation of  
NIH 3T3 cells. Activating BRAF point mutations have 
also been identified in 9% of human sarcoma cell lines and  
0.5–5% of primary human sarcomas51,52, confirming 
that SB mutagenesis can be used to identify cancer genes 
in solid tumours.

CAGGS–SB10 also failed to induce tumours when 
crossed to high copy T2/Onc2 transposon transgenic 
mice53. Epigenetic silencing of the CAGGS–SB10 trans­
gene53, which was not observed in Rosa26–SB11 mice53, 
probably caused this. This shows the value of the 
knock­in approach used by Dupuy and colleagues for 
expressing the transposase. Interestingly, Rosa26–SB11 
could induce tumours when crossed with low copy  
T2/Onc2 transgenic mice, although the median latency 
of tumours was 6–7 months compared with 68 days for 
high copy T2/Onc2 transgenic lines53. Tumours were 
primarily haematopoietic, although histological exam­
ination revealed focal areas of epithelial hyperplasia in 
the anterior and dorsolateral prostate in some mice54, 
as well as astrocytomas in the brains of other mice53. 
Sequence analysis of the SB insertion sites in prostate 
lesions identified several prostate CAN genes, includ­
ing phosphodiesterase 4D, cAMP­specific (Pde4d)54. 
PDE4D is overexpressed in human prostate cancer and 
shows changes in its isoform expression. Knock down 
of PDE4D also reduces the growth and proliferation 
rate of prostate cancer xenografts in vivo54, demon­
strating that SB mutagenesis can also identify genes 
involved in the control of prostate cancer cell growth. 
Analysis of the SB insertion sites present in the astro­
cytomas revealed a high frequency of colony stimulat­
ing factor 1 receptor (Csf1r) insertions, clustered in 
introns 5 and 8, which resulted in increased levels of 
Csf1r mRNA and protein53. CSF1 and CSF1R are also 
overexpressed in high­grade human astrocytomas, 
suggesting a causal link between increased CSR1R 
expression and astrocytoma formation.

700 | OCTOBER 2010 | VOLUME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 20  Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

10

Rosa26–SB11

Rosa26

Ex1

En2-SA

SB11

pA

Ex2

Rosa26–lsl–SB11

Rosa26

Ex1

En2-SA

Stop

SB11

pA

Ex2

Rosa26–LoxP–SB11

Rosa26

Ex1

En2-SA

SB11

pA

Ex2

Figure 4 | Two Rosa26 SB transposase knock-in alleles. 
A genetically enhanced Sleeping Beauty (SB) transposase 
Nature Reviews | Cancer
(SB11) expression cassette consisting of an En2 splice 
acceptor (En2-SA), SB11 complimentary DNA and an SV40 
polyA (pA) signal, was knocked in to intron 1 of the mouse 
Rosa26 locus to generate the Rosa26–SB11 allele. In a 
second round of targeting, a transcriptional stop cassette 
flanked by loxP sites (black triangles), containing two SV40 
pA sites and one bovine growth hormone pA site inserted 
downstream of the green fluorescent protein cDNA 
(Clontech), was inserted between the En2-SA and SB11 to 
generate the conditional Rosa26–lsl–SB11 allele. Cre 
recombinase can be used to remove the transcriptional stop 
cassette to generate the Rosa26–LoxP–SB11 allele and 
activate transposase expression.

T2/Onc3 induces epithelial tumours 
Although several factors could explain the haemato­
poietic tumour bias observed in Rosa26–SB11;T2/
Onc2 mice, one obvious potential contributing fac­
tor is the choice of the MSVC promoter included in  
T2/Onc2 to drive oncogene overexpression42 (FIG. 2). This 
promoter is derived from a cloned Moloney murine leu­
kaemia virus55 and is therefore likely to drive oncogene 
expression in haematopoietic cells at a higher rate than 
in other cell types. To investigate this possibility, a new 
transposon, T2/Onc3, was created, which is identical to 
T2/Onc2, except that the MSCV LTR is replaced with 
a CAGGS promoter56. CAGGS contains the cytomega­
lovirus immediate early enhancer fused to a chicken 
β­actin minimal promoter and is expressed strongly in 
various cell types, including epithelial cells57,58. T2/Onc3 
was introduced into the mouse germ line by microinjec­
tion and mobilized by breeding to Roas26–SB11 mice. 
As the mice aged they developed tumours; however, the 
average age of death of these mice was 55 weeks com­
pared with 68 days for Rosa26–SB11;T2/Onc2 mice56. 
Most tumours were epithelial in origin and each ani­
mal had on average three independent types of cancer 
at the time of euthanasia. Squamous cell carcinomas  
of the skin and hepatocellular carcinomas of the liver 
were the most predominant classes of tumours; how­
ever, many other cancers were observed at lower fre­
quencies, including cancers of the colon, lung, brain, 
breast, nasal cavity and ovary, as well as the salivary, 
preputial, parathyroid and adrenal glands. These results 
show that the nature of the promoter included in the 
transposon matters and suggest that it will be important 
to tailor the structure of the transposon to the type of 
cancer being modelled.

R E V I E W S

A conditional SB transposition system
In order to better control the types of tumours induced 
by SB, a conditional SB transposition system was 
developed by introducing a floxed transcriptional stop 
cassette (lox–stop–lox; lsl) into the 5′ end of SB11, 
which itself had been knocked in to the Rosa26 locus 
(Rosa26–lsl–SB11)56,59,60 (FIG. 4). When the stop cassette 
is present the transposase is not expressed but can be 
reactivated by breeding Rosa26–lsl–SB11 mice with mice 
carrying a tissue­specific Cre transgene. Cre will recom­
bine out the stop cassette to produce Rosa26–LoxP–SB11 
mice and allow the transposase to be expressed (FIG. 4). 
This makes it possible to restrict transposase expression 
to virtually any target tissue and eliminate the embryonic 
lethality caused by ubiquitous transposase expression. 
One can also incorporate a sensitizing mutation into the 
cross, such as activated Kras or mutant Trp53 allele, in 
order to drive the formation of certain types of tumours 
or accelerate the formation of tumours naturally induced 
by SB (FIG. 6).

Colorectal cancer. To evaluate the potential of this con­
ditional transposition system for selectively modelling 
cancer, Rosa26–lsl–SB11;T2/Onc2 mice were bred with 
Villin–Cre mice to activate SB transposition in the epi­
thelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract60. As expected, 
Rosa26–lsl–SB11;T2/Onc2;Villin–Cre mice did not 
develop haematopoietic tumours, as transposition was 
not triggered in the haematopoietic compartment. 
Instead, the mice developed intraepithelial neoplasias, 
adenomas and a low frequency of adenocarcinomas 
in the gastrointestinal tract late in life (>300 days). 
Analysis of 16,690 PCR­amplified, sequenced and 
mapped nonredundant insertions from 135 gastrointes­
tinal tract tumours identified 77 mouse gastrointestinal  
tract CAN genes60 (BOX 1). There are 38 genes with 
human homologues in the catalogue of somatic muta­
tions in human cancer (COSMIC) database (see Further 
information), of which 18 (47%) have documented non­
silent mutations in human cancer, which is significantly 
higher than expected by chance (p< 0.05). If the data 
comparison is limited to COSMIC genes mutated in 
human colorectal cancer (CRC), the overlap is more 
significant (p< 0.001).

By eliminating genes that were not mutated, ampli­
fied, deleted or misregulated in human CRC, the list 
of mouse CAN genes could be narrowed to 15 genes, 
which are the most likely to be driver genes in human 
CRC60. The most frequent gene was Apc (61 insertions). 
APC is a member of the Wnt signalling pathway and 
is the most commonly mutated gene in human CRC 
(70% to 80% of human CRCs have APC mutations)61. 
Three other genes on the list, Bmpr1a, Smad4 and 
Pten, are mutated in juvenile polyposis syndrome, 
juvenile intestinal polyposis and Cowden disease, 
and another gene, Fbxw7, is a component of the SCF 
ubiquitin ligase complex that is mutated in 11.5% of 
human CRC62. Therefore, 5 of the 15 genes identified 
are validated human CRC genes and together represent 
some of the most commonly mutated genes identified 
in human CRC.

 VOLUME 10 | OCTOBER 2010 | 701

© 20  Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

10

Preputial
Exocrine glands that produce 
pheromones found in front of 
the genitals in some mammals.

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 

R E V I E W S

Ingenuity pathway analysis
A curated database and 
analysis system used to explain 
how proteins work together to 
cause cellular changes.

Hepatocellular carcinoma. Rosa26–lsl–SB11;T2/Onc2 
mice were mated with albumin–Cre transgenic mice to 
activate SB transposition in the liver59. A conditional 
dominant­negative Trp53 transgene (p53–lsl–R270H)63 
was also included as a sensitizing mutation as Trp53 
mutations are common in human hepatocellular carci­
noma (HCC)64,65. Characterization of 67 preneoplastic 
liver nodules isolated from 6 mice identified 19 HCC 
CAN genes comprising homologues of genes already 
implicated in tumour formation and apoptosis, such 
as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), hypoxia 
induced factor 1α (HIF1A), MAP2K4, MET, PAK4, 
VRK2, TRPM7 and TAOK3.

Egfr was the most frequently mutated gene (58 of 67 
nodules). All Egfr insertions were located in intron 24 
where they promoted the expression of a truncated 
EGFR protein containing the kinase domain but lacking 
the C­terminal domain. C­terminal deletions in human 
EGFR increase its autokinase activity and transform­
ing ability, and have tumorigenic properties66–68. EGFR 

BfaI

BfaI

NlaIII

NlaIII

TA

SA MSCV

SD

pA
pA

En2-SA

TA

•  Digest
•  Ligate adaptors 
•  PCR

Nested PCR using
barcoded primers

E

TA

TA

TA

TA

TA

TA

Mix barcoded PCR products
from up to 200 tumours and
sequence using 454 platform

Nature Reviews | Cancer

Figure 5 | Barcoded splinkerette PCR amplification and deep sequencing. 
A modified splinkerette PCR method using barcoded primers was used to amplify the 
Sleeping Beauty (SB) transposon insertions from mouse tumours so that they could be 
directly sequenced using a GS FLX Genome Sequencer59,60. Briefly, tumour DNA was 
digested with BfaI or NlaIII to generate left or right transposon-mouse DNA junction 
fragments, respectively. NlaIII cleaves the transposon within the En2-SA sequences and 
BfaI cleaves within the transposon sequences located between the inverted terminal 
repeats and the carp b-actin SA (red rectangle). Double-stranded splinkerettes (blue 
rectangle) containing a C3 spacer blocking group (yellow circle) at the 3′ end of the 
splinkerette, which helps to prevent mispriming101, were then ligated onto the ends of 
each fragment and the transposon-mouse junction fragments PCR amplified using 
primers complimentary to transposon sequences (blue pointed rectangle) and the 
splinkerette (red pointed rectangle). The resulting PCR products were then used as a 
template in a nested PCR, in which the primers incorporated the A/B tags at their 5′ ends 
(brown and orange rectangles) that are used for sample processing on the FLX Genome 
Sequencer. Additionally, a 10 base pair (bp) barcode (red and dark blue rectangles)102 was 
added so that it would be sequenced just before the transposon tag. This makes it possible 
to amplify transposon junction from up to 200 different SB-induced tumours, pool the 
resulting products and then sequence all the PCR products on a single run. Each sequence 
is then assigned to the tumour it came from using the barcode. SD, splice donor.

is also overexpressed in 15–40% of human HCCs, and 
EGF signalling is activated in ~50% of human HCCs69,70. 
Finally, truncated EGFR was linked to fumaryl acetoace­
tate hydrolase (Fah), which allows selective repopulation 
of the livers of FAH­deficient mice, and shown to induce 
hyperplastic nodules in the livers of FAH­deficient mice, 
which were visible by 43 days after injection59. So far, 
however, the type of activating somatic mutations found 
in the tyrosine kinase domain of EGFR in human non­
small­cell lung cancer71 have not been reported for EGFR 
in human HCC.

Moreover, the human orthologues of four mouse 
HCC CAN genes also showed increases in copy number 
in human HCC, including EGFR, SLC25A13, MET and 
UBE2H59. Overexpression of MET in human HCC is well 
characterized72 and mice carrying mutations in Met are 
also prone to liver tumours73. The human orthologues 
of four mouse HCC CAN genes showed decreases in 
copy number in human HCC, including MARCH1, 
PSD3, MAP2K4 and NFIB73. MAP2K4 is a putative 
tumour suppressor gene in tumours of the breast, 
prostate and pancreas, and may thus have a similar 
function in the liver74–76.

Ingenuity pathway analysis identified two pathways 
that were over­represented among the 19 mouse HCC 
CAN genes. One network includes the NFIB and HIF1A 
transcription factors, which transduce EGFR­initiated 
phosphorylation signalling cascades. The second net­
work comprises genes that interact with TNF. TNF can 
induce tyrosine phosphorylation and internalization 
of EGFR, and activate NF­κB, which in turn regulates 
apoptosis during liver tumorigenesis77. These results 
provide additional evidence for a role for Egfr signalling 
in HCC.

HCC is commonly found in people who have con­
tributing factors for HCC, such as cirrhosis of the liver 
or who are chronically infected with the hepatitis B or 
C virus78–81. These agents induce chronic inflamma­
tion and associated reactive hyperplasia in the liver, 
which is thought to be important for HCC develop­
ment. In the future, SB­induced HCC should be exam­
ined in mice that are sensitized by one or more of these 
contributing factors.

The range of genes mutated by SB varies among different  
cancer types. The range of genes mutated by SB varies 
widely in different types of mouse cancer42,50,53,54,59,60, 
similar to that observed in human cancer2. Therefore, 
it will probably be necessary to examine all the dif­
ferent cancers that affect humans in order to obtain a 
complete picture of the genes and signalling pathways 
that cause cancer. This will be a massive undertaking 
as by some estimates there are more than 200 types 
of cancer affecting more than 60 different organs in 
our body (see the CancerHelp UK website; Further 
information).

Most mutations are located in oncogenes. Nearly 90% of 
transposon­based mutations seem to represent gain­of­
function mutations in oncogenes, although there is still 
an appreciable number (~10%) that seem to represent 

702 | OCTOBER 2010 | VOLUME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 20  Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

10

Kernel function
A weighting function used in 
nonparametric function 
estimation. It gives the weights 
of the nearby data points in 
making an estimate.

Bonferroni correction
A method used to address the 
problem of multiple 
comparisons.

loss­of­function mutations in tumour suppressor genes 
(N.G.C. and N.A.J., unpublished observations). Some 
are well­known tumour suppressor genes such as Apc, 
Pten and Nf1, but others seem to represent new tumour 
suppressor genes. In most instances, only one allele is 
mutated, although there are some genes such as Ikzf1 in 
which both alleles are often mutated (N.G.C. and N.A.J., 
unpublished observations). It remains to be determined 
whether these tumour suppressor genes are function­
ing as haploinsufficient genes or whether the second 
allele is inactivated by some other genetic event, such as  
spontaneous mutation or epigenetic silencing.

Local hopping in cancer cells
SB is not locked in place after transposition and can 
continuously transpose to new sites. This can effectively 
reduce the amount of local hopping observed in cancer 
cells as by the time a tumour is formed each SB trans­
poson will have undergone multiple rounds of transpo­
sition and many transposons will have been lost from 
the genome. The reduction in local hopping provides an 
increased chance that SB will mutate a cancer gene locus 
outside the local hopping interval during the course of 
tumour progression. In germline mutagenesis screens, 
the frequency of local hopping varies between 50% and 
80%36,38,39, whereas in sarcomas and gastrointestinal tract 
tumours it is 23% and 45%, respectively50,60. The lowest 

 Box 1 | Identification of CAN genes
Two	statistical	methods	have	been	developed	for	identifying	genomic	regions	in	cancer	
cells	that	contain	a	higher	number	of	Sleeping	Beauty	(SB)	insertions	than	predicted	by	
random	chance	(common	insertion	sites;	CIS)	and	are	therefore	likely	to	contain	
candidate	cancer	(CAN)	genes.	The	first	uses	Monte	Carlo	simulations	to	count	the	
expected	number	of	CIS	of	any	given	size	in	a	specified	window,	taking	into	account	
the	exact	distribution	of	TA	dinucleotides	across	the	genome,	unfinished	regions	that	
are	represented	by	long	tracts	of	Ns	and	the	number	of	insertions	mapped	in	the	
study53,59,60.	Once	the	total	count	of	insertions	is	randomly	distributed	among	the	real	
TA	sites	across	the	genome,	a	summary	of	the	number	of	CIS	of	size	>3,	>4…	>n	is	
recorded	within	windows	of	different	sizes	(that	is,	10 kilobases	(kb),	30	kb,	60	kb	and	
100	kb).	This	process	is	then	repeated	hundreds	of	times	and	the	average	counts	of	
those	reiterations	computed.	The	values	obtained	can	be	interpreted	as	expected	
values	(E-values)	as	they	indicate	the	number	of	CIS	of	a	given	size	that	would	be	
expected	in	a	window	of	a	given	size	by	random	chance.	E-value	thresholds	of	E<1	are	
typically	used,	which	means	that	on	average	one	CIS	or	fewer	will	have	occurred	by	
random	chance.	Small	window	sizes	bias	against	discovering	large	genes	that	have	
disruptive	insertions	evenly	spaced	throughout	the	gene,	and	large	window	sizes	bias	
against	discovering	small	genes	with	tightly	clustered	insertions.	It	is	therefore	best	to	
repeat	the	analysis	using	different	window	sizes.

The	second	method	makes	use	of	a	Gaussian	Kernel	Convolution	framework98,99.	A	
Kernel function	is	positioned	at	every	insertion	site	in	the	data	set.	For	any	position	in	
the	genome,	an	estimate	of	the	number	of	insertions	can	be	obtained	by	summing	all	
the	Kernel	functions.	The	analysis	is	carried	out	repeatedly	using	different	Kernel	sizes	
(that	is,	10	kb,	30	kb,	60	kb	and	100	kb).	The	significance	of	the	peaks	is	then	evaluated	
using	a	null-distribution	computed	by	means	of	a	random	permutation	of	the	data,	
taking	into	account	the	true	distribution	of	TA	dinucleotides	in	the	genome.	The	
probability	of	detecting	false	CIS	is	controlled	by	applying	the	Bonferroni correction100.	
The	kernel	convolution	method	offers	the	advantage	that	it	evaluates	the	insertion	
data	set	on	multiple	scales	(using	different	kernel	sizes),	allowing	the	identification	of	a	
higher	number	of	CAN	genes	in	a	single	analysis.

Both	statistical	approaches	generate	CIS	lists	that	are	similar	but	not	identical	(N.G.C.	

and	N.A.J.,	unpublished	observations).	Currently,	it	seems	best	to	carry	out	both	types	
of	statistical	analysis	and	then	combine	the	two	gene	lists.

R E V I E W S

frequency is found in haematopoietic tumours, with 
only 6–11% showing evidence of local hopping42. SB, like 
most cut and paste transposons, requires DNA synthe­
sis for transposition82. These differences may therefore 
reflect the number of times a cancer­initiating cell has 
divided, and so the number of rounds of transposition 
that have occurred, before a cancer­initiating cells is 
converted into a tumour cell. In addition, the insertions 
recovered from tumours are by definition selected, and 
selection could also mask the true insertional patterns 
of the transposons. This could also introduce a bias into 
the observed insertion patterns for insertions that are 
recovered from tumours.

An alternative transposition system
Since the awakening of SB, several other transposons 
have been identified that can transpose in mouse cells 
such as Minos, piggyBac (PB) and Tol2 (REFS 83–86). 
Among these transposons, the one that has received the 
most attention is PB, which was first identified when it 
jumped from its insect host, the cabbage looper moth 
Trichoplusia ni, into the baculovirus genome87. Similar 
to SB, PB transposes through a cut and paste mecha­
nism, but its preferred insertion site is TTAA, which is  
duplicated on insertion88,89.

PB has several features that make it an attractive alter­
native insertional mutagen. A mouse codon­optimized 
PB transposase (mPB) has been developed that is 300 
times more efficient than SB11 (REFS 45,90), and 13 times 
more efficient than a recently described hyperactive SB 
transposase, SB100, in mouse ES cells45,91; however, the 
opposite has been reported in human HeLa and CD34 
cells91,92. In addition, mPB has been fused to a mutated 
oestrogen receptor, ERT2 (mPB­ERT2), so that it pro­
vides a high level of transposase activity90. The inducible 
ERT2 domain makes it possible to tightly regulate the 
activity of the transposase by the addition of tamoxifen 
or 4­hydroxytamoxifen (4­OHT). In the absence of 
tamoxifen, heat­shock proteins sequester mPB­ERT2 
in the cytoplasm, which prevents it from functioning93. 
In the presence of tamoxifen, mPB­ERT2 is released 
and can translocate to the nucleus and activate trans­
position94. This should make it possible to turn off PB 
transposition after tumours are initiated and so poten­
tially reduce the number of background PB insertions 
in tumour cells. PB can also carry much larger cargo 
than SB. For every 1 kb increase in size from its origi­
nal 1.7 kb length, SB shows around a 30% decrease in 
transposition frequency17. PB, conversely, can carry up 
to 9.1 kb of foreign DNA without significantly reducing 
its integration frequency84. In addition, PB shows little 
propensity for local hoping and preferentially integrates 
into genes45, which should increase the ability of PB to 
insertionally mutate cancer genes. This is perhaps the 
most important difference to SB, as the different target 
site selection properties of PB are predicted to result in 
a different range of genes that can be mutated by PB and 
SB. Finally, canonical PB excises cleanly from the host 
genome, unlike SB, which leaves behind a 5 bp mutagenic 
footprint following excision, although certain PB exci­
sions are still associated with mutations at the excision 

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 

 VOLUME 10 | OCTOBER 2010 | 703

© 20  Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

10

R E V I E W S

Tissue-specific Cre

X

Sensitizing mutation

Tissue-specific Cre/+
Sensitizing mutation/+

X

T2Onc/T2Onc
lsl-SBase/lsl-SBase

Experimental cohort

T2Onc/+
lsl-SBase/+

T2Onc/+
SBase/+
Tissue-specific Cre/+

T2Onc/+
lsl-SBase/+
Sensitizing mutation/+

T2Onc/+
SBase/+
Tissue-specific Cre/+
Sensitizing mutation/+
Figure 6 | Breeding scheme used for mobilizing SB in a sensitized mouse genetic 
Nature Reviews | Cancer
background. Mice carrying a tissue-specific Cre transgene are crossed to mice carrying 
a sensitizing mutation, such as activated Kras transgene or inactivated Trp53 gene. 
The resulting double heterozygotes are then crossed to mice that are homozygous for  
T2/Onc2 or T2/Onc3 (T2Onc) and the conditional transposase allele, Rosa26–lsl–SB11 
(lsl–SBase). Progeny mice carrying the four expected resultant genotypes (experiment 
cohort) are then assessed for tumour development as they age. SB, Sleeping Beauty.

sites84,95 (FIG. 1b). PB transposition should therefore
induce fewer cancer­causing mutations that cannot 
be detected because they are no longer tagged by the 
transposon.

Although there is currently no published data show­
ing that PB can function as an effective cancer gene 
mutagen, there are data showing that PB is a versa­
tile cancer gene mutagen, which is capable of identi­ 
fying cancer genes not yet identified in retroviral or SB 
transposon screens (R. Rand, P. Liu and A. Bradley, per­
sonal communication). PB thus seems to represent an 
attractive alternative mutagen for cancer gene discovery 
in the mouse.

Using transposons to aid drug discovery
Although primarily generated for insertional muta­
genesis, transposon­based systems also harbour huge 
potential for studying many other aspects of cancer biol­
ogy. For example, a recent PB­based screen in ES cells96 
has identified a new genetic interaction between BRCA1 
and 53BP1 that is relevant to breast cancer. Notably, loss  
of 53BP1 was shown to partially restore the homologous­ 
recombination defect of BRCA1­depleted cells and 
revert their hypersensitivity to DNA­damaging agents. 
Transposon­based systems can also be used to identify 
genes that provide resistance or sensitivity to chemo­
therapeutic agents, as demonstrated for retroviral inser­
tional mutagenesis, which was used to identify candidate 
genes involved in the resistance to MEK inhibitors in  
leukaemias that were initiated by hyperactive Ras97.

Future perspectives
Although it has only been 5 years since it was first shown 
that SB can be mobilized at frequencies high enough to 
induce cancer42,50, it has already become apparent that 
SB can be used to model many types of human cancer in 
mice. This, in turn, should allow the rapid identification 
of many of the mutant genes and signalling pathways 
that drive cancer in mice. Using laser capture microdis­
section, it should also be possible to isolate and clone 
the SB insertions from preneoplastic, neoplastic and 
metastatic lesions from the same animal. Because each 
cancer­initiating cell is marked by a unique collection 
of SB insertions, it may then be possible to determine 
whether the individual lesions are descended from a 
single cancer­initiating cell or from multiple cancer­
initiating cells. Moreover, this might also make it pos­
sible to determine the order in which the mutations were 
acquired and whether they are involved in the initiation, 
progression and metastasis of the tumour. SB­induced 
mouse cancer models will also provide a plethora of new 
models for furthering our understanding of the biology 
of cancer, for identifying new drug targets and for pre­
clinical testing of new cancer therapeutics before they 
go into the clinic.

1. 

2. 

3. 

Imai, K. & Takaoka, A. Comparing antibody and small-
molecule therapies for cancer. Nature Rev. Cancer 6, 
714–727 (2006).
Copeland, N. G. & Jenkins, N. A. Deciphering the 
genetic landscape of cancer-from genes to pathways. 
Trends Genet. 25, 455–462 (2009).
Forrest, W. F. & Cavet, G. Comment on “The consensus 
coding sequences of human breast and colorectal 
cancers”. Science 317, 1500 (2007).

4.  Getz, G. et al. Comment on “The consensus coding 
sequences of human breast and colorectal cancers”. 
Science 317, 1500 (2007).

5.  Rubin, A. F. & Green, P. Comment on “The consensus 

coding sequences of human breast and colorectal 
cancers”. Science 317, 1500 (2007).

6.  Kool, J. & Berns, A. High-throughput insertional 

mutagenesis screens in mice to identify oncogenic 
networks. Nature Rev. Cancer 9, 389–399 (2009).
This paper reviews the advantages and the 
limitations of retroviral insertional mutagenesis in 
mice for identifying genes and signalling pathways 
that are important for cancer.

7.  Akagi, K., Suzuki, T., Stephens, R. M., Jenkins, N. A. & 
Copeland, N. G. RTCGD: retroviral tagged cancer gene 
database. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, D523–D527 
(2004).

8.  Mitchell, R. S. et al. Retroviral DNA integration: ASLV, 

HIV, and MLV show distinct target site preferences. 
PLoS Biol. 2, e234 (2004).

9.  Wu, X., Li, Y., Crise, B. & Burgess, S. M. Transcription 

start regions in the human genome are favored targets 
for MLV integration. Science 300, 1749–1751 (2003).
10.  Neil, J. C. & Cameron, E. R. Retroviral insertion sites 
and cancer: fountain of all knowledge? Cancer Cell 2, 
253–255 (2002).

11.  Plasterk, R. H., Izsvak, Z. & Ivics, Z. Resident aliens: 

the Tc1/mariner superfamily of transposable elements. 
Trends Genet. 15, 326–332 (1999).

12.  Lohe, A. R., Moriyama, E. N., Lidholm, D. A. & Hartl, 

15.  Zayed, H., Izsvak, Z., Walisko, O. & Ivics, Z. Development 

of hyperactive sleeping beauty transposon vectors by 
mutational analysis. Mol. Ther. 9, 292–304 (2004).

13. 

14. 

D. L. Horizontal transmission, vertical inactivation, 
and stochastic loss of mariner-like transposable 
elements. Mol. Biol. Evol. 12, 62–72 (1995).
Izsvak, Z., Ivics, Z. & Hackett, P. B. Repetitive elements 
and their genetic applications in zebrafish. Biochem. 
Cell Biol. 75, 507–523 (1997).
Ivics, Z., Izsvak, Z., Minter, A. & Hackett, P. B. 
Identification of functional domains and evolution of 
Tc1-like transposable elements. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 93, 5008–5013 (1996).

16. 

17. 

Ivics, Z., Hackett, P. B., Plasterk, R. H. & Izsvak, Z. 
Molecular reconstruction of Sleeping Beauty, a 
Tc1-like transposon from fish, and its transposition in 
human cells. Cell 91, 501–510 (1997).
A landmark paper that constructed the first 
synthetic highly active transposon (SB) for use in 
mammalian cells.
Izsvak, Z., Ivics, Z. & Plasterk, R. H. Sleeping Beauty, a 
wide host-range transposon vector for genetic 
transformation in vertebrates. J. Mol. Biol. 302, 
93–102 (2000).

18.  Yant, S. R. et al. Somatic integration and long-term 

transgene expression in normal and haemophilic mice 
using a DNA transposon system. Nature Genet. 25, 
35–41 (2000).

19.  Luo, G., Ivics, Z., Izsvak, Z. & Bradley, A. Chromosomal 

transposition of a Tc1/mariner-like element in mouse 
embryonic stem cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 95, 
10769–10773 (1998).

20.  Dupuy, A. J. et al. Mammalian germ-line transgenesis 

by transposition. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 
4495–4499 (2002).

21.  Dupuy, A. J., Fritz, S. & Largaespada, D. A. 

Transposition and gene disruption in the male 
germline of the mouse. Genesis 30, 82–88
(2001).

704 | OCTOBER 2010 | VOLUME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 20  Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

10

33.  Walsh, C. P. & Bestor, T. H. Cytosine methylation and 

56.  Dupuy, A. J. et al. A modified sleeping beauty 

22.  Fischer, S. E., Wienholds, E. & Plasterk, R. H. 

Regulated transposition of a fish transposon in the 
mouse germ line. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98, 
6759–6764 (2001).

23.  Horie, K. et al. Efficient chromosomal transposition of 

a Tc1/mariner- like transposon Sleeping Beauty in 
mice. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98, 9191–9196 
(2001).

24.  Zayed, H., Izsvak, Z., Khare, D., Heinemann, U. & Ivics, 

Z. The DNA-bending protein HMGB1 is a cellular 
cofactor of Sleeping Beauty transposition. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 31, 2313–2322 (2003).

25.  Walisko, O. et al. Sleeping Beauty transposase 

26. 

modulates cell-cycle progression through interaction 
with Miz-1. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 
4062–4067 (2006).
Izsvak, Z. et al. Healing the wounds inflicted by 
sleeping beauty transposition by double-strand break 
repair in mammalian somatic cells. Mol. Cell 13, 
279–290 (2004).

27.  Yant, S. R. & Kay, M. A. Nonhomologous-end-joining 
factors regulate DNA repair fidelity during Sleeping 
Beauty element transposition in mammalian cells. 
Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 8505–8518 (2003).
Ikeda, R. et al. Sleeping beauty transposase has an 
affinity for heterochromatin conformation. Mol. Cell. 
Biol. 27, 1665–1676 (2007).

28. 

29.  Yusa, K., Takeda, J. & Horie, K. Enhancement of 

Sleeping Beauty transposition by CpG methylation: 
possible role of heterochromatin formation. Mol. Cell. 
Biol. 24, 4004–4018 (2004).

30.  Garrison, B. S., Yant, S. R., Mikkelsen, J. G. & Kay, 

M. A. Postintegrative gene silencing within the 
Sleeping Beauty transposition system. Mol. Cell. Biol. 
27, 8824–8833 (2007).

31.  Park, C. W., Kren, B. T., Largaespada, D. A. & Steer, 

C. J. DNA methylation of Sleeping Beauty with 
transposition into the mouse genome. Genes Cells 10, 
763–776 (2005).

32.  Park, C. W., Park, J., Kren, B. T. & Steer, C. J. Sleeping 

Beauty transposition in the mouse genome is 
associated with changes in DNA methylation at the 
site of insertion. Genomics 88, 204–213 (2006).

mammalian development. Genes Dev. 13, 26–34 
(1999).

34.  Yoder, J. A., Walsh, C. P. & Bestor, T. H. Cytosine 

methylation and the ecology of intragenomic 
parasites. Trends Genet. 13, 335–340 (1997).

35.  Liu, G. et al. Target-site preferences of Sleeping Beauty 

transposons. J. Mol. Biol. 346, 161–173 (2005).

36.  Vigdal, T. J., Kaufman, C. D., Izsvak, Z., Voytas, D. F. & 
Ivics, Z. Common physical properties of DNA affecting 
target site selection of sleeping beauty and other Tc1/
mariner transposable elements. J. Mol. Biol. 323, 
441–452 (2002).

37.  Yant, S. R. et al. High-resolution genome-wide 

mapping of transposon integration in mammals. Mol. 
Cell. Biol. 25, 2085–2094 (2005).

38.  Carlson, C. M. et al. Transposon mutagenesis of the 

mouse germline. Genetics 165, 243–256 (2003).
39.  Horie, K. et al. Characterization of Sleeping Beauty 

transposition and its application to genetic screening 
in mice. Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 9189–9207 (2003).

40.  Tower, J., Karpen, G. H., Craig, N. & Spradling, A. C. 

Preferential transposition of Drosophila P elements to 
nearby chromosomal sites. Genetics 133, 347–359 
(1993).

41.  Hanahan, D. & Weinberg, R. A. The hallmarks of 

cancer. Cell 100, 57–70 (2000).

42.  Dupuy, A. J., Akagi, K., Largaespada, D. A., Copeland, 
N. G. & Jenkins, N. A. Mammalian mutagenesis using 
a highly mobile somatic Sleeping Beauty transposon 
system. Nature 436, 221–226 (2005).
This was the first paper showing that SB 
transposon-based mutagenesis can induce cancer 
when mobilized in somatic cells of wild-type mice.

43.  Geurts, A. M. et al. Gene transfer into genomes of 

human cells by the sleeping beauty transposon 
system. Mol. Ther. 8, 108–117 (2003).

44.  Cui, Z., Geurts, A. M., Liu, G., Kaufman, C. D. & 
Hackett, P. B. Structure-function analysis of the 
inverted terminal repeats of the sleeping beauty 
transposon. J. Mol. Biol. 318, 1221–1235 (2002).

45.  Liang, Q., Kong, J., Stalker, J. & Bradley, A. 

Chromosomal mobilization and reintegration of 
Sleeping Beauty and PiggyBac transposons. Genesis 
47, 404–408 (2009).

46.  Soriano, P. Generalized lacZ expression with the 
ROSA26 Cre reporter strain. Nature Genet. 21, 
70–71 (1999).

47.  Zambrowicz, B. P. et al. Disruption of overlapping 
transcripts in the ROSA β geo 26 gene trap strain 
leads to widespread expression of β-galactosidase in 
mouse embryos and hematopoietic cells. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 94, 3789–3794 (1997).

48.  Geurts, A. M. et al. Gene mutations and genomic 

rearrangements in the mouse as a result of transposon 
mobilization from chromosomal concatemers. PLoS 
Genet. 2, e156 (2006).

49.  Ellisen, L. W. et al. TAN-1, the human homolog of the 

Drosophila notch gene, is broken by chromosomal 
translocations in T lymphoblastic neoplasms. Cell 66, 
649–661 (1991).

50.  Collier, L. S., Carlson, C. M., Ravimohan, S., Dupuy, 
A. J. & Largaespada, D. A. Cancer gene discovery in 
solid tumours using transposon-based somatic 
mutagenesis in the mouse. Nature 436, 272–276 
(2005).
This was the first paper showing that SB 
transposon-based mutagenesis can identify genes 
involved in solid cancer when mobilized in somatic 
cells of sensitized mice.

cancer. Nature 417, 949–954 (2002).

52.  Seidel, C. et al. Alterations of cancer-related genes in 
soft tissue sarcomas: hypermethylation of RASSF1A is 
frequently detected in leiomyosarcoma and associated 
with poor prognosis in sarcoma. Int. J. Cancer 114, 
442–447 (2005).

53.  Collier, L. S. et al. Whole-body sleeping beauty 

mutagenesis can cause penetrant leukemia/lymphoma 
and rare high-grade glioma without associated 
embryonic lethality. Cancer Res. 69, 8429–8437 
(2009).

54.  Rahrmann, E. P. et al. Identification of PDE4D as a 

proliferation promoting factor in prostate cancer using 
a Sleeping Beauty transposon-based somatic 
mutagenesis screen. Cancer Res. 69, 4388–4397 
(2009).

55.  Hawley, R. G., Fong, A. Z., Burns, B. F. & Hawley, T. S. 
Transplantable myeloproliferative disease induced in 
mice by an interleukin 6 retrovirus. J. Exp. Med. 176, 
1149–1163 (1992).

transposon system that can be used to model a wide 
variety of human cancers in mice. Cancer Res. 69, 
8150–8156 (2009).
This paper describes the development of a 
modified SB transposon, T2/Onc3, which selectively 
induces epithelial tumours when mobilized in 
somatic cells of wild-type mice.

57.  Niwa, H., Yamamura, K. & Miyazaki, J. Efficient 

selection for high-expression transfectants with a novel 
eukaryotic vector. Gene 108, 193–199 (1991).

58.  Okabe, M., Ikawa, M., Kominami, K., Nakanishi, T. & 
Nishimune, Y. ‘Green mice’ as a source of ubiquitous 
green cells. FEBS Lett. 407, 313–319 (1997).

59.  Keng, V. W. et al. A conditional transposon-based 

insertional mutagenesis screen for genes associated 
with mouse hepatocellular carcinoma. Nature Biotech. 
27, 264–274 (2009).
This paper describes the development of a 
conditional transposition system that can be used 
to model many different kinds of human cancer in 
mice. This transposition system was also used in a 
proof-of-principle experiment to model HCC in 
mice.

60.  Starr, T. K. et al. A transposon-based genetic screen in 

mice identifies genes altered in colorectal cancer. 
Science 323, 1747–1750 (2009).
This paper describes the development of a 
conditional transposition system that can be used 
to model many different kinds of human cancer in 
mice. This transposition system was also used in a 
proof-of-principle experiment to model CRC in 
mice.

61.  Segditsas, S. & Tomlinson, I. Colorectal cancer and 

genetic alterations in the Wnt pathway. Oncogene 25, 
7531–7537 (2006).

62.  Rajagopalan, H. et al. Inactivation of hCDC4 can cause 

chromosomal instability. Nature 428, 77–81 (2004).

63.  de Vries, A. et al. Targeted point mutations of p53 

lead to dominant-negative inhibition of wild-type p53 
function. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 2948–2953 
(2002).

64.  Bressac, B., Kew, M., Wands, J. & Ozturk, M. Selective 

G to T mutations of p53 gene in hepatocellular 
carcinoma from southern Africa. Nature 350, 
429–431 (1991).

65.  Buendia, M. A. Genetics of hepatocellular carcinoma. 

Semin. Cancer Biol. 10, 185–200 (2000).

51.  Davies, H. et al. Mutations of the BRAF gene in human 

72.  Salvi, A. et al. In vitro c-met inhibition by antisense 

R E V I E W S

66.  Boerner, J. L., Danielsen, A. & Maihle, N. J. Ligand-
independent oncogenic signaling by the epidermal 
growth factor receptor: v-ErbB as a paradigm. Exp. 
Cell Res. 284, 111–121 (2003).

67.  Chang, C. M. et al. A minor tyrosine phosphorylation 

site located within the CAIN domain plays a critical 
role in regulating tissue-specific transformation by 
erbB kinase. J. Virol. 69, 1172–1180 (1995).

68.  Frederick, L., Wang, X. Y., Eley, G. & James, C. D. 

Diversity and frequency of epidermal growth factor 
receptor mutations in human glioblastomas. Cancer 
Res. 60, 1383–1387 (2000).

69.  Villanueva, A. et al. Pivotal role of mTOR signaling in 

hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology 135, 
1972–1983 (2008).

70.  Villanueva, A., Newell, P., Chiang, D. Y., Friedman, 

S. L. & Llovet, J. M. Genomics and signaling pathways 
in hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin. Liver Dis. 27, 
55–76 (2007).

71.  Paez, J. G. et al. EGFR mutations in lung cancer: 

correlation with clinical response to gefitinib therapy. 
Science 304, 1497–1500 (2004).

RNA and plasmid-based RNAi down-modulates 
migration and invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma 
cells. Int. J. Oncol. 31, 451–460 (2007).

73.  Takami, T. et al. Loss of hepatocyte growth factor/c-
Met signaling pathway accelerates early stages of 
N-nitrosodiethylamine induced hepatocarcinogenesis. 
Cancer Res. 67, 9844–9851 (2007).

74.  Nakayama, K. et al. Homozygous deletion of MKK4 in 

ovarian serous carcinoma. Cancer Biol. Ther. 5, 
630–634 (2006).

75.  Su, G. H., Song, J. J., Repasky, E. A., Schutte, M. & 

Kern, S. E. Mutation rate of MAP2K4/MKK4 in breast 
carcinoma. Hum. Mutat. 19, 81 (2002).

76.  Xin, W. et al. MAP2K4/MKK4 expression in pancreatic 

cancer: genetic validation of immunohistochemistry 
and relationship to disease course. Clin. Cancer Res. 
10, 8516–8520 (2004).

77.  Arsura, M. et al. Transient activation of NF-κB through 

a TAK1/IKK kinase pathway by TGF-β1 inhibits AP-1/
SMAD signaling and apoptosis: implications in liver 
tumor formation. Oncogene 22, 412–425 (2003).

78.  Anzola, M. Hepatocellular carcinoma: role of hepatitis B 
and hepatitis C viruses proteins in hepatocarcinogenesis. 
J. Viral Hepat. 11, 383–393 (2004).

79.  Beasley, R. P. Hepatitis B virus. The major etiology of 

hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 61, 1942–1956 
(1988).

80.  Perz, J. F., Armstrong, G. L., Farrington, L. A., Hutin, Y. J. 

& Bell, B. P. The contributions of hepatitis B virus and 
hepatitis C virus infections to cirrhosis and primary liver 
cancer worldwide. J. Hepatol. 45, 529–538 (2006).

81.  Yang, H. I. et al. Hepatitis B e antigen and the risk of 

hepatocellular carcinoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 347, 
168–174 (2002).

82.  Mizuuchi, K. In vitro transposition of bacteriophage 

Mu: a biochemical approach to a novel replication 
reaction. Cell 35, 785–794 (1983).

83.  de Wit, T. et al. Tagged mutagenesis by efficient Minos-

based germ line transposition. Mol. Cell. Biol. 30, 
68–77 (2010).

84.  Ding, S. et al. Efficient transposition of the piggyBac 

(PB) transposon in mammalian cells and mice. Cell 
122, 473–483 (2005).
This paper shows that PB is a highly active 
transposon in mammalian cells and the mouse germ 
line and an excellent alternative transposition system 
to SB for insertional mutagenesis screens in mice.

85.  Keng, V. W. et al. Efficient transposition of Tol2 in the 
mouse germline. Genetics 183, 1565–1573 (2009).

86.  Wang, W. et al. Chromosomal transposition of 

PiggyBac in mouse embryonic stem cells. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 105, 9290–9295 (2008).

87.  Smith, G. E., Summers, M. D. & Fraser, M. J. 

Production of human β interferon in insect cells 
infected with a baculovirus expression vector. Mol. 
Cell. Biol. 3, 2156–2165 (1983).

88.  Fraser, M. J., Cary, L., Boonvisudhi, K. & Wang, H. G. 
Assay for movement of Lepidopteran transposon IFP2 
in insect cells using a baculovirus genome as a target 
DNA. Virology 211, 397–407 (1995).

89.  Fraser, M. J., Ciszczon, T., Elick, T. & Bauser, C. Precise 

excision of TTAA-specific lepidopteran transposons 
piggyBac (IFP2) and tagalong (TFP3) from the 
baculovirus genome in cell lines from two species of 
Lepidoptera. Insect Mol. Biol. 5, 141–151 (1996).

90.  Cadinanos, J. & Bradley, A. Generation of an inducible 

and optimized piggyBac transposon system. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 35, e87 (2007).

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 

 VOLUME 10 | OCTOBER 2010 | 705

© 20  Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

10

R E V I E W S

91.  Mates, L. et al. Molecular evolution of a novel 

hyperactive Sleeping Beauty transposase enables 
robust stable gene transfer in vertebrates. Nature 
Genet. 41, 753–761 (2009).

92.  Grabundzija, I. et al. Comparative analysis of 

transposable element vector systems in human cells. 
Mol. Ther. 18, 1200–1209 (2010).

93.  Chambraud, B., Berry, M., Redeuilh, G., Chambon, P. 

& Baulieu, E. E. Several regions of human estrogen 
receptor are involved in the formation of receptor-heat 
shock protein 90 complexes. J. Biol. Chem. 265, 
20686–20691 (1990).

94.  Feil, R., Wagner, J., Metzger, D. & Chambon, P. 

Regulation of Cre recombinase activity by mutated 
estrogen receptor ligand-binding domains. Biochem. 
Biophys. Res. Commun. 237, 752–757 (1997).

95.  Mitra, R., Fain-Thornton, J. & Craig, N. L. piggyBac 

can bypass DNA synthesis during cut and paste 
transposition. EMBO J. 27, 1097–1109 (2008).
96.  Bouwman, P. et al. 53BP1 loss rescues BRCA1 

deficiency and is associated with triple-negative and 
BRCA-mutated breast cancers. Nature Struct. Mol. 
Biol. 17, 688–695 (2010).

97.  Lauchle, J. O. et al. Response and resistance to MEK 
inhibition in leukaemias initiated by hyperactive Ras. 
Nature 461, 411–414 (2009).

98.  de Ridder, J., Uren, A., Kool, J., Reinders, M. & 

Wessels, L. Detecting statistically significant common 
insertion sites in retroviral insertional mutagenesis 
screens. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2, e166 (2006).
99.  Uren, A. G. et al. Large-scale mutagenesis in 

p19(ARF)- and p53-deficient mice identifies cancer 
genes and their collaborative networks. Cell 133, 
727–741 (2008).
This paper shows how large-scale screens in mice 
carrying sensitizing cancer causing mutations can 
be used to identify genes that are involved in 
collaborative cancer networks.

100. Yang, Y. H. et al. Normalization for cDNA microarray 
data: a robust composite method addressing single 
and multiple slide systematic variation. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 30, e15 (2002).

101. Devon, R. S., Porteous, D. J. & Brookes, A. J. 

Splinkerettes-improved vectorettes for greater 
efficiency in PCR walking. Nucleic Acids Res. 23, 
1644–1645 (1995).

102. Gavin, A. J. et al. Pooled library tissue tags for EST-

based gene discovery. Bioinformatics 18, 1162–1166 
(2002).

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank S. C. Lee for help with the 
figures and members of their laboratory for helpful comments 
on the Review. Support was provided by the Biomedical 
Research Council (BMRC), Agency for Science and Technology 
and Research (A*STAR), Singapore.

Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

FURTHER INFORMATION
Nancy A. Jenkins’s homepage: 
http://www.imcb.a-star.edu.sg/php/nn.php
CancerHelp UK: http://www.cancerhelp.org.uk
COSMIC database: 
http://www.sanger.ac.uk/genetics/CGP/cosmic
International Cancer Genome Consortium: http://icgc.org/

ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF

706 | OCTOBER 2010 | VOLUME 10 

 www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 20  Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

10

