C A S E R E P O R T

BJD
British Journal of Dermatology

Use of imatinib in a patient with cutaneous vasculopathy in
the context of von Recklinghausen disease/
neuroﬁbromatosis
I. Khelifa, J.H. Saurat and C. Prins

Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Geneva, 4 Rue Gabrielle Perret-Gentil, Geneva 1205, Switzerland

Summary

Correspondence
Ilhem Khelifa.
E-mail: elhem_khelifa@yahoo.com

Accepted for publication
1 June 2014

Funding sources
None.

Conﬂicts of interest
None declared.

DOI 10.1111/bjd.13170

von Recklinghausen disease/neuroﬁbromatosis (NF) is caused by an autosomal
dominant mutation in NF1, resulting in a deﬁciency of neuroﬁbromin 1, a pro-
tein with a tumour suppressor function in the Ras–extracellular regulated kinase
pathway. The disease comprises a variety of clinical manifestations, including
vascular abnormalities. Large vessel abnormalities are well known, while small
vessels of the skin are very rarely involved. The latter can cause livedo, necrosis
and painful ulcers. For such ulcers, all
invasive therapies (e.g. surgery and
radiotherapy) are harmful and should be avoided. Herein, we describe a patient
with NF and cutaneous vasculopathy treated with imatinib, a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor.

What’s already known about this topic?
(cid:129) Vascular abnormalities in neuroﬁbromatosis (NF) are well described but cutaneous

vasculopathy is not.

What does this study add?
(cid:129) This is the third description of a patient with cutaneous vasculopathy.
(cid:129) We report the ﬁrst patient to receive imatinib in this indication.
(cid:129) A better knowledge of the physiopathology of vasculopathy in NF can allow us to

think about new therapies.

Neuroﬁbromatosis (NF), also known as von Recklinghausen
disease, is caused by an autosomal dominant mutation in NF1,
resulting in a deﬁciency of neuroﬁbromin 1, a protein with
tumour suppressing activity in the Ras–extracellular regulated
kinase (ERK) pathway.1 It is an autosomal dominant disorder
with a variable penetrance.

The clinical picture is varied. Typical signs of NF include
neuroﬁbromas, multiple cafe-au-lait macules, axillary and
inguinal freckling, and iris hamartomas (Lisch nodules). The
ﬁrst description of vascular lesions in NF was made in 1945.2
Since then, cerebral and peripheral vasculopathy have been
well described in the literature, while cutaneous vasculopathy
is rare and very little is known about it.

Case report

A 42-year-old woman, who had NF since she was 8 years old,
with slight cognitive impairment, multiple cafe-au-lait macules,
axillary and inguinal freckling, Lisch nodules and numerous
small and giant plexiform neuroﬁbromas was hospitalized in
January 2008 when a livedo and necrotic plaques appeared on
both her thighs (more signiﬁcantly on the right one), strictly
limited to the site of two giant plexiform neuroﬁbromas. Deep
and painful ulcerations developed rapidly and, on admission, a
clinical diagnosis of occlusive vasculopathy was made (Fig. 1).
Sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, extensive coagulation
tests (bleeding time, partial
thromboplastin time, platelet

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists

British Journal of Dermatology (2015) 172, pp253–256

253

254 Cutaneous vasculopathy in neuroﬁbromatosis,

I. Khelifa et al.

Fig 1. A necrotic, livedoid and painful ulceration of the thigh.

aggregation test, prothrombin time, protein C and S determina-
tion), complete blood count, antiphospholipid antibodies,
cryoglobulins and cryoﬁbrinogen were normal. In addition, no
monoclonal immunoglobulin was detected. There was no evi-
dence of cholesterol emboli.

Deep venous thrombosis and arterial occlusion of the right
leg was ruled out by Doppler sonography, a normal ankle
brachial index and transcutaneous oximetry. Furthermore, com-
puted tomography angiography showed normal arteries of large
calibre, with the exception of a giant aneurysm of the left inter-
nal carotid artery that was 22 mm in diameter. Phlebography
showed a patent greater saphenous vein and collateral venous
network, possibly due to a thrombosis or compression of the
saphenous vein (Fig. 2). Magnetic resonance angiography of
the patient’s right thigh showed cutaneous necrosis down to

Fig 2. Phlebography showing a patent greater saphenous vein and
collateral venous network.

the subcutaneous fat, in contact with the greater saphenous
vein. The latter was dilated with a very irregular diameter and
small expansions along its course, suggestive of a varicose vein.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the patient’s right thigh showed
several neuroﬁbromas along the sciatic and femoral nerves, with
the biggest measuring 5 cm.

Numerous biopsies of lesional skin were performed to fur-
ther characterize the vascular changes. Proliferating, randomly
arranged spindle-shaped cells with elongated wavy nuclei in
the mid- and deep dermis were noted, representing the plexi-
form neuroﬁbroma. Multiple vessels of varying calibre, posi-
tive for CD31 and CD34, but negative for
the D2-40
lymphatic vessel marker, were present in the deep dermis and
subcutis. Elastic laminae were absent in van Gieson elastin sta-
inings. Moreover,
there were large vessels with thickened
walls and proliferating myoﬁbroblasts expressing a-smooth
muscle actin. We also found smaller and partially thrombotic
vessels. Vessels were surrounded concentrically by proliferat-
ing epithelial membrane antigen-positive cells, as well as
S-100 neural proliferating cells (Fig. 3a,b). Skin biopsies of
clinically normal skin showed no vascular abnormalities.

that

Taken together, the information obtained from the radio-
logical investigations and the biopsies allowed us to conclude
that the patient had large vessel disease, as well as cutaneous
vessel abnormalities consisting of intimal proliferation, steno-
sis and thrombosis in the dermis and subcutis, which led to
the clinical picture of livedo, necrosis and subsequent ulcer-
ations. Because of the presence of the livedo, we thought at
ﬁrst
the problem was the vasoconstriction of vessels,
which is why we initially administered antithrombotic medi-
cation (aspirin, coumarin derivatives and heparin), vasodila-
tors (calcium channel blockers, a-1A antagonist
tamsulosin
and prostacyclins) and b-blockers (propranolol). Then we
tried to treat the patient as if she had a proliferating disease,
and administered topical and systemic corticosteroids, inter-
feron-a 2A and sirolimus, all of which were used unsuccess-
fully. Excision and autologous skin grafting of the necrotic
ulcer led to extensive new necrotic lesions.

As the lesions progressed throughout the year, we initiated
therapy with imatinib after obtaining the patient’s consent.
This approach was based on ﬁndings by Lasater et al.,3 linking
a deﬁciency of neuroﬁbromin with hyperactivation of
the
Ras–ERK pathway. Hyperactivation of this pathway leads to
myoﬁbroblast proliferation in injured rat vessels, which can
be prevented by imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor. As we
observed myoﬁbroblast proliferation and vessel stenosis in our
patient, this approach seemed promising.

Imatinib was administered at a dose of 400 mg daily for
2 years. It was well tolerated from a haematological point of
view but the severe abdominal pain and vomiting experienced
by the patient forced us to abandon the treatment after a
reduction in dose to 200 mg daily did not alleviate the side-
effects. By the end of the treatment, during the winter of
2011,
it appeared that wound healing was well underway
(Fig. 4). Since discontinuation of imatinib, the patient’s ulcers
have been expanding and contracting. Complete healing has

British Journal of Dermatology (2015) 172, pp253–256

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists

(a)

(b)

Fig 3. (a, b) Neuroﬁbromatosis. Large vessels with thickened walls
and proliferating myoﬁbroblastic cells, expressing a-smooth muscle
actin (SMA). HE, haematoxylin and eosin.

not been achieved. With imatinib treatment, the necrotic ulcer
became linear and almost healed. At its worst, the ulcer was
burrowing and 20 9 15 cm in size. The result obtained while
receiving imatinib was not obtained before or after treatment
with this medication.

Radiotherapy applied recently to part of the lesion resulted
in a large and painful ulceration, thus conﬁrming our previous
fears of vessel occlusion being initiated by injury.

Discussion

Cutaneous vasculopathy in neuroﬁbromatosis,

I. Khelifa et al. 255

Fig 4. Neuroﬁbromatosis. Accelerated closure of
imatinib treatment.

the ulcer with

arterial stenosis, occlusion, aneurysm, pseudoaneurysm, rup-
ture or arteriovenous ﬁstula formation. For some authors, the
vasculopathy is thought to be of prenatal onset.4 According to
large clinical series, both cerebral and peripheral vasculopathy
in adults have a prevalence ranging from 04% to 64%.5 The
incidence of vascular pathology is probably underestimated, as
most of the vascular features are asymptomatic.6 However,
major cardiac and cerebral vessel involvement can have life-
threatening consequences.7,8

Cutaneous vasculopathy in NF is extremely rare. To our
knowledge, it has been reported only twice.9,10 Neuroﬁbro-
min, the deﬁcient protein in NF, plays an important role in
growth control and differentiation of cells.
In its absence,
endothelial and smooth muscle cells proliferate, and the result-
ing vessels show different abnormalities, notably (i) increased
fragility of vascular walls causing aneurysms; (ii) stenosis
and occlusion; and (iii) arterial ruptures causing arteriovenous
ﬁstulas.

The genetic deﬁciency is not the only factor. It is proven
that the vascular abnormalities in patients with NF increase
with age. Thus, environmental factors (e.g. injury, smoking,
exercise, stress) may play a role in stimulating intimal prolif-
eration via
leading to stenosis
and occlusion of vessels.3,11 In our patient, every surgical
aggression or trauma gave rise to new bouts of necrosis and
ulceration.

the Ras–ERK pathway

Several authors have demonstrated that

inhibition of the
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB Ras–ERK pathway
prevents neointimal proliferation after arterial
injury in NF
mice. Lasater et al.3 went on to demonstrate that NF1 mice,
pretreated with imatinib mesylate, did not develop vascular
smooth muscle proliferation or arterial stenosis after vessel
injury. Imatinib mesylate (Gleevec
; Novartis, East Hanover,
NJ, U.S.A.), initially used in chronic myeloid leukaemia, is a
selective inhibitor of the BCR/ABL tyrosine kinase that blocks
the Ras–ERK pathway via PDGF receptor
the activation of
(PDGFR) and thus the intimal proliferation.

â

Vascular abnormalities in NF are well described in both the
paediatric and adult
literature. NF vasculopathy comprises

To our knowledge, the patient reported herein is the ﬁrst to
receive imatinib mesylate in NF vasculopathy. The treatment

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists

British Journal of Dermatology (2015) 172, pp253–256

256 Cutaneous vasculopathy in neuroﬁbromatosis,

I. Khelifa et al.

can be regarded as partially successful as we obtained the best
result achieved thus
far with regard to wound closure,
although complete healing was not achieved.

The lack of complete healing might be explained by the
inevitable repeated minor traumas experienced by the patient
during daily life, an insufﬁcient plasma level of imatinib (NF
mice received a 10-fold higher dose of imatinib than our
patient) and the fact
that we had to abandon treatment
because of the major digestive side-effects experienced by the
patient. With regard to the only two other patients with skin
vasculopathy published to date, all medications used – pred-
nisolone, ciclosporin, mycofenolate mofetil and dapsone,9
and steroids, cyclophosphamide bolus therapy and inﬂiximab,
respectively10
no
improvement.

unsuccessful

– were

and

brought

Imatinib in NF1+ mice has been shown to reduce the size
of neuroﬁbromas.12 Of note, we did not observe any reduc-
tion in the size of the patient’s neuroﬁbromas.

Recently, an open-label phase 2 trial, based on these results,
has also demonstrated a reduction in volume of clinically sig-
in patients with NF.13
niﬁcant plexiform neuroﬁbromas
Sorafenib, another inhibitor of tyrosine protein kinases (vascu-
lar endothelial growth factor and PDGFR) and Raf kinases, is
being tested for this indication.14,15

In summary, cutaneous vasculopathy is extremely rare in
patients with NF. According to our understanding of the phys-
iopathological mechanisms, new tyrosine kinase inhibitors
with fewer side-effects may be useful in preventing intimal
proliferation. Aggressive surgical treatments should be avoided
at all costs.

References

1 DeClue JE, Papageorge AG, Fletcher JA et al. Abnormal regulation
of mammalian p21ras contributes to malignant tumor growth in
von Recklinghausen (type 1) neuroﬁbromatosis. Cell 1992;
69:265–73.

75:463.

2 Reubi F. Neuromatosis et lesions vasculaires. Sch Med Wochens 1945;
3 Lasater EA, Bessler WK, Mead LE et al. Nf1+/ 

mice have increased
neointima formation via hyperactivation of a Gleevec sensitive
molecular pathway. Hum Mol Genet 2008; 17:2336–44.

4 Smith M, Heran MK, Connolly MB et al. Cerebrovasculopathy in
NF1 associated with ocular and scalp defects. Am J Med Genet A
2011; 155:380–5.

5 Choong A, Alagaratnam S, Suliman S et al. The endovascular man-
agement of a neuroﬁbromatosis vasculopathy: a case report. Vasc
Endovascular Surg 2012; 46:575–7.

6 Hamilton SJ, Allard MF, Friedman JM. Cardiac ﬁndings in an indi-
vidual with neuroﬁbromatosis 1 and sudden death. Am J Med Genet
2001; 100:95–9.

7 Rosser TL, Vezina G, Packer RJ. Cerebrovascular abnormalities in a
population of children with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Neurology
2005; 64:553–5.

8 Cairns AG, North KN. Cerebrovascular dysplasia in neuroﬁbroma-

tosis type 1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2008; 79:1165–70.

9 Ljunggren B, Holst R, Simanaitis M, Rausing A. Skin ulcerations as
manifestation of vasculopathy in neuroﬁbromatosis. J Am Acad Der-
matol 2004; 51:656–9.

10 Obermoser G, Zelger BG, Millonig G et al. Vasculopathy in von
Recklinghausen’s neuroﬁbromatosis—a diagnostic quandary. J Am
Acad Dermatol 2004; 50:S107–9.

11 Lasater EA, Li F, Bessler WK et al. Genetic and cellular evidence of
and

inﬂammation in neuroﬁbromin-deﬁcient mice

vascular
humans. J Clin Invest 2010; 120:859–70.
a microenvironment containing Nf1+/ 
marrow. Cell 2008; 135:437–48.

12 Yang FC, Ingram DA, Chen S et al. Nf1-dependent tumors require
and c-kit-dependent bone

13 Robertson KA, Nalepa G, Yang FC et al. Imatinib mesylate for plex-
iform neuroﬁbromas in patients with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: a
phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2012; 13:1218–24.

14 Kim A, Dombi E, Tepas K et al. Phase I trial and pharmacoki-
netic study of sorafenib in children with neuroﬁbromatosis type
I
Blood Cancer 2013;
60:396–401.

and plexiform neuroﬁbromas.

Pediatr

15 Tamura Y, Ono T, Sano M et al. Favorable effect of sorafenib in a
patient with neuroﬁbromatosis-associated pulmonary hypertension.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2012; 186:291–2.

British Journal of Dermatology (2015) 172, pp253–256

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists

