Clinical/Scientific
Notes

and

rheumatology

sheath
anatomically unchanged peripheral nerve
tumors. Subsequent
tumors
resection of 2 of
compressing the spinal cord confirmed no malignant
transformation and yielded no clinical benefit.
Infectious
evaluations were
negative. Superficial
radial nerve biopsy revealed
moderate to severe acute on chronic neuropathy
with abundant, ongoing Wallerian-like degeneration
as well
schwannoma. Several
courses of oral and IV steroids, plasma exchange,
and IV immunoglobulin did not provide clinical
improvement. Due to persistent decline in function,
he was discharged home with hospice.

intrafascicular

as

Results. Tumor histology showed schwannoma with
almost all cells immunohistochemically positive for
INI1 and S100 with pericellular reticulin.5 Genetic
analysis of tumor showed deletion of the whole NF2
gene,
including flanking regions consistent with
somatic rather than germline NF2 mutations and a
separate somatic NF2 point mutation (c.1447-
12_1447-3DelinsAAG)
fulfilling a three/four hit
hypothesis.6 Immunohistochemical analysis of tumor
revealed increased vascular density (highlighted by
CD34 staining) as well as abundant expression of
VEGF within the tumor (figure e-1 on the Neurol-
ogy® Web site at Neurology.org). Staining for EGFR
and ErbB2 was negative.

Given the severity and refractory nature of the pa-
tient’s symptoms and the angiogenic features of his
resected schwannoma, he was treated off-label with
BEV 10 mg/kg IV every 2 weeks for 6 months fol-
lowed by 7.5 mg/kg IV every 3 weeks continuously.
He was monitored with clinical examination and
whole body MRI (WBMRI) preceding and following
treatment (figure e-2).

After 10 months of therapy, the patient’s pain con-
trol improved from a reported 10/10 to 4/10 intensity
and he discontinued 5 of 7 pain medications. He had
improved lower extremity motor strength, resolution
of the dysesthesias, and improved bladder function
(table). Hospice was discontinued and he initiated
physical medicine and rehabilitation. Radiographically,
many (but not all) of the tumors were smaller on
WBMRI and had less intense contrast enhancement.
After 50 months of BEV therapy, he has had no
adverse events and has ongoing clinical improvement

Jaishri Blakeley, MD*
Karisa C. Schreck, MD,

PhD*

D. Gareth Evans, MD
Bruce R. Korf, MD
David Zagzag, MD, PhD
Matthias A. Karajannis,

MD

Amanda L. Bergner, MS
Allan J. Belzberg, MD

CLINICAL RESPONSE TO BEVACIZUMAB IN
SCHWANNOMATOSIS
Schwannomatosis is a neurogenetic syndrome charac-
terized by schwannomas throughout the peripheral
nervous system without bilateral vestibular schwan-
nomas (VS) or germline neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2)
mutation.1 Management is difficult due to large
tumor burden and treatment-resistant pain. Patients
require multiple surgical procedures (average of 3.4
per decade) for pain, focal neurologic deficits, or
myelopathy.1 There are no known effective drug
therapies.

Bevacizumab (BEV; Avastin, Genentech, South
San Francisco, CA), the monoclonal antibody to vas-
cular endothelial growth factor (VEGF-A), has entered
investigation for NF2-associated VS with early positive
results.2 Preclinical models suggest that schwannomas
have angiogenic features and that antiangiogenesis
therapy reduces tumor microvascular density in both
peripheral and central schwannomas.3 We report suc-
cessful medical treatment in a patient with progressive,
symptomatic schwannomatosis with BEV.

This

study provides Class

IV evidence that
bevacizumab can shrink tumors in a patient with
schwannomatosis.

as

is

in

INI1/SMARCB1

characteristic of

Case report. A 23-year-old man was diagnosed with
schwannomatosis at age 12 years. He had a de novo
germline mutation
(987-
1G.C, splice acceptor exon 8) without germline
NF2 mutations
familial
schwannomatosis.4 He had 12 surgeries to resect
tumors throughout his body due to worsening pain,
focal neurologic deficits, or organ compression.
In 2009, he required surgery for an enlarging
schwannoma at the cervicothoracic junction causing
pain and myelopathy. Symptoms initially improved;
however,
roughly 4 weeks postoperatively, he
developed diffuse whole body pain (prior pain had
been regional) and urinary incontinence. He then
developed bilateral hand weakness,
lower
extremity sensory loss, and gait instability. Clinical
examination revealed multifocal progressive weakness
(upper extremity . lower extremity; 2/5–4/5 motor
strength), diffuse dysesthesias, urinary retention, and
severe pain refractory to multiple therapies. Extensive
MRI
evaluation revealed the previously known

left

Supplemental data
at Neurology.org

1986

Neurology 83 November 18, 2014

Table

Clinical metrics with bevacizumab therapy over time

Date

October 2010

August 2011

Bevacizumab
doses

Patient-reported
pain scale

Pain medications

Bladder function

Functional status

0

8

10/10

4/10

7 medications for
pain

Suprapubic catheter

In hospice, bedbound,
limited movement
of arms

Methadone and
prednisone

Intermittent
catheterization

Participating in physical
therapy

June 2012

16

1–3/10

Methadone

Spontaneously voiding Volunteering 3 hours 5

days per week

December 2013

29

0/10

None

Spontaneously voiding

Independent for all
activities of daily living,
part-time college, plays
wheelchair rugby

with 0/10 reported pain, no use of daily pain medica-
tion, and independence with activities of daily living.
Discussion. VEGF signaling has been implicated in
preclinical injury models of neuropathic pain in general
and may be linked to schwannoma-associated injury in
particular given that VEGF (and its primary receptors
VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2)
is expressed in many
tumor VEGF
schwannomas.2,3,7
expression was confirmed and treatment with BEV
resulted in clinical improvement.

In this patient,

that

active

treatment

continuous

the use of antiangiogenic therapies

These observations suggest that drug therapy
specific to the molecular tumor profile is possible
and that antiangiogenic therapy may have efficacy
for select patients with schwannomatosis. How-
ever,
for
schwannomatosis requires caution given the known
idiosyncratic risks associated with VEGF inhibitors
including thrombosis, hemorrhage, visceral perfo-
rations, hypertension, and renal dysfunction. In
addition, the experience with NF2-associated VS
indicates
is
required for clinical benefit. This could commit pa-
tients to long-term exposure to an expensive and
potentially harmful drug. Hence, investigation for
additional therapies as well as prospective studies
to identify the optimal patient population, dose,
and schedule for BEV in patients with schwanno-
matosis is required.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
From The Johns Hopkins Hospital (J.O.B., K.C.S., A.L.B., A.J.B.),
Baltimore, MD; St. Mary’s Hospital (D.G.E.), Manchester, UK;
University of Alabama at Birmingham (B.K.); and NYU Langone
Medical Center (D.Z., M.A.K.), New York.
Author contributions: Jaishri O. Blakeley: study design, data collec-
tion and interpretation, manuscript drafting and revision. Karisa C.
Schreck: data collection and interpretation, manuscript drafting and
revision. D. Gareth Evans: data analysis and manuscript editing.
Bruce Korf: data analysis and manuscript editing. David Zagzag:
data collection and manuscript editing. Matthias A. Karajannis:

and manuscript

conceptualization,

data analysis and manuscript editing. Amanda L. Bergner: data
collection,
editing. Allan
Belzberg: data collection, conceptualization, and manuscript editing.
Acknowledgment: The authors thank Michael A. Jacobs, Alireza
Akhbardeh, and Laura M. Fayad for data collection and analysis.
Study funding: Supported by funding from 3P30CA006973-50S2,
U01CA070095, U01CA140204, and 5P30CA016087-33 from
the National Cancer Institute.
Disclosure: J. Blakeley reports non-salary research support
from
GlaxoSmithKline, Sanofi, and Lily. K. Schreck, D. Evans, B. Korf,
and D. Zagzag report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. M.
Karajannis reports non-salary research support from GlaxoSmithKline
and Novartis. A. Bergner and A. Belzberg report no disclosures relevant
to the manuscript. Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.

Received July 2, 2012. Accepted in final form May 28, 2014.

Correspondence to Dr. Schreck: ksolt1@jhmi.edu

© 2014 American Academy of Neurology

2.

1. MacCollin M, Chiocca EA, Evans DG, et al. Diagnostic cri-
teria for schwannomatosis. Neurology 2005;64:1838–1845.
Plotkin SR, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Barker FG II, et al.
Hearing improvement after bevacizumab in patients with
neurofibromatosis type 2. N Engl J Med 2009;361:358–367.
al.
Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapies as a novel
therapeutic approach to treating neurofibromatosis-related
tumors. Cancer Res 2010;70:3483–3493.

3. Wong HK, Lahdenranta

J, Kamoun WS,

et

5.

4. Hadfield KD, Newman WG, Bowers NL, et al. Molecular
characterisation of SMARCB1 and NF2 in familial
and sporadic schwannomatosis. J Med Genet 2008;45:
332–339.
Patil S, Perry A, Maccollin M, et al. Immunohistochemical
analysis supports a role for INI1/SMARCB1 in hereditary
forms of
sporadic
schwannomas. Brain Pathol 2008;18:517–519.
Sestini R, Bacci C, Provenzano A, Genuardi M, Papi L.
Evidence of a four-hit mechanism involving SMARCB1
and NF2 in schwannomatosis-associated schwannomas.
Hum Mutat 2008;29:227–231.

schwannomas, but not

in solitary,

6.

7. Kiguchi N, Kobayashi Y, Kadowaki Y, Fukazawa Y, Saika F,
Kishioka S. Vascular endothelial growth factor signaling in
injured nerves underlies peripheral sensitization in neuro-
pathic pain. J Neurochem 2013;129:169–178.

Neurology 83 November 18, 2014

1987

