A R T I C L E

Highly penetrant, rapid tumorigenesis through conditional
inversion of the tumor suppressor gene Snf5

Charles W.M. Roberts,1 Monique M. Leroux,1 Mark D. Fleming,2 and Stuart H. Orkin1,3

1Division of Hematology-Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Children’s Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Harvard
Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115
2 Department of Pathology, Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115
3 Correspondence: stuart_orkin@dfci.harvard.edu

Summary

Recent data suggest the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex may also act as a tumor suppressor. Utilizing a reversibly
inactivating conditional allele, we demonstrate that loss of Snf5/Ini1/Baf47/SmarcB1, a core subunit of SWI/SNF, results
in highly penetrant cancer predisposition with 100% of mice developing mature CD8ⴙ T cell lymphoma or rare rhabdoid
tumors with a median onset of only 11 weeks. Notably, while loss of Snf5 predisposes to aggressive cancers, it is also
required for survival of virtually all nonmalignant cells in vivo. Reversible gene targeting demonstrates a critical and speciﬁc
role for Snf5 in tumor suppression, provides a novel system in which to explore the genetic pathways involved in tumor
suppression by Swi/Snf, and should be of wide use in evaluating other essential tumor suppressor genes.

Introduction

Tightly compacted chromatin provides an organizational struc-
ture for DNA but constitutes a signiﬁcant barrier to gene expres-
sion. Nucleosomal structures impede active transcription and
several chromatin remodeling complexes serve to modulate
expression of genes by regulating local chromatin structure.
These remodeling complexes can be grouped into two broad
classes—those that covalently modify histones with acetyl,
methyl, or phosphoryl groups and those that utilize the energy
of ATP hydrolysis to mobilize nucleosomes. SWI/SNF, a 2 MDa
complex made up of 8 to 11 polypeptides, is the most intensively
studied of the latter class. Though originally identiﬁed in yeast,
the complex is present in all eukaryotes and highly evolutionarily
conserved. In mammals several variants of SWI/SNF exist, each
containing one of two mutually exclusive ATPase subunits,
BRG1 or BRM. The complexes further differ in subunit composi-
tion but all contain the same active core that, in addition to
SNF5, consists of BAF155, BAF170, and either BRG1 or BRM.
(Phelan et al., 1999).

While it has been known for a decade that SWI/SNF regu-
lates transcription through chromatin remodeling, it is only re-
cently that several observations have indicated a potential link
between SWI/SNF and tumor suppression. BRG1 and BRM
bind to the tumor suppressor Rb and are required for Rb-medi-
ated cell cycle arrest (Dunaief et al., 1994; Strobeck et al., 2000;

Strober et al., 1996; Trouche et al., 1997; Zhang et al., 2000).
Subsequently, association of SWI/SNF with BRCA1 in a bio-
chemical complex was reported (Bochar et al., 2000). Speciﬁc,
inactivating mutations in SNF5 were identiﬁed in the majority of
cases of malignant rhabdoid tumor, a rare but highly aggressive
cancer of early childhood, and constituted the ﬁrst genetic evi-
dence linking SWI/SNF to tumor suppression (Biegel et al., 1999;
Sevenet et al., 1999; Versteege et al., 1998). Inactivating muta-
tions in BRG1 have also been identiﬁed in several human tumor
cell lines (Wong et al., 2000). Attempts to conﬁrm the signiﬁ-
cance of these ﬁndings in murine models have met with variable
success. Mice deﬁcient in either Brg1 or Snf5 die early in embry-
onic development and thus only haploinsufﬁcient mice can be
assessed for cancer occurrence (Bultman et al., 2000; Guidi et
al., 2001; Klochendler-Yeivin et al., 2000; Roberts et al., 2000).
Brg1 haploinsufﬁcient mice display a mild tumor-prone pheno-
type with 3/20 mice developing glandular tumors, none of which
exhibited loss of heterozygosity for Brg1. Snf5 haploinsufﬁcient
mice are prone to developing tumors characterized by rhabdoid
cells and bear remarkable resemblance to human malignant
rhabdoid tumors. Like Brg1, Brm is present in only a subset of
SWI/SNF complexes. Brm-deﬁcient mice are viable and heavier
than normal, but do not appear tumor prone (Reyes et al., 1998).
Of Swi/Snf genes inactivated in mice to date, only Snf5 is a
core member present in all Swi/Snf complexes. However, early
embryonic lethality in Snf5-deﬁcient animals precludes evalua-

S I G N I F I C A N C E

Chromatin remodeling complexes are essential for appropriate transcriptional regulation of large numbers of genes. Snf5 is a core
subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex and is one of only a few subunits present in all variants of the complex.
Recent data suggest that SWI/SNF may serve an important tumor suppressor role for a variety of cancers. However, the data have
often been indirect in nature and mouse knockout experiments have been hampered by lethality. While haploinsufﬁcient models
have provided support to this association, long latency and low penetrance have hampered further analysis. Utilizing a novel
conditional targeting approach that should be useful in the characterization of other tumor suppressor genes, we demonstrate that
controlled inactivation of Snf5 in vivo results in extremely rapid development of aggressive cancers with high penetrance.

CANCER CELL : NOVEMBER 2002 · VOL. 2 · COPYRIGHT  2002 CELL PRESS

415

A R T I C L E

Figure 1. Snf5 conditional targeting construct
The conditionally targeted allele with the neomycin resistance cassette
removed is shown on top and the allele that results following Cre expression
is shown below.

tion of tumor development in its absence. Conditional targeting
utilizing the loxP-Cre system provides an alternate strategy as
a target gene ﬂanked by loxP sites may be inactivated in vivo
in liveborn mice by expression of the bacteriophage Cre recom-
binase (Lewandoski, 2001; Sauer and Henderson, 1989).

In order to circumvent embryonic lethality and evaluate the
effect of biallelic loss of Snf5, we generated strains of mice with
two different conditional mutations at the Snf5 locus—one a
conditionally targeted Snf5 allele and the other a reversibly inac-
tivating allele. These mice were bred to transgenic strains that
express Cre recombinase either in the very early embryo or
following induction with interferon. Using this approach, we
report a powerful system for evaluating conditional oncogenesis
mediated by Snf5 loss. This approach should also prove useful
for evaluating other essential tumor suppressor genes.

Results

Inactivation of Snf5 in conditional Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺ mice leads
to rapid demise
Previously we generated a targeted Snf5 null allele (Snf5⫺) (Rob-
erts et al., 2000). Snf5⫺/⫺ mice are early embryonic lethal.
Haploinsufﬁcient Snf5⫹/⫺ mice are predisposed to rhabdoid tu-
mors that bear a striking histologic resemblance to human ma-
lignant rhabdoid tumors. Further follow-up of a cohort of Snf5⫹/⫺
mice has revealed an overall tumor incidence of 12%. In total,
28 mice have developed tumors with a median onset of just
over one year. All but one of the tumors was of the rhabdoid
type. While this establishes a ﬁrm link between Snf5 and tumor
suppression, the low penetrance and high median age have
precluded the use of Snf5⫹/⫺ mice as a practical tumor model
with which to study the involvement of Snf5 in critical cellular
pathways.

To recapitulate the Snf5 null mutation utilizing a conditional
allele, we generated a targeting construct in which exon 1 is
ﬂanked by loxP sites (ﬂoxed) (Figure 1). Thus, following exposure
to Cre recombinase, exon 1,which contains the initiator ATG,
is deleted. Following appropriate targeting in ES cells, condition-
ally targeted Snf5ﬂoxed mice were generated.

To conﬁrm that inactivation of the Snf5ﬂoxed allele recreates
a Snf5⫺ allele, we bred mice carrying the conditional allele to
mice carrying both the Snf5⫺ allele (Snf5⫹/⫺) and the Gata1-Cre
transgene (Gata1-Cre⫹). Gata1-Cre is expressed very early in
embryonic development and results in ubiquitous deletion of
ﬂoxed target sequences (Mao et al., 1999). As anticipated, Cre-

mediated deletion of the ﬂoxed allele by the Gata1-Cre trans-
gene resulted in lethality of Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺ embryos (data not shown).
We next considered the use of various lines of transgenic
Cre-expressing mice that would be useful in the evaluation of
Snf5 function. We ultimately chose Mx-Cre mice for two rea-
sons. First, expression of Cre from the Mx promoter is inducible
and could therefore circumvent embryonic lethality caused by
loss of Snf5. The Mx promoter is activated by injection of inter-
feron or, alternatively, by administration of the interferon-inducer
synthetic double-stranded RNA (polyI/polyC),
(Kuhn et al.,
1995). Second, following induction of Mx-Cre mice, Cre-medi-
ated excision occurs to some degree within all tissues with the
exception of brain. Widespread excision was essential because
the cell of origin of malignant rhabdoid tumor is unknown. We
therefore bred Mx-Cre mice onto the Snf5ﬂoxed background.

Following polyI/polyC administration, high levels of Cre-
mediated excision were achieved in bone marrow, liver, thymus,
and spleen and moderate levels in all other tissues tested includ-
ing muscle, heart, lung, GI tract, kidney, uterus, ovaries, and
testes. The only tissue that lacked excision was brain. Whereas
polyI/polyC treatment of 10 Snf5ﬂoxed/⫹/Mx-Cre mice had no ef-
fect on survival, treatment of Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/Mx-Cre mice resulted
in dramatic ﬁndings. Between 1 and 3 weeks after injection,
90% of Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/Mx-Cre mice died; the remainder died over
the ensuing 4 weeks. This occurred whether mice were injected
as neonates or adults. By 1–2 weeks following polyI/polyC ad-
ministration, mice appeared ill and were profoundly pancytope-
nic. Mice often displayed extensive bruising of the skin and
intestinal hemorrhage (Figures 2A and 2B). Histological analysis
of bone marrow revealed an extreme deﬁciency of hematopoi-
etic cells (Figure 2C). Presumably bone marrow aplasia led to
low platelet counts, bleeding, anemia, oxygen deprivation, and
death. Several mice developed only transient mild/moderate
pancytopenia. Despite daily monitoring and a healthy appear-
ance, these latter mice succumbed to sudden death, the etiol-
ogy of which is unclear. Of note, a single mouse developed a
lymphoma 12 days after injection. These ﬁndings demonstrate
that continued Snf5 is required for survival of both neonatal and
mature mice and is necessary for maintenance of hematopoietic
cells within the bone marrow. Rapid demise due to widespread
inactivation of Snf5 in Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺ mice, however, precludes their
use as a tumor model.

Generation of a reversible, inverting conditional
Snf5 allele (Snf5inv)
We reasoned that decreasing the penetrance of Snf5 loss in
bone marrow and other tissues might circumvent lethality be-
cause unaffected progenitor cells would proliferate and com-
pensate for the death of affected cells. Moreover, even partial
penetrance would still be expected to generate many Snf5 null
cells, which might be highly tumor predisposed. To establish
such an animal model, we modiﬁed the Snf5 locus so that it
could be reversibly inactivated via Cre-mediated gene inversion,
an approach ﬁrst used by Lam and Rajewsky in the context of
B-lymphoid cell function (Lam and Rajewsky, 1998)—here, we
apply this approach to cancer modeling.

In construction of traditional conditional alleles with the loxP-
Cre recombination system, 34 base pair loxP sites are placed
in the same directional orientation ﬂanking a target DNA region.
Upon expression of Cre recombinase, crossing-over results in
the excision of DNA between the loxP sites (Figure 3A). In con-

416

CANCER CELL : NOVEMBER 2002

A R T I C L E

administration of polyI/polyC, only 50% of the alleles would end
up in the inverted orientation if no biological selection were
imposed.

We generated the reversible inverting conditional allele of
Snf5, designated Snf5inv with the targeting vector shown (Figure
3C). We predicted that inversion of exon 1 would inactivate the
gene given that mutations within exon 1 predispose to cancer
in humans and because no alternative initiation sites are present
downstream of the initiator ATG. Snf5inv/inv mice appear normal
in the absence of Cre expression (data not shown).

To validate the properties of the Snf5inv allele, we ﬁrst exam-
ined the consequences of expressing Cre recombinase within
the germline (or very early embryo) of Snf5inv/⫺ mice through use
of the Gata1-Cre transgene. As was the case with Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/
Gata1-Cre mice, Snf5inv/⫺/Gata1-Cre mice were embryonic lethal
suggesting that loss of Snf5 in a substantial proportion (or 50%)
of cells during embryonic development is incompatible with
survival. To test the Snf5inv allele further, we then analyzed polyI/
polyC-treated Snf5inv/⫹ mice carrying the Mx-Cre transgene. We
predicted that there would be no selective disadvantage to
inversion of Snf5 in this genetic background. Administration of
polyI/polyC was tolerated without any adverse effects. DNA
analysis validated the properties of the Snf5inv allele. In organs
where induction of the Mx promoter is highly efﬁcient such as
bone marrow, ⵑ50% of DNA derived from the Snf5inv allele was
in the germline (active) orientation and ⵑ50% in the inverted
(inactive) orientation (Figure 3D). In those tissues in which the
Mx-Cre transgene is less well expressed, a smaller fraction of
the Snf5inv derived DNA was in the inverted orientation. Recom-
bination was detected within all tissues with the exception of
brain where the Mx-Cre transgene is not expressed.

Highly penetrant, rapid tumor formation following
Cre-mediated inversion in Snf5inv/⫺ mice
The effect of polyI/polyC-activated Cre expression on the short-
term survival of Snf5inv/⫺/Mx-Cre mice was strikingly different
from that observed with Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/Mx-Cre mice. Rather than
succumbing within the three weeks following polyI/polyC ad-
ministration, Snf5inv/⫺/Mx-Cre mice initially appeared normal.
However, beginning at 4 weeks following injection, Snf5inv/⫺/
Mx-Cre mice developed cancer. The susceptibility to tumor
formation was dramatic: 100% of the mice developed tumors
with a median onset of only 11 weeks post-polyI/polyC (Figure
4). Mice displayed an enlarged lymph node or dramatically en-
larged spleens and livers (Figures 5A–5C). This was often ac-
companied by a mild progressive decrease in blood counts, an
increase in circulating eosinophils, and occasionally by circulat-
ing tumor cells (Figure 5D). Histologic analysis revealed efface-
ment of normal architecture in involved lymph nodes and spleen
(Figure 5E) and peri-portal involvement frequently in liver (Figure
5F). Bone marrow was typically devoid of malignant cells al-
though it often contained moderately increased numbers of
eosinophils. At high-magniﬁcation the tumors revealed a pleo-
morphic mixture of small to intermediate sized cells including
a predominant population of intermediate sized cells with irregu-
lar to cleaved nuclei, vesicular chromatin, and variably distinct
nucleoli (Figures 5G and 5H). Mitotic ﬁgures were frequent. The
histologic appearance of the tumor cells was highly suggestive
of malignant lymphocytes.

Tumors were characterized further by immunohistochemis-
try. Findings were consistent in eight tumors that were analyzed

Figure 2. Inactivation of Snf5 with Mx-Cre leads to hemorrhage and pancy-
topenia
A: Subcutaneous hemorrhage is present over the right thorax and abdomen
of a Mx⫹ Snf5Cond/⫺ pup that was injected with polyI/polyC one week earlier.
B: Abdominal organs of a Mx⫹ Snf5Cond/⫺ mouse injected with polyI/polyC
eight days earlier demonstrating extensive intestinal hemorrhage. The color
of the intestine (I) is normally close to that of the stomach (S) or bladder
(B) but in this case is dark red due to bleeding. Liver (L).
C: A section through the femur of an adult Mx⫹ Snf5Cond/⫺ mouse that was
injected with polyI/polyC 16 days earlier. The bone marrow contains only
mature red blood cells and there is virtually no hematopoietic activity.
Reference bar ⫽ 50 ␮m.

trast, Cre-mediated inversion takes place when the ﬂanking loxP
sites are placed in opposing orientation (Figure 3B). This is a
reversible event since both loxP sites are recreated on the same
strand of DNA following inversion. Previously, Lam and Rajew-
sky (Lam and Rajewsky, 1998) demonstrated that Cre-mediated
inversion occurs with high efﬁciency. We reasoned that following
transient expression of the Cre protein within cells a steady
state would be rapidly reached between alleles that were in the
germline orientation and those in the inverted orientation. Thus,
in any given tissue, even if 100% of cells expressed Cre following

CANCER CELL : NOVEMBER 2002

417

A R T I C L E

Figure 3. An inverting conditional allele allows for reversible inactivation and results in partial penetrance of Snf5 loss
A: Diagram of a conditionally targeted allele containing loxP sites in identical orientations. Following expression of Cre, DNA between the LoxP sites is
removed and the loxP sites are recreated on separate DNA molecules making the reaction essentially irreversible.
B: Diagram demonstrating the effect of placing loxP sites in opposing orientations. Following expression of Cre, DNA between the loxP sites is inverted.
Since both loxP sites remain on the same DNA strand, the reaction is entirely reversible.
C: Inverting conditional Snf5 construct. The construct was made by reversing the orientation of the ﬂoxed neomycin resistance cassette within intron 1 and
then transfecting ES clones to remove the neomycin resistance cassette.
D: Southern blot of DNA from the organs of a Mx⫹ Snf5Inv/⫹ mouse one month after injection with polyI/polyC. Lane 1 contains tail DNA obtained from the
mouse prior to injection with polyI/polyC and demonstrates presence of the wild-type and inverting conditional allele in the active orientation only. Lane
2 contains DNA from the tail of the mouse obtained following injection with polyI/polyC. The Mx promoter is weakly expressed in tissues of the tail but there
is now a faint band corresponding to the inverting allele in the inactive orientation while the majority of the inverting allele remains in the active orientation.
In contrast, Mx-Cre is highly expressed in thymus, bone marrow, spleen, and liver, and close to 50% of the inverting allele is located in the inactive orientation
within these organs—demonstrating that despite close to 100% expression of Cre, only 50% of the inverting allele is in the inactive orientation.

(Figure 6). All tumors were positive for the T cell markers Thy1.2,
CD3, and CD8 and negative for CD4, immature T cell (TdT), B
cell (B220), and myeloid (Mac-1 and Gr-1) markers. Tumors
were highly vascular as assessed by CD31 (PECAM) staining.
These ﬁndings deﬁne the tumors as mature CD8⫹ T cell lympho-
mas (Morse et al., 2002), a tumor type not seen in Snf5 haploin-
sufﬁcient mice.

To examine potential clonality of these mature T cell lympho-
mas, we performed Southern analysis of the ␤ T cell receptor
locus. As shown in Figure 7A, we observed monoclonal re-
arrangements in each tumor with one tumor containing two
discrete rearranged bands. In total, 28 Snf5inv/⫺ mice carrying
Mx-Cre have been treated with polyI/polyC. Twenty-three devel-
oped cancer within 24 weeks following injection and another
ﬁve were found dead with advanced autolysis precluding evalu-
ation of the cause of death. Of the 23 evaluable mice, 20 devel-
oped lymphomas and 3 developed rhabdoid tumors.

Inactivation of Snf5 in T cell lymphomas
of polyI/polyC-treated Snf5inv/⫺ mice
The orientation of the Snf5inv allele was determined in various
tissues and tumors in multiple Snf5inv/⫺/Mx-Cre mice by South-
ern blot analysis (Figure 7B). In all tissues other than tumor,
virtually all Snf5inv-derived DNA was in the normal (active) orien-
tation. In contrast, in lymphoma DNA the majority of Snf5inv-
derived DNA was in the inverted (inactive) orientation. Since the
inverting event is detectable in most tissues only when the Snf5inv
allele is paired with a wild-type allele but not when it is paired
with a knockout allele (compare Figure 3D to Figure 7B), we
infer that loss of Snf5 is lethal to virtually all cells and yet also
predisposes to malignant transformation. The small amount of
Snf5inv allele DNA in the functional orientation within the tumor
very likely reﬂects the presence of nonmalignant cells, such as
endothelial and inﬂammatory cells, which are abundant in these
tumors.

418

CANCER CELL : NOVEMBER 2002

A R T I C L E

Figure 4. Survival of Snf5 targeted mice
Snf5⫹/⫺ mice are predisposed to develop rhab-
doid tumors. Overall, there is a 12%–15% pene-
trance with a median onset of 12 months. Mx⫹
Snf5Cond/⫺ mice (designated Stc/⫺) die rapidly of
bone marrow and organ failure following injec-
tion with polyI/polyC. 90% of the mice die within
3 weeks and the remainder over the next four
weeks. Mx⫹ Snf5Inv/⫺ mice succumb to cancer
with a penetrance of 100% and median latency
of 11 weeks after injection with polyI/polyC.

Effects of Snf5 loss upon lymphoid subpopulations
The ﬁnding of exclusively CD8⫹ mature lymphomas in Snf5inv/⫺/
Mx-Cre mice is particularly interesting since mice normally have
a 4:1 predominance of CD4⫹:CD8⫹ mature T cells. It was re-
cently reported that two other subunits of Swi/Snf, Brg1 and
Baf57, are involved in suppression of CD4 expression and acti-
vation of CD8 expression during thymocyte development (Chi
et al., 2002). We thus sought to evaluate whether Snf5 loss had
differential effects upon lymphocyte subpopulations in spleen
and thymus. Splenocytes and thymocytes were evaluated at
12, 18, 24, 36, 48, 96, and 216 hr following induction with polyI/
polyC. There was a progressive loss of hematopoietic cells
within both tissues as well as in bone marrow. Lymphocyte
subsets within the spleen were lost at equal rates following
inactivation of Snf5. There was no difference in the CD4⫹:CD8⫹
ratio or in the T cell:B cell ratio in spleen following induction
(Figures 8A and 8B). Further, we examined V␤ rearrangements
in splenic T cells and found no change in the relative prevalence
of individual V␤ segments following induction (not shown). Simi-
larly, inactivation of Snf5 led to an equal
loss of thymocyte
subsets. No signiﬁcant differences were detected in
CD4⫹CD8⫺, CD4⫺CD8⫹, or CD4⫹CD8⫹ thymocyte subsets ei-
ther in total thymus or in the TCR lo/⫺ fraction (not shown).
These data suggest that the development of exclusively CD8⫹
lymphomas is not due to differential lethality within lymphocyte
subsets following Snf5 inactivation.

Cell death following loss of Snf5
Since inactivation of Snf5 led to the loss of large numbers of
cells in addition to oncogenic transformation, we sought to
determine whether apoptosis occurred following induction.
Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/Mx-Cre mice were induced with polyI/polyC and tis-
sues harvested at 12, 18, 24, 36, 48, 96, and 216 hr post-
induction. We focused our analysis upon liver and spleen be-
cause these organs are the most common sites of lymphoma
occurrence and have high levels of Cre activity. No increase in
apoptosis was evident at 12 hr post-induction. However, at 18 to

24 hr following a single dose of polyI/polyC there was increased
apoptosis in Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/Mx-Cre mice when compared either to
uninduced mice of the same genotype or to induced Snf5ﬂoxed/⫹/
Mx-Cre control mice at the same time points. The increased
apoptosis was readily detected by ﬂow cytometric analysis of
anexin-V staining of splenocytes (Figures 8C and 8D), by TUNEL
staining in liver and spleen (Figures 8E–8H) and by histologcial
analysis (Figures 8I and 8J).

Discussion

Highly penetrant, short latency tumor formation
upon inactivation of Snf5
The data presented here demonstrate that Snf5, a core member
of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, is vital for tumor
suppression in vivo and is also required for the survival of most
normal cells. The rapidity with which tumors develop following
inducible inactivation of Snf5 is unprecedented. 100% percent
of mice develop tumors with a median latency of 11 weeks. In
comparison, the time to tumor development with other tumor
suppressors is signiﬁcantly longer. p53-deﬁcient mice develop
tumors at a median age of 20 weeks (not including the 3 weeks
of embryonic development without p53), p19/Arf knockout mice
at 38 weeks, p16/Ink4a⫺ mice at 60 weeks, and loss of p21/
Cip1/Waf1 does not lead to a detectable increase in tumor
formation in mice (Brugarolas et al., 1995; Donehower et al.,
1992; Serrano et al., 1996; Sharpless et al., 2001). Inactivation
of the tumor suppressors Rb, Apc, Pten, Vhl, or Nf1 each leads
to embryonic lethality (Bollag et al., 1996; Di Cristofano et al.,
2001; Gnarra et al., 1997; Largaespada et al., 1996; Lee et al.,
1992; Su et al., 1992). Haploinsufﬁciency for Rb leads to tumor
formation with a median latency of 45 weeks while combined
p53 deﬁciency and Rb haploinsufﬁciency yields tumors at 17
weeks (Williams et al., 1994). Thus, the aggressive cancer-prone
phenotype that occurs following reversible inactivation of the
Snf5 gene is striking when compared to other tumor suppressor

CANCER CELL : NOVEMBER 2002

419

A R T I C L E

Figure 5. Lymphomas in Mx⫹ Snf5Inv/⫺ mice
A: Mouse demonstrating markedly enlarged lymph node secondary to lym-
phoma.
B: Spleen from mouse with lymphoma (top) compared to spleen from nor-
mal littermate (bottom).
C: Liver from mouse with lymphoma (top) compared to litter from normal
littermate (bottom).
D: Peripheral blood smear demonstrating the presence of three malignant
white blood cells. Reference bar ⫽ 10 ␮m.
E: Section from involved spleen demonstrating widespread necrosis and an
island of malignant lymphocytes. Reference bars ⫽ 100 ␮m.
F: Section through involved liver demonstrating peri-portal inﬁltration of lym-
phoma. Reference bars ⫽ 100 ␮m.
G and H: Sections through two different lymphomas demonstrating uniform
histologic appearance of the lymphomas. The lymphomas consist of a
predominant population of intermediate sized cells with irregular nuclei,
vesicular chromatin, and variably distinct nucleoli. Mitotic ﬁgures are fre-
quent. Reference bar ⫽ 10 ␮m.

knockouts and indicates a critical role for Snf5 in preventing
cancer.

The limited spectrum of tumors arising after Snf5 inactivation
is particularly interesting. While disruption of tumor suppressors
such as p53, p19/Arf, and Pten predisposes to a wide variety
of cancers, inactivation of others leads to speciﬁc phenotypes.
For example, haploinsufﬁciency for Rb, a gene known to be
critical in tumor suppression in humans, yields exclusively pitu-
itary adenocarcinomas in mice, an otherwise rare tumor (Hu et
al., 1994). Similarly, inactivation of Snf5 in our system gives rise
to two speciﬁc types of tumors. The basis for this speciﬁcity
remains unclear but several possibilities exist. First, since the
lymphomas occur early, have a high mitotic rate, and are rapidly

progressive, animals may die of lymphoma prior to the appear-
ance of more slowly growing solid tumors. For instance, this
may explain why the overall incidence of rhabdoid tumors in
the inverting system is the same as in the haploinsufﬁcient mice
(10%–15%) despite a signiﬁcantly earlier onset of 4.6 months
in the inverting mice instead of just over 12 months in the
haploinsufﬁcient mice. Second, the high proliferative rate of
hematopoietic cells combined with the high activity of the Mx-
Cre transgene in this tissue may select for the occurrence of
lymphomas although this would not explain the speciﬁc predi-
lection for mature CD8⫹ T cell lymphomas per se. Third, recent
data demonstrate roles for the Swi/Snf subunits Baf57 and Brg1
in activation of CD4 expression and repression of CD8 expres-
sion (Chi et al., 2002). If Snf5 also plays a role in controlling the
development of T cells then loss of Snf5 may impair T cell
development and predispose to malignant transformation of
maturing CD8⫹ T cells. However, using ﬂow cytometric analysis
we were unable to detect differential effects upon T cell subsets
following inactivation of Snf5. It must be noted, though, that
induction of Mx-Cre relies upon increased levels of interferon,
and it is thus possible that the presence of interferon obscurred
subtle thymic developmental effects following Snf5 inactivation.

Tumor suppression by other Swi/Snf subunits
It is not yet clear whether tumor suppression is speciﬁc to Snf5
or is a more general property of the Swi/Snf complex. Several
lines of evidence suggest that the tumor suppressor activity of
Snf5 is related to the role of the Swi/Snf complex in chromatin
remodeling. First, other chromatin remodeling complexes, par-
ticularly histone acetylase (HAT) and deacetylase (HDAC) fac-
tors, are involved in recurrent chromosomal translocations and
have been implicated in oncogenesis. Second, Brg1 and Brm,
mutually exclusive catalytic ATPase-containing subunits of Swi/
Snf, each bind to Rb and are required for Rb-mediated cell
cycle arrest. (Dunaief et al., 1994; Trouche et al., 1997). Third,
the Swi/Snf complex is also part of the Brca1 biochemical com-
plex and Brg1 directly binds to Brca1 (Bochar et al., 2000).
Fourth, mutations in BRG1 have been detected in several human
tumor cell lines and, while inactivation of Brg1 results in embry-
onic lethality in mice, 3 of 30 Brg1 haploinsufﬁcient mice devel-
oped glandular tumors (Bultman et al., 2000). Most recently,
HLTF, a member of the Swi/Snf family, was demonstrated to
be speciﬁcally silenced in human colon cancers (Moinova et
al., 2002) and BAF180 was found to have speciﬁc nonsense
mutations in two of 40 primary breast cancers (Ramon Parsons,
personal communication). Thus, there is accumulating evidence
that the entire Swi/Snf complex is involved in growth regulation
and may have a widespread role in tumor suppression. Since
Snf5 is an invariant subunit in all Swi/Snf complexes, further
elucidation of its function and interacting pathways is likely to
generate insight into this newly appreciated mechanism of tu-
mor suppression.

While the above data support a generalized role for the Swi/
Snf complex in tumor suppression, the fact that distinct tumor-
prone phenotypes result following inactivation of different Swi/
Snf subunits suggests that the complex does not solely act in
a single pathway. Rather, we speculate Swi/Snf may be involved
in diverse growth control pathways and inactivation of individual
subunits leads to altered expression of only subsets of Swi/
Snf-regulated genes. Thus, loss of Brg1 promotes glandular
tumors while inactivation of Snf5 leads to rhabdoid tumors and

420

CANCER CELL : NOVEMBER 2002

A R T I C L E

Figure 6. Loss of Snf5 gives rise to mature CD8⫹ T cell lymphomas
Immunohistochemical staining was performed on eight lymphomas from Mx⫹ Snf5Inv/⫺ mice that had been injected with polyI/polyC. Representative sections
are shown.
A: IgG2a negative control.
B: CD31 (PECAM) reveals a high degree of vascularity.
C: Mac-1 stains only scattered macrophage/monocyte cells within the tumor mass.
D: Gr-1 stains only occasional neutrophils within the tumor.
E: B220 identiﬁes a few B cells within the tumor.
F: The vast majority of cells are positive for this T cell marker.
G: The vast majority of cells are also positive for this T cell marker, although it is slightly less intense than thy1.2.
H: All tumors were negative for CD4 with the exception of a very few cells.
I: All tumors were positive in the vast majority of cells for this marker.

lymphomas. Given the high penetrance and rapid lethality
caused by lymphomas following conditional inactivation of Snf5,
it will be interesting to determine whether other, slower growing,
tumors occur in the absence of Snf5 but never become manifest
due to early death of lymphoma-laden mice. Ultimately, identiﬁ-
cation of interacting pathways and downstream targets of Snf5
as well as evaluation of cancer-prone phenotypes in mice deﬁ-
cient for other Swi/Snf subunits will be required in order to
identify speciﬁc roles for Snf5 and Swi/Snf in cancer.

Snf5 is required in nonmalignant cells
It is interesting that loss of Snf5 expression ultimately results
in the death of cells and yet also predisposes to malignant
transformation. This apparent paradox is not without precedent
in oncogenesis as illustrated by ﬁndings with c-myc. Overex-
pression of c-myc causes most primary cells to undergo apo-

ptotic death. However, rare cells that harbor an additional pre-
disposing mutation such as in ras, bcl2, or bax undergo
increased proliferation/survival and are predisposed to malig-
nancy (Hoffman et al., 2002). Thus, loss of Snf5 may result in
establishment of an epigenetic state that leads to cell death
except in those rare cells that contain additional mutations and
progress to cancer.

Snf5 and human cancer
The types of tumors that develop in the Snf5inv/⫺ mice carrying
the Mx-Cre transgene closely resemble speciﬁc human tumors.
The histologic appearance of the rhabdoid tumors is essentially
indistinguishable from human malignant rhabdoid tumors that
carry biallelic inactivating mutations in hSNF5. The clinical pre-
sentation and histologic appearance of mice with mature T cell
lymphoma/leukemia is highly reminiscent of human mature T

CANCER CELL : NOVEMBER 2002

421

A R T I C L E

Figure 7. Loss of Snf5 leads to monoclonal lymphomas and loss of nonmalignant cells
A: Southern blot of DNA obtained from tail and tumor samples of mice with lymphoma. The blot was hybridized with a probe to the V␤ region of the T cell
receptor. The three thymus lanes demonstrate the germline band at the top and faint polyclonal smears throughout the lane. The tail samples contain
only the germline band and each has a distinct clonal band within the tumor sample. In the case of mice Mx74 and Mx145, tumor samples consisted of
pieces of involved spleen and liver. B: Southern blot of DNA isolated from the organs and lymphoma of a Mx⫹ Snf5Inv/⫺ mouse that had been injected with
polyI/polyC. The tail DNA was harvested prior to injection and demonstrates the unrearranged bands. Of note, in the knockout allele (⫺), exon 1 has been
replaced with a neomycin resistance cassette surrounded by loxP sites. Thus, in the presence of Cre, the neomycin cassette is removed leading to a
change in size on the Southern blot while the allele remains inactive due to continued absence of exon 1. Comparison of the KO(⫺neo) band to the
KO(⫹neo) band demonstrates that there has been virtually 100% excision within thymus and bone marrow, over 90% excision in spleen, liver, and tumor
samples, and 20%–40% excision in the remaining organs with the exception of brain where there is no excision. In contrast, despite high levels of Cre
expression, the vast majority of the inverting allele remains in the active orientation with the exception of the tumor sample where the majority is in the
inactive orientation.

cell leukemia/lymphoma in which patients typically present with
isolated adenopathy or with markedly enlarged spleen and liver.
Elevated eosinophil counts and inﬁltration of tumor masses with
nonmalignant inﬂammatory cells are common in such patients.
Mature T cell lymphoma/leukemia is among the most aggressive
of human lymphoid neoplasms and is typically refractory to
treatment with chemotherapy. Notably, the high frequency of
mature T cell leukemia/lymphoma in the Snf5inv/⫺ mice suggests
a potential link to human cancer where 45% of cases of mature
T cell prolymphocytic leukemia have loss of genetic material at
chromosome 22q11, the location of SNF5 (Soulier et al., 2001).
We are currently investigating the status of Snf5 within these
human tumors.

Advantages of reversible inverting conditional alleles
for tumor modeling in mice
Given that many tumor suppressor genes are essential for sur-
vival of individual cells or the whole organism, conditional tar-

geting strategies are required in order to evaluate the normal
function of these genes and generate useful cancer-prone ani-
mal models. Conditional targeting typically makes use of site-
speciﬁc recombinases, either the Cre-loxP system derived from
bacteriophage P1 or the Flp-Frt system derived from Sacchara-
romyces cerevisiae (Lewandoski, 2001). In combination with
transgenes that drive tissue-speciﬁc Cre/Flp expression, inacti-
vation of a gene of interest can be directed to a speciﬁc tissue.
However, many tumor suppressor genes are essential for sur-
vival, and deletion of the gene within speciﬁc tissues/organs
may lead to death of the mouse via loss of organ function.
The strategy we have used serves to counter this problem and
provides several advantages. First, we have utilized an inducible
system so that embryonic lethality due to loss of essential gene
functions is minimized. Second, the approach leads to repro-
ducible mosaic partial penetrance within multiple tissues. Con-
sequently, signiﬁcant numbers of cells lose expression of the

422

CANCER CELL : NOVEMBER 2002

A R T I C L E

targeted gene and become predisposed to malignant transfor-
mation, while at least half of cells retain expression and prevent
death of the animal due to organ failure.

The system we have developed should also prove ideal for
identifying interacting genetic pathways participating in tumor
suppression. The tumors that result from inactivation of Snf5
are highly penetrant and develop over a narrow time course.
Thus, examining the effects of other genetic mutations on tumor
formation in Snf5inv mice provides a robust system in which to
pursue how Snf5 loss contributes to oncogenesis, either through
established tumor suppressor pathways or through novel mech-
anisms.

Experimental Procedures

Generation of Snf5 conditionally targeted mice
An 8.8 kb region of homology beginning 4.1 kb 5⬘ of exon 1 and continuing
to the BamHI site in intron 1 was used to generate the targeting constructs.
A neomycin resistance cassette ﬂanked by loxP sites was blunt-end ligated
into the XcmI site 1.4 kb 3⬘ of exon 1 and this was transformed into E. coli.
A clone with the loxP sites pointed in the 3⬘ direction was selected. Polylinker
and loxP sites were inserted at the EcoRv site 0.8 kb upstream of exon 1
such that the loxP site pointed 3⬘. An HSV-TK cassette was inserted at
the BamHI site at the 3⬘ end of the homology region. This construct was
electroporated into CJ7 ES cells (strain 129) and clones were selected in
G418 and gancyclovir. Six of 114 clones had undergone homologous recom-
bination. Three of these six clones had incorporated the 5⬘ loxP site and two
of these had good karyotypes. In order to remove the neomycin resistance
cassette and leave only the loxP sites behind, one of these clones (#108)
was electroporated with the pMC-Cre expression plasmid. Fourteen of 96
clones were now G418 sensitive and 4 of these 14 clones retained exon 1.
Two of these clones (#7 and #8) had good karyotypes and were injected
into blastocysts. Both gave rise to high percentage chimeric mice and both
led to germline transmission.

Generation of Snf5 inverting conditional mice
The inverting construct was generated identically to the conditional construct
described above with the exception that a bacterial clone containing the
loxP sites of the neomycin cassette pointing in the 5⬘ direction was used.
This construct was electroporated into CJ7 ES cells and clones were selected
in G418 and gancyclovir. Twenty of 103 clones underwent homologous
recombination and ten of these retained the 5⬘ loxP site. In order to prevent
transcriptional interference from the neomycin resistance gene, one of these
clones (#31) was transduced with the pMC-Cre expression plasmid and
subclones that had deleted the neomycin cassette but retained exon 1 of
Snf5 were identiﬁed. Thirty of 115 clones were now G418 sensitive and 5
of these retained exon 1. Two of these clones (#26 and #28) had good
karyotypes and were injected into blastocysts. Both gave rise to high-per-
centage chimeric mice and both led to germline transmission.

Mx-Cre induction
Induction of Mx-Cre in vivo was accomplished via one of two regimens.
Neonatal mice (day of life 3) were injected subcutaneously with 200 ␮g of
polyI/polyC (# P-0913, Sigma Chemicals, St. Louis, MO) daily for 5 days.
Mature mice (four to eight weeks of age) were injected intraperitoneally with

H: TUNEL reaction performed on a liver section from the same Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺
/Mx-Cre mouse in the ﬁrst two panels. Note the increased apoptosis in
comparison to the control mouse.
I: H&E stained spleen section from a Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/Mx-Cre mouse at 96 hr post-
induction. Arrows identify cells with the morphologic appearance of late
stage apoptosis while the arrowhead points to a tingible body macrophage
that has engulfed several apoptotic cells.
J: Liver section from a Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/Mx-Cre mouse. The arrow indicates a late
stage apoptotic cell.

Figure 8. Lymphocyte development and apoptosis following inactivation
of Snf5
A and B: Flow cytometry of CD4 and CD8 staining of splenocytes from
Snf5ﬂoxed/⫹/Mx-Cre control mice (A) and Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/Mx-Cre mice (B). The sam-
ples shown are from 216 hr post-induction. No differences were apparent
at any of the times examined.
C and D: Two-color staining of nonpermeabilized splenocytes with Anexin-V
and propidium iodide (PI) from Snf5ﬂoxed/⫹/Mx-Cre control mice (C) and
Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/Mx-Cre mice (D) are shown at 24 hr post-induction. Viable cells
are Anexin-V negative and PI negative (lower left quadrant), necrotic cells
are positive for both markers (upper
right quadrant) and apoptotic
cells are positive for Anexin-V but negative for PI (lower right quadrant). Note
the increase in apoptotic cells in the Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/Mx-Cre mice compared to
the control mice.
E: Negative control TUNEL reaction performed without TdT enzyme on liver
from a Snf5ﬂoxed/⫺/Mx-Cre mouse at 18 hr after induction.
F: Positive control TUNEL reaction from the same mouse. The liver section
was treated with DnaseI prior to performing the TUNEL reaction in order to
generate DNA strand breaks.
G: TUNEL reaction performed on a liver section from a Snf5ﬂoxed/⫹/Mx-Cre
control mouse 18 hr after induction with polyI/polyC.

CANCER CELL : NOVEMBER 2002

423

A R T I C L E

300 ␮g of polyI/polyC every other day for ﬁve doses. There was no apparent
toxicity associated with either of these regimens.

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry was carried out utilizing commercially available stain-
ing kit (ABC kit, #SC-2019, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) and
antibodies (PharMingen, San Diego, CA) reactive to the following epitopes:
B220 (#01121A), Gr-1 (#557445), Mac-1 (557394), IgG2a (553927), IgG1
(553969), Thy-1.2 (553000), CD31 (557355), IgG2b (553986), CD3 (557306),
CD4 (553043), CD8 (558733).

Southern Analysis
Genotyping of mice was done by hybridizing a labeled 0.6 kb XcmI fragment
located 3 kb upstream of exon 1 to BamHI digested DNA. Deletion and
inversion of the conditional alleles was performed using a labeled 0.38 kb
XcmI fragment located 3 kb upstream of exon 1 to SpeI digested DNA.
Rearrangement at the T cell receptor ␤ locus was detected using a labeled
1.6 kb BamHI/KpnI fragment located just 5⬘ of C␤2 and hybridizing to BglII
digested DNA.

TUNEL staining
Detection of DNA strand breaks within apoptotic cells was carried out using
the In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Catalog # 1 684 809, Roche Diagnostics,
Mannheim, Germany). Staining of 5␮M cryopreserved sections was per-
formed according to the manufacturer’s directions with the exception that
permeabilization was carried out for 10 min in 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.1%
sodium citrate.

Flow Cytometric Analysis
Four-color immunostaining of primary thymocytes and splenocytes in single
cell suspension was carried out using the following antibodies: anti-CD4-
PE, anti-CD8-FITC, anti-TCR␤-APC, anti-B220-PerCP, anti-CD44-FITC,
anti-CD25-APC, anti-CD3-APC, anti-CD8-PerCP, anti-IgM-PE, and anti-
IgD-FITC (all antibodies obtained from BD PharMingen, San Diego, CA).
Analysis of V␤ T cell receptor was carried out with 15 individual FITC-conju-
gated monoclonal antibodies that recognize V␤ 2, 3, 4, 5.1 and 5.2, 6, 7,
8.1 and 8.2, 8.3, 9, 10b, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 17a T cell receptors (V␤ TCR
Screening Panel, catalog #0143KK, BD PharMingen, San Diego, CA).

Detection of apoptotic cells by ﬂow cytometry was carried out with the
Anexin-V-FLUOS Staining Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(Catalog # 1 858 777, Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany).

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank Christine Fillmore and Sophie Allende Richter for
expert technical assistance, Dr. Craig Bassing for providing a probe for T
cell receptor rearrangement, Dr. Geraldine Pinkus for performing the TdT
staining, and Dr. Hanno Hock for helpful discussions and for reviewing the
manuscript. C.W.M.R. has been supported by a physician scientist fellowship
from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, a fellowship grant from Hope
Street Kids, a developmental project grant from the Claudia-Adams Barr
program, and by a NIH career development award. S.H.O. is an Investigator
of the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute. Partial support was provided
through a Center of Excellence Award from the NIH-NIDDK.

Received: August 7, 2002
Revised: October 17, 2002

References

Biegel, J.A., Zhou, J.Y., Rorke, L.B., Stenstrom, C., Wainwright, L.M., and
Fogelgren, B. (1999). Germ-line and acquired mutations of INI1 in atypical
teratoid and rhabdoid tumors. Cancer Res. 59, 74–79.

Bochar, D.A., Wang, L., Beniya, H., Kinev, A., Xue, Y., Lane, W.S., Wang,
W., Kashanchi, F., and Shiekhattar, R. (2000). BRCA1 is associated with a
human SWI/SNF-related complex: linking chromatin remodeling to breast
cancer. Cell 102, 257–265.

Bollag, G., Clapp, D.W., Shih, S., Adler, F., Zhang, Y.Y., Thompson, P.,
Lange, B.J., Freedman, M.H., McCormick, F., Jacks, T., and Shannon, K.
(1996). Loss of NF1 results in activation of the Ras signaling pathway and
leads to aberrant growth in haematopoietic cells. Nat. Genet. 12, 144–148.

Brugarolas, J., Chandrasekaran, C., Gordon, J.I., Beach, D., Jacks, T., and
Hannon, G.J. (1995). Radiation-induced cell cycle arrest compromised by
p21 deﬁciency. Nature 377, 552–557.

Bultman, S., Gebuhr, T., Yee, D., La Mantia, C., Nicholson, J., Gilliam, A.,
Randazzo, F., Metzger, D., Chambon, P., Crabtree, G., and Magnuson, T.
(2000). A Brg1 null mutation in the mouse reveals functional differences
among mammalian SWI/SNF complexes. Mol. Cell 6, 1287–1295.

Chi, T.H., Wan, M., Zhao, K., Taniuchi, I., Chen, L., Littman, D.R., and
Crabtree, G.R. (2002). Reciprocal regulation of CD4/CD8 expression by SWI/
SNF-like BAF complexes. Nature 418, 195–199.

Di Cristofano, A., De Acetis, M., Koff, A., Cordon-Cardo, C., and Pandolﬁ,
P.P. (2001). Pten and p27KIP1 cooperate in prostate cancer tumor suppres-
sion in the mouse. Nat. Genet. 27, 222–224.

Donehower, L.A., Harvey, M., Slagle, B.L., McArthur, M.J., Montgomery,
C.A., Jr., Butel, J.S., and Bradley, A. (1992). Mice deﬁcient for p53 are
developmentally normal but susceptible to spontaneous tumours. Nature
356, 215–221.

Dunaief, J.L., Strober, B.E., Guha, S., Khavari, P.A., Alin, K., Luban, J.,
Begemann, M., Crabtree, G.R., and Goff, S.P. (1994). The retinoblastoma
protein and BRG1 form a complex and cooperate to induce cell cycle arrest.
Cell 79, 119–130.

Gnarra, J.R., Ward, J.M., Porter, F.D., Wagner, J.R., Devor, D.E., Grinberg,
A., Emmert-Buck, M.R., Westphal, H., Klausner, R.D., and Linehan, W.M.
(1997). Defective placental vasculogenesis causes embryonic lethality in
VHL-deﬁcient mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 9102–9107.

Guidi, C.J., Sands, A.T., Zambrowicz, B.P., Turner, T.K., Demers, D.A., Web-
ster, W., Smith, T.W., Imbalzano, A.N., and Jones, S.N. (2001). Disruption
of Ini1 leads to peri-implantation lethality and tumorigenesis in mice. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 21, 3598–3603.

Hoffman, B., Amanullah, A., Shafarenko, M., and Liebermann, D.A. (2002).
The proto-oncogene c-myc in hematopoietic development and leukemogen-
esis. Oncogene 21, 3414–3421.

Hu, N., Gutsmann, A., Herbert, D.C., Bradley, A., Lee, W.H., and Lee, E.Y.
(1994). Heterozygous Rb-1 delta 20/⫹ mice are predisposed to tumors of the
pituitary gland with a nearly complete penetrance. Oncogene 9, 1021–1027.

Klochendler-Yeivin, A., Fiette, L., Barra, J., Muchardt, C., Babinet, C., and
Yaniv, M. (2000). The murine SNF5/INI1 chromatin remodeling factor is
essential for embryonic development and tumor suppression. EMBO Rep.
1, 500–506.

Kuhn, R., Schwenk, F., Aguet, M., and Rajewsky, K. (1995). Inducible gene
targeting in mice. Science 269, 1427–1429.

Lam, K.P., and Rajewsky, K. (1998). Rapid elimination of mature autoreactive
B cells demonstrated by Cre-induced change in B cell antigen receptor
speciﬁcity in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 13171–13175.

Largaespada, D.A., Brannan, C.I., Jenkins, N.A., and Copeland, N.G. (1996).
Nf1 deﬁciency causes Ras-mediated granulocyte/macrophage colony stim-
ulating factor hypersensitivity and chronic myeloid leukaemia. Nat. Genet.
12, 137–143.

Lee, E.Y., Chang, C.Y., Hu, N., Wang, Y.C., Lai, C.C., Herrup, K., Lee, W.H.,
and Bradley, A. (1992). Mice deﬁcient for Rb are nonviable and show defects
in neurogenesis and haematopoiesis. Nature 359, 288–294.

Lewandoski, M. (2001). Conditional control of gene expression in the mouse.
Nat. Rev. Genet. 2, 743–755.

Mao, X., Fujiwara, Y., and Orkin, S.H. (1999). Improved reporter strain for
monitoring Cre recombinase-mediated DNA excisions in mice. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 96, 5037–5042.

Moinova, H.R., Chen, W.D., Shen, L., Smiraglia, D., Olechnowicz, J., Ravi,
L., Kasturi, L., Myeroff, L., Plass, C., Parsons, R., et al. (2002). HLTF gene
silencing in human colon cancer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 4562–4567.

424

CANCER CELL : NOVEMBER 2002

A R T I C L E

Morse, H.C., 3rd, Anver, M.R., Fredrickson, T.N., Haines, D.C., Harris, A.W.,
Harris, N.L., Jaffe, E.S., Kogan, S.C., MacLennan, I.C., Pattengale, P.K.,
and Ward, J.M. (2002). Bethesda proposals for classiﬁcation of lymphoid
neoplasms in mice. Blood 100, 246–258.

Phelan, M.L., Sif, S., Narlikar, G.J., and Kingston, R.E. (1999). Reconstitution
of a core chromatin remodeling complex from SWI/SNF subunits. Mol. Cell
3, 247–253.

Reyes, J.C., Barra, J., Muchardt, C., Camus, A., Babinet, C., and Yaniv, M.
(1998). Altered control of cellular proliferation in the absence of mammalian
brahma (SNF2alpha). EMBO J. 17, 6979–6991.

Roberts, C.W., Galusha, S.A., McMenamin, M.E., Fletcher, C.D., and Orkin,
S.H. (2000). Haploinsufﬁciency of Snf5 (integrase interactor 1) predisposes
to malignant rhabdoid tumors in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 13796–
13800.

Sauer, B., and Henderson, N. (1989). Cre-stimulated recombination at loxP-
containing DNA sequences placed into the mammalian genome. Nucleic
Acids Res. 17, 147–161.

Serrano, M., Lee, H., Chin, L., Cordon-Cardo, C., Beach, D., and DePinho,
R.A. (1996). Role of the INK4a locus in tumor suppression and cell mortality.
Cell 85, 27–37.

Sevenet, N., Sheridan, E., Amram, D., Schneider, P., Handgretinger, R.,
and Delattre, O. (1999). Constitutional mutations of the hSNF5/INI1 gene
predispose to a variety of cancers. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65, 1342–1348.

Sharpless, N.E., Bardeesy, N., Lee, K.H., Carrasco, D., Castrillon, D.H.,
Aguirre, A.J., Wu, E.A., Horner, J.W., and DePinho, R.A. (2001). Loss of
p16Ink4a with retention of p19Arf predisposes mice to tumorigenesis. Nature
413, 86–91.

Soulier, J., Pierron, G., Vecchione, D., Garand, R., Brizard, F., Sigaux, F.,

Stern, M.H., and Aurias, A. (2001). A complex pattern of recurrent chromo-
somal losses and gains in T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia. Genes Chromo-
somes Cancer 31, 248–254.

Strobeck, M.W., Knudsen, K.E., Fribourg, A.F., DeCristofaro, M.F., Weiss-
man, B.E., Imbalzano, A.N., and Knudsen, E.S. (2000). BRG-1 is required
for RB-mediated cell cycle arrest. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 7748–7753.

Strober, B.E., Dunaief, J.L., Guha, S., and Goff, S.P. (1996). Functional
interactions between the hBRM/hBRG1 transcriptional activators and the
pRB family of proteins. Mol. Cell. Biol. 16, 1576–1583.

Su, L.K., Kinzler, K.W., Vogelstein, B., Preisinger, A.C., Moser, A.R., Luongo,
C., Gould, K.A., and Dove, W.F. (1992). Multiple intestinal neoplasia caused
by a mutation in the murine homolog of the APC gene. Science 256, 668–670.

Trouche, D., Le Chalony, C., Muchardt, C., Yaniv, M., and Kouzarides, T.
(1997). RB and hbrm cooperate to repress the activation functions of E2F1.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 11268–11273.

Versteege, I., Sevenet, N., Lange, J., Rousseau-Merck, M.F., Ambros, P.,
Handgretinger, R., Aurias, A., and Delattre, O. (1998). Truncating mutations
of hSNF5/INI1 in aggressive paediatric cancer. Nature 394, 203–206.

Williams, B.O., Remington, L., Albert, D.M., Mukai, S., Bronson, R.T., and
Jacks, T. (1994). Cooperative tumorigenic effects of germline mutations in
Rb and p53. Nat. Genet. 7, 480–484.

Wong, A.K., Shanahan, F., Chen, Y., Lian, L., Ha, P., Hendricks, K., Ghaffari,
S., Iliev, D., Penn, B., Woodland, A.M., et al. (2000). BRG1, a component
of the SWI-SNF complex, is mutated in multiple human tumor cell lines.
Cancer Res. 60, 6171–6177.

Zhang, H.S., Gavin, M., Dahiya, A., Postigo, A.A., Ma, D., Luo, R.X., Harbour,
J.W., and Dean, D.C. (2000). Exit from G1 and S phase of the cell cycle is
regulated by repressor complexes containing HDAC-Rb-hSWI/SNF and Rb-
hSWI/SNF. Cell 101, 79–89.

CANCER CELL : NOVEMBER 2002

425

