Article

pubs.acs.org/jpr

†

†

‡

‡,⊥

§

Carlos García,

Victor Segura,

Elizabeth Guruceaga,

Joao Alves-Cruzeiro,

Fernando J. Corrales,

Proteogenomics Dashboard for the Human Proteome Project
Vital Vialas,
Daniel Tabas-Madrid,
∥,⊥
Gorka Prieto,
and Alberto Pascual-Montano*,†,⊥
†
ProteoRed-ISCIII, National Center for Biotechnology-CSIC (CNB), C/Darwin 3, Madrid 28049, Spain
‡
ProteoRed-ISCIII, Center for Applied Medical Research (CIMA), University of Navarra, Avda. Pío XII, 55, Pamplona E-31008,
Spain
Department of Communication Engineering E.T.S. Ingenierı́a de Bilbao, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Alda.
§
Urquijo, s/n, Bilbao 48013, Spain
Computer Science Faculty, Complutense University of Madrid (UCM), C/ Jose Garcı́á Santesmases 9, Madrid 28040, Spain
∥
*S Supporting Information

Juan Pablo Albar,

†,⊥

‡

†

ABSTRACT: dasHPPboard is a novel proteomics-based
dashboard that collects and reports the experiments produced
by the Spanish Human Proteome Project consortium
(SpHPP) and aims to help HPP to map the entire human
proteome. We have followed the strategy of analog genomics
projects like the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE),
which provides a vast amount of data on human cell
lines
experiments. The dashboard includes results of shotgun and
selected reaction monitoring proteomics experiments, post-
translational modiﬁcations information, as well as proteoge-
nomics studies. We have also processed the transcriptomics
data from the ENCODE and Human Body Map (HBM)
projects for the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc gene expression
patterns in diﬀerent cell lines and tissues, taking special interest in those genes having little proteomic evidence available (missing
proteins). Peptide databases have been built using single nucleotide variants and novel junctions derived from RNA-Seq data that
can be used in search engines for sample-speciﬁc protein identiﬁcations on the same cell lines or tissues. The dasHPPboard has
been designed as a tool that can be used to share and visualize a combination of proteomic and transcriptomic data, providing at
the same time easy access to resources for proteogenomics analyses. The dasHPPboard can be freely accessed at: http://
sphppdashboard.cnb.csic.es.
KEYWORDS: Human Proteome Project, chromosome 16, spHPP, proteomics, transcriptomics, RNA-Seq, ENCODE, bioinformatics,
proteogenomics

for

■ INTRODUCTION
The Human Genome Project,1 completed in 2003, successfully
sequenced nearly the entire human genome and provided the
blueprints
the proteome characterization with the
identiﬁcation of a potential panel of protein coding genes;
however, it rapidly became evident that our knowledge of about
two-thirds of these genes was considerably limited, including an
absence of protein-level evidence for ∼35% of them.2 It was in
this scenario that the idea to progress to the next level, mapping
the entire human proteome, began to take form. In 2008, the
Human Proteome Organization (HUPO) started discussing
about the creation the Human Proteome Project (HPP), which
was ﬁnally launched in 2010 and consisted of a wide-global
collaborative eﬀort to map and characterize all of the proteins
encoded by human genes. The mission of the HPP is to
generate the map of the protein-based molecular architecture of
the human body and become a resource to help elucidate

biological and molecular function and advance diagnosis in
treatment of diseases. Three major pillars support the project to
accomplish this task: mass spectrometry (MS), antibody/
aﬃnity capture reagents (Ab), and bioinformatics driven
Knowledge base (KB).3 To enhance the understanding of the
human proteome, HUPO divided the HPP into two major
programs: the Chromosome-based Human Proteome Project
(C-HPP),
to characterize the human proteome on a
chromosome-by-chromosome basis, and the Biology/Disease
Human Proteome Project (B/D-HPP), which provides a
framework for the coordination of biology- and diseased-
based research groups’ contributions to the HPP.4 One of the

Special Issue: The Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project
2015

Received: May 27, 2015
Published:

July 6, 2015

© 2015 American Chemical Society

3738

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

Downloaded via NEW YORK UNIV on June 18, 2018 at 15:30:01 (UTC). See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles. Journal of Proteome Research

Article

Figure 1. Overall picture of the dasHPPboard structure, data sources, and types of results displayed.

C-HPP primary goals is to put the proteomic catalog in the
genomic context to improve the understanding of its biological
context and to promote more eﬀective collaborations with
molecular biologists. To manage these international collabo-
rative eﬀorts in an eﬃcient way, the consortium divided the
work into groups by countries representing all of the human
chromosomes.

the characterization of

Nowadays we can diﬀerentiate three maps of the human
proteome: the work of the HPP and the ones presented in Kim
et al.5 and Wilhelm et al.6 articles. These works are changing
the existing panorama into a much richer scenario for research.
Within this context, the Spanish HPP consortium (SpHPP)
has been responsible for
the
chromosome 16. The SpHPP consortium, composed of 16
laboratories,
is organized into ﬁve working groups: Protein
expression and Peptide Standard, SRM Protein Platform,
Clinical Healthcare and Biobanking, Protein Sequencing, and
Bioinformatics.7 According to Ensembl database (V79),8
chromosome 16 contains about 90 million base pairs,
representing almost 3% of the total DNA in human cells,
including 842 protein-coding genes reported by neXtProt
(release 2014-09-19),9 of which 110 are considered to be
missing. These missing proteins have only transcriptomic
evidence and a predicted sequence (or are inferred by
homology) or are partially identiﬁed proteins, one in which
there is
the
corresponding protein without convincing MS information.
The search for experimental evidence of
these so-called
“missing proteins” constitutes the ﬁrst phase of the C-HPP
and is expected to be ﬁnished by 2018.10
The great variety of cell types in the human body, which is
∼230,
set of diﬀerent
transcriptomes and therefore diﬀerent proteomes. Unlike
other groups that focus on ﬁnding the missing proteins in
cell lines and tissues of their choice, we ﬁrmly believe that a
proteogenomics approach is needed, taking advantage of all
existing transcriptomics studies to make better selection of
samples prior to this search. In this work, we have developed a
proteomics-centric dashboard named dasHPPboard that collects
and reports the experiments produced by the HPP consortium.
Not only is this bioinformatic tool a protein browser as the one
developed by other chromosomes (the Proteome Browser,11

transcript evidence of

the existence of

translates

into an even greater

includes

CAPE,12 GenomewidePDB,13 H-InvDB,14 Chromosome 18
Knowledgebase,15 ...) but also it
the necessary
databases to perform proteogenomics studies to detect SAPs
and novel junctions. A ﬁrst logical approximation integrates the
data produced by the Spanish contribution to the HPP project.
To cover as much transcriptomic information as possible to
make the proteogenomics map a reality, we considered the
inclusion of data external to the HPP project. The ENCODE
project16 was selected as a source data set because of the variety
of cell
lines it hosts and the large number of RNA-Seq
experiments from each of these lines. This project began in
2003 with the mission to identify all of the functional elements
encoded in the human genome. To fulﬁll this mission, the
institutions involved in the project
focused on generating
multiple complementary types of genome-wide data, like RNA-
Seq, ChIP-Seq, or measurement of DNA methylation. Since the
beginning of the HPP project, a collaboration between the HPP
and ENCODE is being considered. For example,
in Paik
Hancock (2012),17 the authors defend that a combined eﬀort
between the two initiatives would help decipher how the
interacting genomic elements documented by ENCODE
control the families of isoforms generated at the protein level,
and although this collaboration has been discussed a great
number of times, with speciﬁc examples of action such as the
search in ENCODE for “missing” proteins that have been
diﬃcult to identify in proteomic studies, a robust study of this
kind had not yet been made. The SpHPP made in 2014 a ﬁrst
approach by building a transcriptomic map for chromosome 16,
based on data from three cell lines extracted from ENCODE
and studied by the Spanish consortium (MCF-7, K-562, and
HepG2).2 Additionally, proteogenomics studies of the Illumina
Human Body Map (HBM) and the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia18 (CCLE) have also been included. There are
other studies, like Human Protein Atlas database,19 which have
recently incorporated many transcriptomic data, including raw
ﬁles available through platforms like ArrayExpress or GEO,
which could be processed by our tool. We intend to add them
to our platform in future updates of dasHPPboard to improve
the cell lines and tissue coverage. Transcriptomics data have
been analyzed to identify those cell lines and tissues showing
signiﬁcant expression levels for those genes that are diﬃcult to
observe by standard mass
spectrometry. The dashboard

3739

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

Journal of Proteome Research

Article

facilitates proteogenomics analyses by providing peptide
databases built using the information on single nucleotide
variants (SNVs) and novel junctions obtained from RNA-Seq
data. We want to remark with the addition of these databases
the importance of detecting alternative splice variants to better
detect protein products coming from these transcripts. These
databases can be used for the identiﬁcation of protein variants
present in shotgun proteomics experiments on the same cell
line or tissue from where those SNVs were retrieved.

Here we present what is, to the best of our knowledge, the
only dashboard containing results from transcriptomics and
proteomics experiments in a proteogenomics approach that
links both ﬁelds. We have summarized the structure and aims of
the dasHPPboard in Figure 1. There are other download centers
and dashboards,
like the ones developed for the ENCODE
project, one of which is hosted in http://genome.crg.es/
encode_RNA_dashboard/hg19/ and has been a source of
inspiration when deﬁning the graphical part of the overview of
our Web site. Comparing with information hosted in ENCODE
dashboard, we have several conceptual diﬀerences. Our Web
site is oriented to experimentalist users,
including fully
processed end results generated with state-of-the-art methods
in order to minimize the time required to understand and apply
them to their research. In contrast, the ENCODE dashboard
contains, for RNA-Seq data, fastq raw sequencing data, and in
most of the cases, bam alignment ﬁles and results like bed or
bigwig ﬁles containing chromosome regions and coverage,
which is by far much more complicated to interpret. In the case
of microarrays, they only display raw signal, which needs to be
further processed to know if a gene is expressed.

Including all of this information, dasHPPboard is intended to

be a one-stop shop for data produced in the HPP context.

■ MATERIALS AND METHODS

We present the workﬂows we have implemented to generate
results for the diﬀerent data types we include in dasHPPboard:
transcriptomics data,
including Microarray and RNA-Seq
workﬂows along with the proteogenomics approach we have
used with the NGS data; proteomics data, including Shotgun
proteomics with its PTMs pipeline and SRM workﬂows.
Finally, we include details of implementation of the web tool
and database that form the dasHPPboard.
Analysis of Transcriptomics Data
In this work, we have downloaded and analyzed diﬀerent
publicly available data sets of RNA-Seq and microarray
experiments, calculated their gene expression, and uploaded it
in an interactive, easy-to-use dashboard designed speciﬁcally for
this purpose. The RNA-Seq data sets used were extracted from
the ENCODE project,16 the Illumina Human Body Map 2.0
project (HBM), and the Gröschel et al. (2014) study on acute
myeloid leukemia cell lines.20 Three microarray data sets have
also been included, with expression data from the Cancer Cell
Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) project,18 tumor samples from
IGC’s Expression Project for Oncology (expO) and a study of
gene expression in tissues across the human body.21 The gene
expression was calculated for all chromosomes and for all
samples available in these data sets, resulting in a very complete
transcriptomic map for the entire human genome.

Processing RNA-Seq Data. After downloading raw
FASTQ ﬁles from the diﬀerent projects, we performed the
RNA-Seq analyses following the steps detailed later and
summarized in Figure 2. First of all, a quality control step

Figure 2. Workﬂow of transcriptomic analysis from the raw data to the
FPKM counting.

3740

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

Journal of Proteome Research

was performed with FastQC (http://www.bioinformatics.
babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) software, and residual adapt-
ers and contaminants were removed using the FASTX-toolkit22
(http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/). High-quality re-
maining reads were aligned using TopHat23 v2.0.9 employing
the GRCh37 assembly as the human reference genome.
SAMtools24 rmdup tool was used to remove potential PCR
duplicates. This software, used speciﬁcally with paired-end
alignments,
in the case of multiple read pairs with identical
external coordinates retains the pair with the highest mapping
quality. SAMtools sort and SAMtools merge were used to sort
the bam ﬁles generated in the alignment by read names and to
join multiple sorted alignments, respectively. The quantiﬁcation
process was done in two steps: (1) using the htseq-count script
(http://www-huber.embl.de/users/anders/HTSeq/doc/count.
html) from HTSeq25 package with GENCODE26 V18
annotations to count the fragments and (2) using a Ruby
script
to calculate the FPKM (fragments per kilobase of
transcript per million mapped reads).

A single FPKM value is not very valuable when trying to
determine if a gene is really expressed if we do not have a
plausible threshold to compare it with. This is even more
problematic when the expression value is low; however, despite
the great advances in NGS technology, errors in sequencing are
inherent to the technology, and alignment algorithms can map
reads to the wrong location. These problems can lead to
deceiving FPKM values due to background noise. Some authors
propose to address this issue by simply keeping an arbitrary
percentage of the highest expressed genes, but this strategy can
ﬁlter out true expressed genes; therefore, we believe that a more
robust method to analyze this data is needed. With this in mind,
we have used two very reliable threshold-deﬁning methods
available: the one explained in Ramskold et al27 and the Bgee
m e t h o d ( h t t p : / / b g e e . u n i l . c h / b g e e / b g e e ? p a g e =
documentation#RNASeqData) based on the Hebenstreit et
al.28 work.

for each experiment

For each RNA-Seq experiment, the two thresholds were
calculated, and the results include graphs of those calculations.
Furthermore,
includes gene
quantiﬁcation, a new ﬁeld with threshold information was
added to results, getting values of “HIGH QUALITY” when
gene expression value is above both thresholds, “LOW
QUALITY” when expression value is only above one of the
thresholds, and “NO EXPRESSION” when none of
the
thresholds have been surpassed.

that

These methods are both based on measuring reads not
annotated to genes interpreting them as intergenic noise.
GENCODE V18 annotations were used to do that, taking gene
ranges and reversing them to obtain intergenic regions. The
authors in this study29 observed that the average read density is
dramatically higher in the gene start and end zones, and it is
correlated with known genes; therefore, they should not be
considered. As a result, the intergenic regions were adjusted by
removing 10kb regions from gene starts and ends. The read
measurement of the intergenic regions was performed with
htseq-count.

Threshold method from Ramskold et al.27 is deﬁned as
follows. First of all, the expression information on genes and
intergenic regions is binned using a logarithmic scale from
log10(0.01) to log10(100) taking steps of 0,1 on this
transformed scale, and then converted to cumulative amounts
of genes and intergenic regions expressed above diﬀerent levels.
A false discovery rate (FDR) is calculated for each expression

Article

level, which is then used to estimate the true number of
expressed genes in each bin from gene expression information.
Also, a false negative rate (FNR) is calculated as a function of
this estimated true number of expressed genes. Finally, the
threshold is deﬁned as the intersection between the FDR and
the FNR. This method was implemented as a Ruby script,
including some R code to generate spline curves from the
diﬀerent FDR and FNR points calculated and to know the exact
intersection point between them.

The threshold method explained in Bgee Web site is slightly
diﬀerent but also uses the gene and intergenic regions
expression information. Expression levels are binned, and for
each point, the value of the proportion of genes and intergenic
regions from that point compared with the total proportion is
calculated. The minimum point at which this value exceeds a
ﬁxed value is set as the threshold. The ﬁxed value we use in our
implementation of
this threshold calculation is 0.05. This
method was developed entirely in Ruby code.

Proteogenomics Analysis. We have used two diﬀerent
approaches for the generation of the databases containing
peptides with single amino acid polymorphisms (SAPs) or
novel junctions between exons. In both cases the input data are
the RNA-Seq data ﬁltered and aligned as explained in Figure 2.
All of
the processing steps of both analyses have been
performed on the CNB or CIMA computer clusters.

In the case of SAP databases, mpileup command of
SAMtools (v 0.1.18) was used for the SNV calling. The
obtained binary ﬁle (BCF ﬁle) was converted to the variant call
format (VCF ﬁle) with BCFtools (v 0.1.17-dev) and ﬁltered
with the vcfutils.pl script of SAMtools. SNVs with a read depth
lower than 10 or a quality score lower than 10 are not
considered for further analysis. The remaining SNVs were
annotated with the variant_eﬀect_predictor.pl
script of
Ensembl
that converts SNVs to the corresponding amino
acid coordinates and retrieves the SIFT and PolyPhen-2 scores
for each SNV.38 We used this information to ﬁlter
the
synonymous SNVs with R/Bioconductor. Sequences of 80
amino acids around the mutated peptide were extracted from
the Ensembl protein FASTA ﬁle. The SAP database includes
the SAPs whose sequences do not exist
in the reference
proteome (Ensembl v73). A similar proteogenomic strategy
was successfully used by Sheynkman et al.39

Databases of the resulting peptides from novel

junctions
observed in RNA-Seq experiments were generated with
functions of customProDB R package.40 The Tophat BED
ﬁle with putative splice junctions was read and the novel
junctions were three-frame translated to peptide sequences.
Those peptide sequences that are identical to existing peptides
in the reference database were ﬁltered. In this case, the length
of the peptides is not constant and depends on the length of
the putative novel junctions deﬁned by TopHat based on each
RNA-Seq experiment.

This pipeline has been implemented to use RNA-Seq data at
sample level, so in experiments including more than one
sample, these databases will be available when expanding the
corresponding sample information. The corresponding refer-
ence databases including contaminant sequences provided by
cRAP (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and decoy sequences
using pseudoreverse trypsin method are also provided in the
dasHPPboard for SAPs and novel junctions databases.

Data Sets. ENCODE data. In this work, we have analyzed
the gene expression of all chromosomes and all cell lines from
ENCODE that have whole-cell Long PolyA+ RNA-Seq data,

3741

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

Journal of Proteome Research

comprising a total of 23 cell lines and 44 diﬀerent experiments,
out of the 111 cell lines that contain RNA-Seq data in that
project. Some of the cell lines had more than one experiment,
varying from 1 to 5, and some of the experiments had more
than one biological sample with diﬀerent runs, in a total of 44
experiments (15 single end, and 29 paired end) and 288
sequencing runs. The RNA-Seq FASTQ ﬁles were downloaded
from the ENCODE RNA dashboard (http://genome.crg.es/
encode_RNA_dashboard/hg19/). The list of the cell
lines
from ENCODE used for this study can be found in Table 1.

Table 1. List of the 23 Cell Lines from ENCODE Used in
Our Study

cell line name

BJ
IMR90
K562
SK-N-SH
NHEK
HEPG2
GM12892
GM12891
HELA-S3
HSMM
H1-HESC

tissue of
origin

skin
lung
blood
brain
skin
liver
blood
blood
cervix
muscle
embryonic
stem cell

blood
GM12878
blood vessel
HUVEC
lung
NHLF
A549
epithelium
MONOCYTES-CD14+ monocytes
HMEC
SK-N-SH_RA
LHCN-M2

breast
brain
skeletal

muscle
myoblast

CD20+
MCF-7
HCT-116
AG04450
total

blood
breast
colon
lung

number of
experiments

included

total number of

samples
included

1
1
3
1
3
3
1
1
3
2
5

4
3
2
1
1
1
1
2

1
2
1
1
44

2
2
6
2
6
6
3
2
6
4
10

7
6
4
2
2
1
2
2

2
5
2
2
86

Acute Myeloid Leukemia Cell Lines.20 In this study, RNA
deep sequencing has been used to determine gene expression
patterns and expression genotypes in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) cell
lines that harbor a 3q-aberration. The authors
wanted to uncover the mechanism by which 3q aberrations
result in the overexpression of EVI1, which is involved in
leukemogenesis. For
they performed RNA
sequencing of AML cell
lines overexpressing this gene and
others that do not express it. The raw data from this sequencing
study, which includes samples from seven diﬀerent cell lines,
are freely available in ArrayExpress, with the accession number
E-MTAB-2225.

this purpose,

Human Body Map 2.0 Data. In 2011, Illumina published a
new RNA-Seq data set, as part of the HBM project, generated
on HiSeq 2000 instruments. This project provides a tran-
scription proﬁling by high-throughput sequencing of individual
and mixture samples of 16 human tissues: adipose, adrenal,
brain, breast, colon, heart, kidney,
lymph node,
ovary, prostate, skeletal muscle, testes, thyroid, and white blood

lung,

liver,

Article

cells. Also, in this case, transcriptomic analysis using this data
set for the chromosome 16 has been done,1 which we now
completed for the full set of the human chromosomes, and
added the results to the dasHPPboard. The HBM data are
publicly available and the corresponding accession numbers are
GSE30611 in GEO30 database, E-MTAB-513 in ArrayEx-
press,31 and ERX011226 in SRA.32

the microarray experiments used in this

The subset of experiments of the HBM project that has been
analyzed is detailed in the Supporting Information Table 1 and
does not include the experiments with mixture samples. There
are two experiments: one single and one paired end experiment
for each individual tissue sample that consists of one run each.
Processing Microarray Data. The results obtained by
Guruceaga et al.37 about the cell
lines, normal tissues, and
tumor samples where each protein is more likely to be
expressed, have been included in the dasHPPboard. In brief, all
of
study were
processed using the same analysis pipeline. The statistical
environment R/Bioconductor33 was used for data preprocess-
ing, analysis and visualization. Both background correction and
normalization were performed using the fRMA (Frozen Robust
Multichip Average) algorithm.34 After the normalization step,
an expression probability threshold was calculated for each
sample to distinguish the expressed probe sets from the
nonexpressed ones. The Gene Expression Barcode algorithm35
has been designed to estimate this value taking into account a
huge amount of publicly available experiments from diﬀerent
Aﬀymetrix platforms, including the Aﬀymetrix Human Genome
U133 Plus 2.0 Array. The output of the algorithm is the z score
value under the unexpressed normal distribution for each probe
set. A threshold of z > 2 was used to identify the expressed
genes in a sample. A Naive Bayes Classiﬁer36 predicted the
protein expression probability in a sample based on the 3′UTR,
5′UTR, and CDS gene sequence lengths, the probability of an
expressed gene being a coding gene of a missing protein in a
certain sample and the gene barcode for each biological sample.
The obtained result was a score that ranks the proteins from
the most probably expressed to the least probably expressed in
each sample.37

Data Sets. Three microarray public experiments have been
analyzed. The ﬁrst data set contains expression data from the
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) project, a collaboration
between the Broad Institute and the Novartis Institutes for
Biomedical Research and its Genomics Institute of the Novartis
Research Foundation to conduct a detailed genetic and
pharmacological characterization of a large panel of human
cancer models. It provides public access to the transcriptome
proﬁling of 917 human cell lines spanning 36 cancer types using
the Aﬀymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array platform.
Raw data were downloaded from GEO using the accession
number GSE36133. Human normal
tissue samples were
obtained from GEO database using the accession number
GSE3526.21 This data set was generated using samples from 10
post-mortem donors. Samples were processed to generate total
RNA, which was subsequently analyzed for gene expression
using the Aﬀymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array.21 A
total of 352 samples from 65 tissues are available. Finally, 2158
tumor samples representing 156 diﬀerent tissues that were
hybridized on the Aﬀymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0
Array have been also included in the analysis. This data set,
provided by the IGC’s Expression Project
for Oncology
(expO), is publicly available in GEO database with accession
number GSE2109.

3742

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

Journal of Proteome Research

Analysis of Proteomics Data

Analysis of Shotgun Proteomics Data.

Information
about proteins and peptides
identiﬁed in the shotgun
experiments performed by the SpHPP consortium has been
included in the dasHPPboard. These experiments include the
proteome characterization of MCF7, CCD18,
Jurkat, and
Ramos cell
lines. In brief, raw MS/MS data obtained using
several high-performance spectrometers (Orbitrap, Q Exactive,
MaXis Impact, and 5600 triple TOF) were converted to mgf
(mascot general ﬁle) format and used to perform searches
against UniprotKB41 human database (release 2013_06, June
13) using Mascot v2.4. Search parameters were set as follows:
carbamidomethyl cysteine as ﬁxed modiﬁcation and oxidized
methionines and acetylation of the peptide amino termini as
variable modiﬁcations. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 50
ppm,
in both MS and MS/MS modes, and two missed
cleavages were allowed. Typically, an accuracy of ±10 ppm was
found for both MS and MS/MS spectra. Using these search
parameters,
including ﬁlter peptides with fewer than seven
amino acids, the target-decoy approach to calculate the FDR,
and employing MIAPE Extractor Software v. 2.92 (http://
www.proteored.org/miape-extractor), we considered protein
identiﬁcations with FDR < 1% at both peptide and protein
level.Finally, protein inference was performed using PAnalyz-
er42 algorithm.

Analysis of Postranslational Modiﬁcations. One of the
goals for the ﬁrst phase of the C-HPP is to characterize three
major postranslational modiﬁcations (PTMs) (i.e., phosphoryl-,
glycosyl-, and acetyl-) for each protein.43 In the SpHPP
consortium we have selected phosphorylation as the ﬁrst PTM
to study, and we will include acetylation in a next step.

The experiments previously submitted by the SpHPP
consortium to proteomeXchange (accessions PXD000442,
PXD000443, PXD000447, PXD000449) have been reprocessed
again but now including phosphorylation of S, T, and Y as
variable modiﬁcations. The input to the processing pipeline
consists of the mgf ﬁles associated with the diﬀerent fractions of
each experiment, and the search process has been carried out
running X!Tandem in a cluster. The X!Tandem output ﬁles
have been converted to the HUPO-PSI standard format
mzIdentML44 using the mzidLibrary45 version 1.6.10. The
resulting mzid ﬁles have been processed using a new version of
the PAnalyzer software (2.0-alpha1), which carries out the
protein grouping and also identiﬁcations ﬁltering. The PSM
ﬁlter selects only the best PSM for each peptide and precursor
charge combination. Then, using these PSMs we have
calculated a p value for the peptides, which are subsequently
ﬁltered according to this p value using a 1% FDR at peptide-
level criterion. Finally, we have calculated a p value for protein
groups and applied a second FDR ﬁlter of 1% at protein group
level.

Analysis of Selected Reaction Monitoring. The selected
reaction monitoring (SRM) data was generated in a
collaborative manner in proteomics laboratories belonging to
the Spanish consortium of the HPP project. The implemented
strategy consists of the development of SRM methods and
cross-validation assays across the diﬀerent laboratories of the
consortium. In this way, tested, reliable methods are delivered.
The experiments were performed using at least three cell
lines that are used in common by all the laboratories in the
SpHPP consortium: MCF7, CCD18, and Ramos. Other SRM
assays were generated using the additional cell lines: TC28,
Jurkat, and HUH7; and tissues: HUAEC (Human Umbilical

Article

Artery Endothelial Cells), plasma, and serum. As previously
described,2 these results include solid tested SRM methods for
43 proteins. In brief, proteotypic peptides were obtained from
PeptideAtlas46 and GPMDB47 databases, and optimal tran-
sitions for every target peptide from each of the proteins were
selected on the basis of previous MS/MS spectra acquired from
the same original samples and also from predictions and data in
online databases. The SRM analysis was performed on ABSciex
4000 and 5500 QTRAP instruments. The chromatographic
setup consisted of a 90 min linear gradient (5 to 40% ACN in
0.1% formic acid; 300 nL/min) in C18 nanocolumns (75 μm
id, 15 cm, 3 μm particle size) (LC Packings, Netherlands;
Eksigent, USA; Thermo Scientiﬁc, USA).

Dwell time was set to 20 ms per transition, and collision

energies were optimized using SRM Pilot Software.

In addition to peptide conﬁrmation by SRM-triggered MS2
spectrum sequence searching (MIDAS), the proteins in this set
have been detected with at least 3 transitions per peptide, with
4.16 transitions per peptide on average. The method has been
cross-validated by at least two other laboratories diﬀerent from
the original laboratory where the method was developed.

As a result, we have generated SRM results ﬁles for
chromosome 16 including MCF7, CCD18, HUH7, Jurkat,
Ramos, and TC28 cell lines and HUAEC, serum, and plasma
tissues.
Dashboard Implementation
The dasHPPboard has been built by joining several components
of diﬀerent technologies to classify, access, and display results in
a modular and independent way.

First of all, a library for organizing and accessing data is
needed. Data need to be linked to a set of metadata to be
organized and displayed correctly. For this purpose, a directory
tree in which each level represents a diﬀerent data feature has
been used. Having this metadata embedded in directory names
has the important advantage of the considerable savings in
space needed for storing it. The inclusion of new data in the
directory tree can be performed through a script written in
Ruby. A library to perform queries on the data and their
associated metadata has also been developed.

The hierarchical structure of the directory tree, depicted in
Figure 3, ﬁrst divides data by the project they belong to, which
is in turn associated with the type of samples they contain
(tissues, cell lines, cancer tissues). Information is subsequently
stored in folders according to the following hierarchy: the
version of the genome that has been used to analyze the data,
the name of the tissue or cell
line, and ﬁnally folders with
information on the types of experiments on which results are
present. On the basis of this library to perform queries and
using the Nanoc framework, which generates programmatically
an html view with Ruby, we have developed the web
visualization of the dashboard overview. This web contains all
of the metadata information, descriptions, and download links
of the diﬀerent ﬁle types that our Web site contains. All of the
information in this hierarchical structure corresponds to ﬁnal
and oﬄine-generated results, which are chromosome-oriented
and have been splitted to download the minimum amount of
information possible for each query, not exceeding the order of
a few kilobytes in each download.

The gene and protein search section has been developed
with Ruby on Rails framework, which contains a module that
enables the association between database tables and pro-
grammatic objects. We have populated the database using a

3743

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

Journal of Proteome Research

Article

Table 2. List of Features Included in the Experiments’
Results Tables That Are Available for Download in
dasHPPboard

×
×
×

RNA-
Seq microarrays
×
×
×
×
×
×
×

×

×

×
×

Ensembl Gene ID
gene name
gene description
FPKM
expression quality
neXtProt ID
thresholds information
Z score
protein missing
group of proteins peptide

belongs to

Uniprot protein isoforms
Uniprot canonical protein

ID

type of protein group

(unique, group of
isoforms, protein family)
neXtProt protein evidence
protein inference category

(Panalyzer)
Mascot score
number of peptides that

support the identiﬁcation

peptide type
peptide sequence
PTM sequence
peptide p value
peptide q value
PTM type
PTM position
PTM reported by Uniprot
PTM reported by
Phosphositeplus

retention time
collision energy
experiment setup

shotgun PTMs

SRM

×
×
×

×

×
×

×
×

×

×
×

×
×

×
×
×

×

×

×
×

×
×

×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×
×

×
×
×

×

×

×

×

×

×
×
×

each of these tabs, experiments are organized ﬁrst by data
source or project and then subclassiﬁed by laboratory or data
series to which they belong. To simplify the search and display
of the data, we only show at ﬁrst the number of experiments for
each experiment type and group of results, adding diﬀerent
colors to the cells. Clicking on a cell of results, users can
visualize more information from that speciﬁc experiment of
certain cell type. That cell
is expanded, and a table with
diﬀerent type of information depending on the experiment type
is displayed. As a header of the expanded cell, redundant
information about cell and experiment type and data about the
compartment and cell fraction to which the sample belongs is
displayed. If there is information about the laboratory where
the experiment has been done, it is also displayed. Although
there are multiple types of experiments,
they share a
chromosome’s view where users can access to download the
results of a particular chromosome separately, saving download
time and space when interested only in a single chromosome.
Internally, we have distinguished several types of experiments
when displaying the results: RNA-Seq, gene expression arrays
(microarrays), and shotgun proteomics
including PTMs
information and SRM. This internal structure and the results

3744

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

Figure 3. Graphical description of the internal data structure of the
dasHPPboard.

seeding script written in Ruby. This script takes the diﬀerent
result ﬁles in the data directory tree of the dashboard, parses
them, and inserts them into the MySQL database, taking into
account whether they are transcriptomic results,
in which
expressed genes are tagged, or proteomic results, in which all
data are preserved. The search interface admits input in gene
names, Ensembl Gene IDs, Uniprot
IDs, and neXtProt
accessions. The results of
the query include: (a) brief
information on the input gene or protein and (b) a table of
the experiments, providing links to the data in the dashboard
overview.

All of the source codes of the library and Ruby on Rails
project are available through https://github.com/danieloop/
dasHPPboard.

■ RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Up to now, we have generated about 24 gigabytes of results in
text and images, so we needed an interface to display it in a
compact and easy to browse way, which may result a
challenging task. During the dasHPPboard development we
have taken this into account, making a visual overview in
tabular form showing the cell and experiment types and the
number of samples for each of them. At present we display
3523 experiments from diﬀerent samples, separated in tabs
corresponding to 948 cell
lines, 77 normal, and 156 cancer
tissues. All of these numbers are summarized in Table 3. For

Journal of Proteome Research

Article

Table 3. Summary of the Number and Type of Experiments Hosted in the dasHPPboard

number of lines/tissues/cancer tissues

number of experiments

cell lines

Encode

RnaSeq (Gingeras)

RnaSeq (Myers)

HPP

Shotgun (SpHPP)

SRM (SpHPP)

ArrayExpress

RnaSeq (E-MTAB-2225)

GEO

GeneExpressionArray (GSE6133)

tissues

HBM

RnaSeq

GEO

GeneExpressionArray (GSE3526)

HPP

SRM (SpHPP)

cancer tissues

GEO

GeneExpressionArray (GSE2109)

total

cell lines = 19
tissues = 0
cancer tissues = 0
total = 14
cell lines = 14
tissues = 0
cancer tissues = 0
total = 14
cell lines = 4
tissues = 0
cancer tissues = 0
total = 4
cell lines = 6
tissues = 0
cancer tissues = 0
total = 6
cell lines = 7
tissues = 0
cancer tissues = 0
total = 7
cell lines = 917
tissues = 0
cancer tissues = 0
total = 917
cell lines = 0
tissues = 16
cancer tissues = 0
total = 16
cell lines = 0
tissues = 65
cancer tissues = 0
total = 65
cell lines = 0
tissues = 3
cancer tissues = 0
total = 3
cell lines = 0
tissues = 0
cancer tissues = 156
total = 156
cell lines = 948
tissues = 77
cancer tissues = 156

20

24

4

6

7

917

32

352

3

2158

3523

available for each of the types of experiments are depicted in
Figure 1. The resulting webpage can be accessed at http://
sphppdashboard.cnb.csic.es.

When expanding RNA-Seq results, rows with the diﬀerent
samples that belong to the speciﬁc type of cell and experiment
are displayed. For each sample the following information is
shown: GEO or ArrayExpress accession if available; a
chromosomes’ view, which is expanded when clicked, where
users can select the chromosome for which they want to
download a results table containing information described in
Table 2. We also show details of calculated expression
including Ramskold et al.27 method threshold
thresholds,
value and the corresponding graph including FDR and FNR,
and if there are no biological replicates, also the Bgee method
threshold value and a graph with the expression level
proportions of genes and intergenic noise and also links to

download target and decoy peptide databases generated from
SAPs and novel
junctions found in the sample through
previously commented proteogenomic methods. If biological
replicates are present, users are allowed to click on the row
from the corresponding sample to expand it and obtain
information about each of the replicates, which is the same as
displayed in samples without replicates.

In microarray results, available information when expanding
certain cell type and experiment is also organized by rows
corresponding to the diﬀerent samples belonging to it. The
GEO accession of the selected sample is provided as well as a
chromosomes’ view to download expression data from a
speciﬁc chromosome, whose tables contain information
depicted in Table 2, including a Z score calculated as explained
in Materials and Methods section, giving “NA” values to that
marked as nonexpressed (z < 2).

3745

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

Journal of Proteome Research

Article

Figure 4. Example of use of the “Search” section of the dasHPPboard.

Expanded shotgun proteomics results include a ProteomeX-
change48 accession for each cell type and a chromosomes’ view
to download results in a separate way. These chromosome
results are tabular ﬁles that contain experiment information at
peptide and protein level, whose characteristics are described in
Table 2. These results may be further expanded, displaying
PTMs information for each of the experiments that have been
performed with the sample. For each experiment, information
setup and a chromosomes’ view to
about experimental
download PTMs reports is displayed. These reports consist
of TSV ﬁles with an entry for each protein and PTM
combination indicating multiple characteristics described in
Table 2 including a list indicating whether each of
these
positions has already been reported by UniProt and
PhosphoSitePlus.49

Each expanded SRM results table includes a chromosomes’
from the
view in order
corresponding experiment. The tab-separated values include
multiple columns that are listed in Table 2.

to download SRM result ﬁles

For the time being, of all 3523 experiments, 3510 are
classiﬁed as transcriptomics type. Because of this, the greatest
value of our dasHPPboard consists of showing information

it

to detect

about genes corresponding to missing proteins in diﬀerent cell
lines and tissues. From this information,
is possible to
determine which type of cell would be the best candidate when
making proteomics experiments
those missing
proteins and contribute to complete the human proteome
map, which is the ultimate goal of the HPP. As shown in
previous work,2 transcriptomics and shotgun proteomics
experiments can be complementary when searching missing
proteins. As it has been demonstrated in the study of
Guruceaga et al.,37 expression distribution of genes that should
produce missing proteins in transcriptomics experiments is very
diﬀerent across cell lines and specially tissues. If someone is
interested in ﬁnding a certain missing protein, the ideal would
be ﬁrst searching it
transcriptomics
experiments of the dasHPPboard and then choosing a cell line
or tissue where it is signiﬁcantly expressed. This is no guarantee
of ﬁnding the missing proteins when doing shotgun proteomics
experiments, but the probability will always be greater than
making a blind search. The query section of the dasHPPboard is
very useful in this sense. Users can directly search the protein of
interest and look into transcriptomics studies where it
is
present. As an example of the use of this query section, we have

in the whole set of

3746

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

Journal of Proteome Research

provided an example displayed in Figure 4. The query section is
accessible through the tab titled “Search”. Next, users have to
provide a gene or protein of interest. In our example, we have
chosen the protein with neXtProt
identiﬁer NX_Q8IUE0
marked as missing in the release of 2014-09-19 (Figure 4.1).
When clicking on the “Search” button a query is performed and
a table with results is generated. Then, ordering the table by
experiment type, the top two rows correspond to RNA-Seq
results, in which dasHPPboard has found signiﬁcant expression
levels for the NX_Q8IUE0 protein (Figure 4.2). The cell type
corresponds to testis tissue, which agrees with the description
present in neXtProt database. Finally, these results can be
downloaded by clicking in “Link to results”, also redirecting us
to the main panel of the dashboard (Figure 4.3). In this panel,
we can download the related SAPs or novel junctions database
if we are interested in performing a targeted proteomics
analysis, or we can look at the threshold information on the
experiment (Figure 4.4). We have to comment that this protein
has been already found, and it has been ﬂagged with proteomics
based evidence in the latest version of neXtProt (May 2015).

■ CONCLUSIONS

Focusing on the characterization of the proteins with no or
inadequate experimental evidence is one of the key points that
may lead to advances in the comprehension of our biology and
the diagnosis and treatment of diseases. The HPP consortium
has concentrated eﬀorts on this but mostly focusing on
proteomic approaches in most cases, and this should change.
Genomics ﬁeld goes a step ahead, and all of their available tools
and methods should be employed to generate new advances in
proteomics. In this work, we have used novel proteogenomic
methods that allow us to move in this direction, allowing better
protein matches when using peptide search engines. Missing
proteins could be expressed only in certain types of tissues;
therefore, the more accurate information we have about this
will be crucial to progress in the ﬁeld. A deep analysis of
transcriptomics existing data should also be done for this
purpose, not only looking for mutations, new transcripts, or
gene expression but also measuring the diﬀerences in gene
expression over the entire set of cell types in the human body,
which will facilitate the task of ﬁnding those missing proteins in
a more accurate way. The work presented here means a step in
this direction, having processed a large amount of RNA-Seq
and microarrays data that
ready to be used by
experimentalists and with the possibility to add more data
sets in a very automated way, increasing the available number of
studies with diﬀerent cell types. Our dasHPPboard is also ready
to be a central place to keep diﬀerent ﬁnal reports generated
from experiments of the HPP consortium,
facilitating their
exploration and allowing reaching more global ﬁndings.
Furthermore,
the analysis reported here might encourage
other groups of the HPP consortium to suggest new studies,
preferably of diﬀerent cell lines or tissues, and add them to the
dashboard, in a collaborative eﬀort that we hope will result in a
very complete and unprecedented proteogenomic map of the
human.

is

Most of

the data included in our work come from
transcriptomics experiments. At the moment we have included
proteomics experiments performed within the Spanish HPP
consortium, which is focused on Chromosome 16. Including
proteomics experiments from all of the groups of the C-HPP
consortium is necessary to learn more about
the whole
proteome, and it would allow us to generate new types of

Article

reports in which proteomic and genomic information would be
mixed. Experiments coming from other studies like Human
Protein Atlas should be also taken into account to complete our
panel of transcriptomics and proteomics experiments. We are
currently generating tabulated text
result ﬁles, a versatile
solution when exploring and analyzing them, but proteomics
experiments can become enormous, with a lot of related ﬁelds,
and standardized solutions could be a good option to minimize
the time spent in understanding the data and the eﬀort required
to convert the ﬁles to serve as input for other programs. In this
direction, as a future work, we are planning to include
proteomics results in mzTab50 format. This is a standard format
developed by members of the Proteomics Informatics working
group of the HUPO-PSI, which is stored in a simple tabulated
way in line with the results we currently display in dasHPPboard
and will facilitate us to include proteomics results in an easier
way because of the increasingly better integration of standards
in protein-related programs and the simple conversion between
these formats through programs such as PRIDE Converter 2.51
Also, in this direction, we want to add more metadata to the
panel of experiments and to the results of the search section,
including information coming from databases like PeptideAt-
las46 or the GPMDB47 to display a more complete panel, giving
them the possibility to easily access to full data sets with raw
data.

■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*S Supporting Information
Supporting Information Table 1: List of the HBM experiments
included in the dasHPPboard. The Supporting Information is
available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466.

■ AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author
*Tel: +34915854617. E-mail: pascual@cnb.csic.es.
Author Contributions
⊥
C.G., F.J.C., J.P.A., and A.P.-M. share senior authorship.
Funding
CIMA, CNB, and UPV/EHU laboratories are member of
Proteored, PRB2-ISCIII and are supported by grant PT13/
0001 funded by ISCIII and FEDER. The Spanish Minister of
Science and Innovation with grant BIO2013−48028-R, the
Government of Madrid (CAM) with grant P2010/BMD-2305
and the Children Tumor Foundation also supported this work.
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.

■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank IGC and expO for the eﬀorts to procure tissue
samples under
standard conditions and perform gene
expression analyses on a clinically annotated set of deidentiﬁed
tumor samples. D.T.-M. acknowledges Javier Setoain, Marta
Marti ́nez, and Mònica Franch. We dedicate this contribution to
Juan Pablo Albar, leader of the Spanish HPP consortium for
Chromosome 16, who passed away during the writing of this
contribution (http://sphpp.proteored.org/juan_pablo_albar/).

3747

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

Journal of Proteome Research

■ ABBREVIATIONS

HPP, Human Proteome Project; SpHPP, Spanish Consortium
of the HPP; ENCODE, ENCyclopedia Of DNA Elements;
HBM, Human Body Map; HUPO, Human Proteome
Organization; C-HPP, Chromosome-Based HPP; B/D-HPP,
Biology/Disease HPP; SRM, selected reaction monitoring;
CCLE, Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia; SNV, single nucleotide
variant; expO, Expression Project
for Oncology; FPKM,
fragments per kilobase of
transcript per million mapped
reads; GEO, gene expression omnibus; AML, acute myeloid
leukemia; fRMA, frozen robust multiarray analysis; SAP, single
amino acid polymorphism; HUAEC, human umbilical artery
endothelial cells; TSV, tab-separated values

J. A.; Mora, M.

■ REFERENCES
(1) Collins, F. S.; Patrinos, A.; Jordan, E.; Chakravarti, A.; Gesteland,
R.; Walters, L. New goals for the U.S. Human Genome Project: 1998−
2003. Science 1998, 282, 682−689.
(2) Segura, V.; Medina-Aunon,
I.; Martínez-
Bartolomé, S.; Abian, J.; Aloria, K.; Antúnez, O.; Arizmendi, J. M.;
Azkargorta, M.; Barceló-Batllori, S.; et al. Surfing transcriptomic
landscapes. A step beyond the annotation of chromosome 16
proteome. J. Proteome Res. 2014, 13, 158−172.
(3) Legrain, P.; Aebersold, R.; Archakov, A.; Bairoch, A.; Bala, K.;
Beretta, L.; Bergeron, J.; Borchers, C. H.; Corthals, G. L.; Costello, C.
E. The human proteome project: current state and future direction.
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2011, 10, M111.009993 DOI: 10.1074/
mcp.M111.009993.
(4) Paik, Y.-K.; Jeong, S.-K.; Omenn, G. S.; Uhlen, M.; Hanash, S.;
Cho, S. Y.; Lee, H.-J.; Na, K.; Choi, E.-Y.; Yan, F.; et al. The
Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project
for cataloging
proteins encoded in the genome. Nat. Biotechnol. 2012, 30, 221−223.
(5) Kim, M.-S.; Pinto, S. M.; Getnet, D.; Nirujogi, R. S.; Manda, S. S.;
Chaerkady, R.; Madugundu, A. K.; Kelkar, D. S.; Isserlin, R.; Jain, S.;
et al. A draft map of the human proteome. Nature 2014, 509, 575−
581.
(6) Wilhelm, M.; Schlegl, J.; Hahne, H.; Moghaddas Gholami, A.;
Lieberenz, M.; Savitski, M. M.; Ziegler, E.; Butzmann, L.; Gessulat, S.;
Marx, H.; et al. Mass-spectrometry-based draft of
the human
proteome. Nature 2014, 509, 582−587.
(7) Segura, V.; Medina-Aunon, J. A.; Guruceaga, E.; Gharbi, S. I.;
Gonzälez-Tejedo, C.; San Chez Del Pino, M. M.; Canals, F.; Fuentes,
M.; Ignacio Casal, J.; Martínez-Bartolomé, S.; et al. Spanish human
proteome project: Dissection of chromosome 16. J. Proteome Res.
2013, 12, 112−122.
(8) Flicek, P.; Amode, M. R.; Barrell, D.; Beal, K.; Billis, K.; Brent, S.;
Carvalho-Silva, D.; Clapham, P.; Coates, G.; Fitzgerald, S. Ensembl
2014. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014, 42, D749.
(9) Gaudet, P.; Argoud-Puy, G.; Cusin, I.; Duek, P.; Evalet, O.;
Gateau, A.; Gleizes, A.; Pereira, M.; Zahn-Zabal, M.; Zwahlen, C.; et al.
neXtProt: organizing protein knowledge in the context of human
proteome projects. J. Proteome Res. 2013, 12, 293−298.
(10) Paik, Y.-K.; Omenn, G. S.; Thongboonkerd, V.; Marko-Varga,
G.; Hancock, W. S. Genome-wide proteomics, Chromosome-Centric
Human Proteome Project (C-HPP), part II. J. Proteome Res. 2014, 13,
1−4.
(11) Goode, R. J. A.; Yu, S.; Kannan, A.; Christiansen, J. H.; Beitz, A.;
Hancock, W. S.; Nice, E.; Smith, A. I. The proteome browser web
portal. J. Proteome Res. 2013, 12, 172−178.
(12) Guo, F.; Wang, D.; Liu, Z.; Lu, L.; Zhang, W.; Sun, H.; Zhang,
H.; Ma, J.; Wu, S.; Li, N.; et al. CAPER: a chromosome-assembled
human proteome browsER. J. Proteome Res. 2013, 12, 179−186.
(13) Jeong, S.-K.; Lee, H.-J.; Na, K.; Cho, J.-Y.; Lee, M. J.; Kwon, J.-
Y.; Kim, H.; Park, Y.-M.; Yoo,
J. S.; Hancock, W. S.; et al.
GenomewidePDB, a proteomic database exploring the comprehensive
protein parts list and transcriptome landscape in human chromosomes.
J. Proteome Res. 2013, 12, 106−111.

Article

(14) Yamasaki, C.; Murakami, K.; Fujii, Y.; Sato, Y.; Harada, E.;
Takeda, J.; Taniya, T.; Sakate, R.; Kikugawa, S.; Shimada, M.; et al.
The H-Invitational Database (H-InvDB), a comprehensive annotation
resource for human genes and transcripts. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008, 36,
D793−D799.
(15) Zgoda, V. G.; Kopylov, A. T.; Tikhonova, O. V.; Moisa, A. A.;
Pyndyk, N. V.; Farafonova, T. E.; Novikova, S. E.; Lisitsa, A. V.;
Ponomarenko, E. A.; Poverennaya, E. V.; et al. Chromosome 18
Transcriptome Profiling and Targeted Proteome Mapping in Depleted
Plasma, Liver Tissue and HepG2 Cells. J. Proteome Res. 2013, 12, 123−
134.
(16) Myers, R. M.; Stamatoyannopoulos, J.; Snyder, M.; Dunham, I.;
Hardison, R. C.; Bernstein, B. E.; Gingeras, T. R.; Kent, W. J.; Birney,
E.; Wold, B. A user’s guide to the Encyclopedia of DNA elements
(ENCODE). PLoS Biol. 2011, 9, e1001046.
(17) Paik, Y.-K.; Hancock, W. S. Uniting ENCODE with genome-
wide proteomics. Nat. Biotechnol. 2012, 30, 1065−1067.
(18) Barretina, J.; Caponigro, G.; Stransky, N.; Venkatesan, K.;
Margolin, A. A.; Kim, S.; Wilson, C. J.; Lehár, J.; Kryukov, G. V.;
Sonkin, D.; et al. The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables
predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature 2012, 483,
603−607.
(19) Uhlen, M.; Fagerberg, L.; Hallstrom, B. M.; Lindskog, C.;
Oksvold, P.; Mardinoglu, A.; Sivertsson, A.; Kampf, C.; Sjostedt, E.;
Asplund, A.; et al. Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science
(Washington, DC, U. S.) 2015, 347, 1260419−1260419.
(20) Gröschel, S.; Sanders, M. A.; Hoogenboezem, R.; De Wit, E.;
Bouwman, B. A. M.; Erpelinck, C.; Van Der Velden, V. H. J.;
Havermans, M.; Avellino, R.; Van Lom, K.; et al. A single oncogenic
enhancer
rearrangement causes concomitant EVI1 and GATA2
deregulation in Leukemia. Cell 2014, 157, 369−381.
(21) Roth, R. B.; Hevezi, P.; Lee, J.; Willhite, D.; Lechner, S. M.;
Foster, A. C.; Zlotnik, A. Gene expression analyses reveal molecular
relationships among 20 regions of the human CNS. Neurogenetics
2006, 7, 67−80.
(22) Pearson, W. R.; Wood, T.; Zhang, Z.; Miller, W. Comparison of
DNA sequences with protein sequences. Genomics 1997, 46, 24−36.
(23) Kim, D.; Pertea, G.; Trapnell, C.; Pimentel, H.; Kelley, R.;
Salzberg, S. L. TopHat2: accurate alignment of transcriptomes in the
presence of insertions, deletions and gene fusions. Genome Biol. 2013,
14, R36.
(24) Li, H.; Handsaker, B.; Wysoker, A.; Fennell, T.; Ruan, J.;
Homer, N.; Marth, G.; Abecasis, G.; Durbin, R. The Sequence
Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics 2009, 25, 2078−
2079.
(25) Anders, S.; Pyl, P. T.; Huber, W. HTSeq - A Python framework
to work with high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics 2015,
31, btu638.
(26) Harrow,
J. M.; Tapanari, E.;
Diekhans, M.; Kokocinski, F.; Aken, B. L.; Barrell, D.; Zadissa, A.;
Searle, S.; et al. GENCODE: the reference human genome annotation
for The ENCODE Project. Genome Res. 2012, 22, 1760−1774.
(27) Ramsköld, D.; Wang, E. T.; Burge, C. B.; Sandberg, R. An
abundance of ubiquitously expressed genes
revealed by tissue
transcriptome sequence data. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2009, 5, e1000598.
(28) Hebenstreit, D.; Fang, M.; Gu, M.; Charoensawan, V.; van
Oudenaarden, A.; Teichmann, S. A. RNA sequencing reveals two
major classes of gene expression levels in metazoan cells. Mol. Syst.
Biol. 2011, 7, 497.
(29) Van Bakel, H.; Nislow, C.; Blencowe, B. J.; Hughes, T. R. Most
“dark matter” transcripts are associated with known genes. PLoS Biol.
2010, 8, e1000371.
(30) Barrett, T.; Wilhite, S. E.; Ledoux, P.; Evangelista, C.; Kim, I. F.;
Tomashevsky, M.; Marshall, K. A.; Phillippy, K. H.; Sherman, P. M.;
Holko, M.; et al. NCBI GEO: archive for functional genomics data
sets–update. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013, 41, D991−D995.
(31) Kolesnikov, N.; Hastings, E.; Keays, M.; Melnichuk, O.; Tang, Y.
A.; Williams, E.; Dylag, M.; Kurbatova, N.; Brandizi, M.; Burdett, T.;

J.; Frankish, A.; Gonzalez,

3748

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

Journal of Proteome Research

et al. ArrayExpress update-simplifying data submissions. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2015, 43, gku1057.
(32) Leinonen, R.; Sugawara, H.; Shumway, M. The sequence read
archive. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011, 39, D19−D21.
(33) Gentleman, R. C.; Carey, V. J.; Bates, D. M.; Bolstad, B.;
Dettling, M.; Dudoit, S.; Ellis, B.; Gautier, L.; Ge, Y.; Gentry, J.; et al.
Bioconductor: open software development for computational biology
and bioinformatics. Genome Biol. 2004, 5, R80.
(34) McCall, M. N.; Bolstad, B. M.; Irizarry, R. A. Frozen robust
multiarray analysis (fRMA). Biostatistics 2010, 11, 242−253.
(35) McCall, M. N.; Jaffee, H. A.; Zelisko, S. J.; Sinha, N.; Hooiveld,
G.; Irizarry, R. A.; Zilliox, M. J. The Gene Expression Barcode 3.0:
improved data processing and mining tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014,
42, D938−D943.
(36) Duda, R. O.; Hart, P. E.; Stork, D. G. Pattern Classiﬁcation;
Wiley: New York, 2012.
(37) Guruceaga, E.; Sanchez Del Pino, M.; Corrales, F. J.; Segura, V.
Prediction of a missing protein expression map in the context of the
Human Proteome Project. J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 1350.
(38) McLaren, W.; Pritchard, B.; Rios, D.; Chen, Y.; Flicek, P.;
Cunningham, F. Deriving the consequences of genomic variants with
the Ensembl API and SNP Effect Predictor. Bioinformatics 2010, 26,
2069−2070.
(39) Sheynkman, G. M.; Shortreed, M. R.; Frey, B. L.; Scalf, M.;
Smith, L. M. Large-scale mass spectrometric detection of variant
peptides resulting from nonsynonymous nucleotide differences. J.
Proteome Res. 2014, 13, 228−240.
(40) Wang, X.; Zhang, B. customProDB: an R package to generate
customized protein databases from RNA-Seq data for proteomics
search. Bioinformatics 2013, 29, 3235−3237.
(41) Magrane, M.; Consortium, U. UniProt Knowledgebase: a hub of
integrated protein data. Database 2011, 2011, bar009.
(42) Prieto, G.; Aloria, K.; Osinalde, N.; Fullaondo, A.; Arizmendi, J.
M.; Matthiesen, R. PAnalyzer: a software tool for protein inference in
shotgun proteomics. BMC Bioinf. 2012, 13, 288.
(43) Paik, Y.-K.; Omenn, G. S.; Uhlen, M.; Hanash, S.; Marko-Varga,
G.; Aebersold, R.; Bairoch, A.; Yamamoto, T.; Legrain, P.; Lee, H.-J.;
et al. Standard guidelines
the chromosome-centric human
proteome project. J. Proteome Res. 2012, 11, 2005−2013.
(44) Jones, A. R.; Eisenacher, M.; Mayer, G.; Kohlbacher, O.; Siepen,
J.; Hubbard, S. J.; Selley, J. N.; Searle, B. C.; Shofstahl, J.; Seymour, S.
L. The mzIdentML data standard for mass spectrometry-based
proteomics results. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2012, 11, M111.014381
DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M111.014381.
(45) Ghali, F.; Krishna, R.; Lukasse, P.; Martínez-Bartolomé, S.;
Reisinger, F.; Hermjakob, H.; Vizcaíno, J. A.; Jones, A. R. Tools
(Viewer, Library and Validator) that facilitate use of the peptide and
protein identification standard format, termed mzIdentML. Mol. Cell.
Proteomics 2013, 12, 3026−3035.
(46) Desiere, F.; Deutsch, E. W.; King, N. L.; Nesvizhskii, A. I.;
Mallick, P.; Eng, J.; Chen, S.; Eddes, J.; Loevenich, S. N.; Aebersold, R.
The PeptideAtlas project. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006, 34, D655−D658.
(47) Craig, R.; Cortens, J. P.; Beavis, R. C. Open source system for
analyzing, validating, and storing protein identification data. J. Proteome
Res. 2004, 3, 1234−1242.
(48) Vizcaíno, J. A.; Deutsch, E. W.; Wang, R.; Csordas, A.; Reisinger,
F.; Ríos, D.; Dianes, J. A.; Sun, Z.; Farrah, T.; Bandeira, N.; et al.
ProteomeXchange provides globally coordinated proteomics data
submission and dissemination. Nat. Biotechnol. 2014, 32, 223−226.
(49) Hornbeck, P. V.; Kornhauser, J. M.; Tkachev, S.; Zhang, B.;
Skrzypek, E.; Murray, B.; Latham, V.; Sullivan, M. PhosphoSitePlus: a
comprehensive resource for investigating the structure and function of
experimentally determined post-translational modifications in man and
mouse. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012, 40, D261−D270.
(50) Griss, J.; Jones, A. R.; Sachsenberg, T.; Walzer, M.; Gatto, L.;
Hartler, J.; Thallinger, G. G.; Salek, R. M.; Steinbeck, C.; Neuhauser,
N.; et al. The mzTab data exchange format: communicating mass-
spectrometry-based proteomics and metabolomics experimental
results to a wider audience. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2014, 13, 2765−2775.

for

Article

(51) Côté, R. G.; Griss, J.; Dianes, J. A.; Wang, R.; Wright, J. C.; van
den Toorn, H. W. P.; van Breukelen, B.; Heck, A. J. R.; Hulstaert, N.;
Martens, L.; et al. The PRoteomics IDEntification (PRIDE) Converter
2 framework: an improved suite of tools to facilitate data submission to
the PRIDE database and the ProteomeXchange consortium. Mol. Cell.
Proteomics 2012, 11, 1682−1689.

3749

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00466
J. Proteome Res. 2015, 14, 3738−3749

