Neuro-Oncology 12(1):14–18, 2010.
doi:10.1093/neuonc/nop010
Advance Access publication October 20, 2009

NEURO-ONCOLOGY

Bevacizumab induces regression of vestibular
schwannomas in patients with
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2†

Victor-Felix Mautner, Rosa Nguyen, Hannes Kutta, Carsten Fuensterer,
Carsten Bokemeyer, Christian Hagel, Reinhard E. Friedrich, and Jens Panse

Department of Maxillofacial Surgery (V.M., R.N., R.E.F.); Department of Otolaryngology (H.K.); Institute of
Neuropathology (C.H.); Department of Oncology/Hematology, Cancer Center (J.P., C.B.); University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany; MRI Institute, Hamburg Othmarschen, Germany (C.F.)

Bilateral vestibular schwannomas are the hallmark of
neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2), and these tumors
impair hearing and frequently lead to deafness.
Neurosurgical intervention, the only established treat-
ment, often damages the vestibular nerve. We report 2
cases in which treatment with bevacizumab (for 3
months in one case and 6 months in the other) induced
regression of progressive vestibular schwannomas by
more than 40% and substantially improved hearing in
the patient treated for 6 months. Bevacizumab therapy
may thus provide an effective treatment for progressive
vestibular schwannomas in patients with NF2.

Keywords: bevacizumab, neuroﬁbromatosis type 2,
vestibular schwannoma

Introduction

Neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2) is an autosomal

dominant syndrome characterized by tumors
in the peripheral and cerebral nervous systems,
including schwannomas, meningiomas, and gliomas.
The hallmark of NF2 are bilateral schwannomas of
the vestibular nerves, which are present in up to 90%
of all patients.1 Neurosurgical
intervention is the
only established treatment option for vestibular

Received May 12, 2009; accepted May 29, 2009.

†As we were submitting this manuscript, Dr Scott Plotkin informed us
that their manuscript describing the outcome of bevacizumab treatment
on NF2 patients was accepted for publication in the New England
Journal of Medicine.
Corresponding Author: Victor-Felix Mautner, MD, Department of
Maxillofacial Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg-
Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany (kluwe@uke.
uni-hamburg.de).

surgical

schwannomas. However,
resection may
further damage the vestibular nerves and worsen
hearing, in some cases resulting in ultimate deafness.2
Stereotactic irradiation of the tumors can be used to
induce regression or slow progression, but the potential
complications include facial nerve weakness, trigeminal
neuropathy, vestibular dysfunction, and an increased
risk for development of secondary malignancies later.3, 4
Very recently, erlotinib, an endothelial growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has been
reported to have induced substantial regression of a
vestibular
schwannoma and signiﬁcantly improved
hearing in a patient with NF2,5 suggesting that patients
with slow-growing benign tumors may also beneﬁt
from so-called targeted therapies, such as tyrosine
kinase inhibitors or monoclonal antibodies, originally
developed for the treatment of malignant
tumors.
Bevacizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody
against vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), is a
recently approved drug for treatment of various malig-
nancies such as colon and breast cancers in combination
with classic chemotherapeutic agents. Tumors with high
levels of VEGF expression such as glioblastomas are con-
sidered as suitable for bevacizumab treatment.6 Because
vestibular schwannomas express VEGF-1,7 NF2 patients
with imminent total hearing loss because of tumor pro-
gression may beneﬁt from bevacizumab treatment. At
the 2008 NF conference in Bonita Spring, Florida, pre-
liminary results from an ongoing treatment of NF2
patients using bevacizumab were presented by the
group of Dr Scott Plotkin (Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts), demonstrating poten-
tial efﬁcacy of this drug for vestibular schwannomas.

In this current study, 2 NF2 patients for whom
no other treatment options were available opted for
treatment with bevacizumab after extensive consultation,
discussions, and informed consent on an individual basis.

# The Author(s) 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights
reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org.

Patient Histories

Patient 1

A 17-year-old male patient was seen by an ear, nose, and
throat physician in 2003 with progressive hoarseness
because of paresis of the right vocal cord. Radiological
work-up identiﬁed a causative vagus tumor. Additional
cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed
small vestibular schwannomas of 8  15 and 11 
20 mm2 on the left and right vestibular nerves, respect-
ively. A tumor of the left trigeminal nerve and a right par-
ietally located meningioma were also detected. Magnetic
resonance imaging of the cervical spine revealed an
intramedullary C3 – C4 lesion suspected to be an ependy-
moma. These ﬁndings conﬁrmed the diagnosis of NF2.
In 2004, at the age of 18 years, the patient suffered a
sudden bilateral pantonal hearing loss with thresholds of
40 – 60 decibels hearing level (dBHL) on the right side
and 20 – 30 dBHL on the left side. The right vestibular
schwannoma had grown by 30%. The patient under-
went surgery to resect the left vestibular schwannoma,
which was smaller, with the hope of preserving the
hearing on the left side. The resection did not further
impair the hearing. Magnetic resonance imaging scan
in 2005 detected a substantial progression of the right
vestibular
schwannoma, which led to a pantonal
hearing loss of 70 – 90 dBHL in the pure-tone audiogram.
Because of brain stem compression, this tumor was
resected with an outcome of total right-side hearing loss.
The hearing in the left ear continued to decrease because
of regrowth of the left vestibular schwannoma. In 2008,
the patient became unable to differentiate voices and
could no longer converse ﬂuently over the phone even
with a hearing aid. He was aware that further surgery
would be required because of tumor progression and that
deafness was imminent. Because of the risk of brain stem
herniation, radiation therapy was not recommended.
In addition to his progressive vestibular schwannoma,
the intramedullary cervical spine tumor showed slow
progression leading to an asymptomatic syrinx.

Patient 2

In 1992, a 22-year-old man presented with sudden right-
sided hearing loss. The patient was treated with corticos-
teroids and rheologica, which transiently restored partial
hearing function. In 1996, at the age of 26 years, he had
a sudden decline in hearing of the left ear. Cranial MRI
revealed bilateral vestibular schwannomas and a left
ventricular meningioma and conﬁrmed the diagnosis of
NF2. In the same year, the patient underwent neurosur-
gery of the left vestibular schwannoma (then 2 cm in
diameter), resulting in total hearing loss in the left ear.
In 1997, the right vestibular schwannoma was 1.6 cm
in diameter, and the patient had a 15% hearing impair-
ment on the right side. In 2001, the patient suffered a
sudden hearing loss with tinnitus, which was almost
completely recovered after infusion of corticoids and

Mautner et al.: Efﬁcacy of bevacizumab for vestibular schwannoma

rheologica. The right vestibular schwannoma progressed
to a diameter of 1.7 cm.

Two years later, the patient experienced another
sudden hearing loss in 0.5–2 kHz of about 40 dBHL
and was treated again with corticoids and rheologica.
Annual cranial MRI revealed a continuous progression
of the right vestibular schwannoma with an associated
decline in hearing. In 2008, pure-tone audiometry demon-
strated a pantonal hearing loss of 30–60 dBHL with the
peak at 1–2 kHz. Speech audiogram revealed a hearing
loss for numbers up to 60 dBHL and 85% recognition of
single syllables at 100 dBHL. The risk of total hearing
loss in the case of surgery was estimated to be very high.
Radiation therapy was not recommended because of the
risk of brainstem herniation during treatment.

Bevacizumab Treatment

Bevacizumab was given to each patient as an infusion
every 2 weeks at a dose of 5.0 mg/kg body weight.
The infusion time was 90 minutes at the beginning and
then gradually reduced to 30 minutes. Before the treat-
ment, the patients had a thorough medical evaluation
including blood pressure, urine analysis,
liver and
kidney function tests, coagulation status, and history
of thrombosis, hemoglobin, leukocyte count, and throm-
bocyte count. These tests were repeated before each
treatment. Patients gave reports about their condition
weekly via e-mail. The treatment was administered in
the oncology outpatient clinic of University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf by nurses experienced in
administration of bevacizumab. Treatment with bevaci-
zumab was scheduled for a total of 1 year.

Results

Patient 1

Six months after the start of therapy, the left vestibular
schwannoma had regressed from a calculated volume
of 10.4 mL (Fig. 1A) to 5.9 mL (Fig. 1B). Mitigation of
brain stem compression was clearly visible on the
cranial MRI scans. The intramedullary tumor showed
slight regression, whereas the volume of the syrinx
decreased more substantially (Fig. 1C and D).

Both pure-tone audiometry and Freiburger speech
audiogram displayed slight improvement in hearing
and word recognition (Fig. 2). Subjectively, the patient
experienced a more signiﬁcant hearing improvement,
as he regained the ability to communicate via phone
and to distinguish voices.

The patient had slight fatigue after each infusion
therapy and mild epistaxis episodes at the beginning of
treatment. No other side effects were reported or observed.

Patient 2

Three months after the start of therapy, the right vestib-
ular schwannoma regressed from 7.3 mL (Fig. 3A) to

NEURO-ONCOLOGY † J A N U A R Y 2 0 1 0

15

Mautner et al.: Efﬁcacy of bevacizumab for vestibular schwannoma

Fig. 1. Cranial (A and B) and spinal (C and D) MRIs of patient 1 before (A and C) and 6 months after (B and D) bevacizumab treatment.
Homogeneous contrast enhancement revealed vestibular schwannoma in the cerebellarpontine angle compressing the brain stem and the
4th ventricle before treatment (A), which was substantially decreased after 6 months of treatment (B). Cervical spine MRI showed a syrinx
associated with the intramedullary tumor (suspected ependymoma) before treatment (C), which was visibly decreased 6 months after the
start of treatment (D).

4.3 mL (Fig. 3B). The cystic part regressed more than the
solid part in the tumor. Brain stem compression was
clearly relieved. Audio tests did not show improvement,
nor did the patient himself
report any hearing
improvement.

After the 10th infusion, the patient developed high
blood pressure. After consultation with his
local
general practitioner, he was given a calcium antagonist.
Subsequently, he was switched to a sartan (angiotensin-1
antagonist), which resulted in better control of his blood
pressure.

Discussion

In these case reports, bevacizumab had notable efﬁcacy
in the treatment of benign vestibular schwannomas in
the 2 patients with NF2. In both patients, total hearing
loss was imminent because of tumor progression, with
no other treatment options left. Within short treatment

16

NEURO-ONCOLOGY † J A N U A R Y 2 0 1 0

treatment, both objectively

periods of 3 and 6 months, vestibular schwannomas
regressed substantially in both patients. In the ﬁrst
patient, hearing improved signiﬁcantly after 6 months
of
and subjectively.
Although such improvement has not yet been seen in
the second patient, he has been treated for only 3
months so far. Also for the ﬁrst patient, hearing tests
did not reveal improvement at 3 months of treatment,
although the patient himself reported better hearing
subjectively.

Both patients are still receiving medication, and
follow-up examination will reveal if the tumors further
regress during ongoing treatment. Treatment is sched-
uled for up to 1 year, and both patients will be closely
monitored for subsequent side effects of bevacizumab
and regrowth of tumors that might occur after cessation
of treatment. Disease recurrence and more aggressive
progression have been reported following bevacizumab
treatment of malignant gliomas.8,9 This, however, may
not necessarily occur in patients with benign vestibular

Mautner et al.: Efﬁcacy of bevacizumab for vestibular schwannoma

schwannomas, and although recurrence of glioblasto-
mas is normally associated with rapid deterioration
and ultimately patient death, resumption of bevacizu-
mab treatment can be considered for NF2 patients
with vestibular schwannomas. However, unknown side
effects and the high risk for thrombosis and bleeding
events argue against
the drug.
Nonetheless, treatment with bevacizumab can postpone
surgical procedures, which carry a high risk of total
hearing loss. In addition, tumor regression after bevaci-
zumab treatment increases the chance of hearing preser-
vation in the case of surgical intervention. Combined
treatment with bevacizumab and subsequent surgery
thus provides a new treatment option for large and pro-
gressing vestibular schwannomas.

long-term use of

In both patients, intramedullary tumors were not
affected by the medication. Interestingly, the syrinx
and the bulging of the myelon caused by such a tumor
in the ﬁrst patient were visibly reduced. In contrast to
the drastic regression of the vestibular schwannomas,
no visible change was found for the cerebral meningio-
mas on MRI. One possible explanation is that only the
progressive vestibular schwannomas responded to the
drug, whereas meningiomas in the 2 patients were not
in a progressive phase during the treatment period and
thus did not respond.

This is another success in medical treatment for ves-
tibular schwannoma after the impressive result by
Plotkin et al.5 with erlotinib. These successes are the
fruits of modern anticancer drugs and the recent NF2
research focused on directly inhibiting tumor Schwann
cell proliferation (eg, using erlotinib) and suppression
of vascularization (eg, with bevacizumab). The exact
mechanism of the action of bevacizumab on vestibular
schwannomas remains to be elucidated. The drug may
also suppress growth of tumor Schwann cells directly,
a possibility that can be tested in vitro in future studies.

Fig. 2. Hearing of patient 1 before (thin lines) and after 6 months
of treatment (thick lines). (A) Pure-tone audiometry. Solid and
dotted lines are measures of
the middle and inner ear,
respectively, (B) Freiburg speech audiogram. The y-scale on the
left refers to the speech level for the monosyllabic word test,
whereas that
for
numbers. The upper 2 thin lines are reference values for number
and monosyllabic word recognition, respectively.

in the middle refers to the speech level

Fig. 3. Cranial MRI for patient 2 before (A) and 3 months after (B) treatment. The cystic component of the right vestibular schwannoma
regressed substantially, whereas mitigation of the associated brain stem compression was clearly seen.

NEURO-ONCOLOGY † J A N U A R Y 2 0 1 0

17

Mautner et al.: Efﬁcacy of bevacizumab for vestibular schwannoma

Erlotinib is given orally but daily, while bevacizumab
has to be given i.v. yet only once every 2 weeks. As an
EGFR inhibitor, erlotinib frequently causes skin altera-
tions including dry skin, acne, and onychia, as well as
other side effects known for tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Bevacizumab, on the other hand, targets VEGF and is
associated with the risk of hypertension, bleeding,
embolism, and kidney complications. In our limited
experience, however, bevacizumab is well tolerated by
patients. Further systematic studies are essential to
evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of both
drugs in treating vestibular schwannomas.

Our encouraging results with bevacizumab suggest
for

consideration of a prospective

clinical

trial

vestibular

progressive NF2-related
schwannomas,
especially for patients with imminent total hearing
loss. In addition, other modern anticancer drugs may
also be effective against slow-growing benign tumors
such as vestibular schwannomas and should be further
evaluated.

Acknowledgments

We thank Dr Lan Kluwe for her help in preparing the
manuscript.

Conﬂict of interest statement. None declared.

References

1. Mautner VF, Lindenau M, Baser ME, et al. The neuroimaging

5.

Plotkin SR, Singh MA, O’Donnell CC, Harris GJ, McClatchey AI, Halpin

and

clinical

spectrum of

neuroﬁbromatosis 2. Neurosurgery.

C. Audiologic and radiographic response of NF2-related vestibular

1996;38:880– 885.

schwannoma

to

erlotinib

therapy. Nat Clin

Pract Oncol.

2. Otto SR, Brackmann DE, Hitselberger WE, Shannon RV, Kuchta J.

2008;5:487–491.

Multi-channel auditory brain stem implant: update on performance of

6. Wong ET, Brem S. Taming glioblastoma: targeting angiogenesis. J Clin

61 patients. J Neurosurg. 2002;96:1063– 1071.

Oncol. 2007;25:4705–4706.

3.

Evans DG, Birch JM, Ramsden RT, Sharif S, Baser ME. Malignant trans-

7. Uesaka T, Shono T, Suzuki SO, et al. Expression of VEGF and its receptor

formation and new primary tumours after therapeutic radiation of

genes in intracranial schwannomas. J Neurooncol. 2007;83:259–266.

benign disease: substantial risks in certain tumour prone syndromes. J

8.

Zuniga RM, Torcuator R, Jain R, et al. Efﬁcacy, safety and patterns of

Med Genet. 2006;43:289 –294.

response and recurrence in patients with recurrent high-grade gliomas

4. Mathieu D, Kondziolka D,

Flickinger

JC, et al.

Stereotactic

treated with

bevacizumab

plus

irinotecan.

J Neurooncol.

radiosurgery

for

vestibular

schwannomas

in

patients with

2009;91:329– 336.

neuroﬁbromatosis

type

2:

an

analysis

of

tumour

control,

9. Norden AD, Young GS, Setayesh K, et al. Bevacizumab for recurrent

complications,

and

hearing

preservation

rates. Neurosurgery.

malignant gliomas: efﬁcacy,

toxicity, and patterns of

recurrence.

2007;60:460– 468.

Neurology. 2008;70:779–787.

18

NEURO-ONCOLOGY † J A N U A R Y 2 0 1 0

Copyright of Neuro-Oncology is the property of Society for Neuro-Oncology and its content may not be copied
or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

