Clinical Chemistry 53:12
2051–2059

(2007)

Molecular Diagnostics
and Genetics

Development of a Focused Oligonucleotide-Array

Comparative Genomic Hybridization Chip for

Clinical Diagnosis of Genomic Imbalance

Yiping Shen,1,2† David T. Miller,1,3,4† Sau Wai Cheung,5 Va Lip,1 Xiaoming Sheng,1

Keith Tomaszewicz,1 Hong Shao,1 Hong Fang,1 Hung Siv Tang,1 Mira Irons,3,4
Christopher A. Walsh,3,4,6 Orah Platt,1,4 James F. Gusella,2,4 and Bai-Lin Wu1,4*

Background: Submicroscopic genomic imbalance un-
derlies well-defined microdeletion and microduplica-
tion syndromes and contributes to general developmen-
tal disorders such as mental retardation and autism.
Array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) com-
plements routine cytogenetic methods such as karyotyp-
ing and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for the
detection of genomic imbalance. Oligonucleotide arrays
in particular offer advantages in ease of manufacturing,
but standard arrays for single-nucleotide polymorphism
genotyping or linkage analysis offer variable coverage
in clinically relevant regions. We report the design
and validation of a focused oligonucleotide-array
CGH assay for clinical laboratory diagnosis of genomic
imbalance.
Methods: We selected >10 000 60-mer oligonucleotide
features from Agilent’s eArray probe library to interro-
gate all subtelomeric and pericentromeric regions and
95 additional clinically relevant regions for a total of 179
loci. Sensitivity and specificity were measured for 105
patient samples, including 51 with known genomic-

1 Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston,

MA.

2 Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital,

Boston, MA.

3 Division of Genetics, Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, MA.
4 Departments of Medicine, Neurology, Pathology, Pediatrics, Harvard

Medical School, Boston, MA.

5 Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Med-

icine, Houston, TX.

6 Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD.
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
* Address correspondence to this author at: Departments of Laboratory
Medicine and Pathology, Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
300 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115. Fax 617-730-0338; e-mail bai-
lin.wu@childrens.harvard.edu.

Received April 20, 2007; accepted September 11, 2007.
Previously published online at DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2007.090290

imbalance events, as detected by bacterial artificial
chromosome– based array CGH, FISH, or multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification.
Results: Focused array CGH detected all known regions
of genomic imbalance in 51 validation samples with
100% concordance and an excellent signal-to-noise ratio.
The mean SD among log2 ratios of all noncontrol fea-
tures without copy number alteration was 0.062 (me-
dian, 0.055). Clinical testing of another 211 samples from
individuals with developmental delay, unexplained
mental retardation, dysmorphic features, or multiple
congenital anomalies revealed genomic imbalance in 25
samples (11.9%).
Conclusions: This focused oligonucleotide-array CGH
assay, a flexible, robust method for clinically diagnos-
ing genetic disorders associated with genomic imbal-
ance, offers appreciable advantages over currently avail-
able platforms.
© 2007 American Association for Clinical Chemistry

Genomic imbalance causes a variety of human genetic
disorders, ranging from imbalance of entire chromo-
somes, as in Down syndrome, to submicroscopic rear-
rangements, as
in the 22q11 deletion that causes
DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome. Genomic imbal-
ance also causes idiopathic mental retardation (1, 2 ) and
is detectable in approximately 3%–4% of cases (3 ) by
traditional cytogenetic methods, such as karyotype and
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)7 analyses. These
traditional cytogenetic methods are labor intensive, espe-
cially when multiple genomic regions are interrogated.

7 Nonstandard abbreviations: FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization;
MLPA, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification; CGH, comparative
genomic hybridization; BAC, bacterial artificial chromosome; CNV, copy-
number variant; SNR, signal-to-noise ratio.

2051

2052

Shen et al.: Oligonucleotide-Array CGH Chip for Clinical Diagnosis

Molecular

techniques such as multiplex ligation-
dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and real-time
PCR are alternatives to multiple FISH assays for evaluat-
ing the genomic copy number of multiple targets (4 ).
Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization
(CGH) offers the ability to interrogate many more
genomic regions in a single assay. Early CGH arrays were
composed of large-insert bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC) clones (5 ). BAC-based arrays have revolutionized
the detection of genomic imbalance in clinical cytogenetic
laboratories (6, 7 ) but are challenging to develop, validate,
and manufacture. The fact that BAC clones in standard
libraries may be inaccurately mapped could lead to diag-
nostic errors without careful validation (8 ). Additionally,
BAC clone inserts average approximately 150 kb, limiting
the resolution of detectable copy-number variants (CNVs)
to the size of a BAC insert. Deletion breakpoints that
extend beyond the BAC clone cannot be accurately deter-
mined. Once validated, BAC arrays are much more effi-
cient than multiplex FISH analysis, but genetic informa-
tion is constantly changing. Consequently, updates to a
BAC-based array require successive rounds of extensive
probe validation.

Oligonucleotide-based arrays offer advantages over
BAC-based arrays, and many platforms are available.
Oligonucleotide arrays designed for genotyping single-
nucleotide polymorphisms may not provide uniform cov-
erage at all sites of genomic imbalance (9, 10 ). Custom
oligonucleotide arrays that are based on libraries of vali-
dated synthetic probes can interrogate clinically relevant
genomic regions without the need for large-insert clone
libraries. We describe an array based on Agilent’s eArray
library, a large collection of 60-mer oligonucleotides spe-
cifically selected for robust copy-number analysis (11 ).
This targeted oligonucleotide-based array provides a flex-
ible and adaptable method for CGH to detect genomic
copy-number
clinical diagnostic
laboratory.

imbalance

in the

Materials and Methods

validation samples
DNA was obtained from the material remaining from 105
samples after previous clinical assays had been completed
for patients who originally had been referred for genetic
testing with BAC-based array CGH, FISH, karyotyping,
or MLPA in the DNA Diagnostic Laboratory at Children’s
Hospital Boston and the Medical Genetics Laboratories at
Baylor College of Medicine. Genomic imbalance was
previously identified in 51 (49%) of the 105 samples.
Samples with positive results from prior testing were
assigned to a “validation set” and subjected to oligonu-
cleotide-array CGH analysis in these 2 laboratories with
the array platform described below. Laboratory personnel
were blinded to prior testing results. The Children’s
Hospital Boston Institutional Review Board approved this
project.

clinical samples
After assay validation, we performed clinical array CGH
testing of 211 consecutively submitted samples from
presumably unrelated children. Samples were submitted
after referral to specialists in the Divisions of Clinical
Genetics and Developmental Medicine, and the Depart-
ment of Neurology for clinical molecular-diagnostic test-
ing. The referring diagnoses for these patients included
developmental delay, mental retardation, dysmorphic
features, or multiple congenital anomalies. All samples
were compared with a reference sample for standard
2-color array CGH, either a 46,XY male or a 46,XX female
sample. Reference DNA was purchased from Promega.

Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood for all
samples with a D50K PureGene DNA-isolation reagent
set (Qiagen/Gentra) according to the manufacturer’s in-
structions. All DNA was stored at ⫺20 °C.

chip design
This focused oligonucleotide chip covers 179 clinically
relevant regions of genomic imbalance,
including all
subtelomeric and pericentromeric regions, and 95 regions
responsible for well-defined microdeletion/microdupli-
cation syndromes, mental retardation, and autism (for a
summary of array coverage, see Supplemental Data 1 in
the Data Supplement that accompanies the online version
of
this article at http://www.clinchem.org/content/
vol53/issue12). A total of 10 207 region-specific features
and 603 quality-control and negative-control features se-
lected from Agilent’s eArray library (11 ) are randomly
located on the array with an average spatial resolution of
⬍35 kb within the targeted regions. Each subtelomeric
region has a minimum coverage of 5 Mb. A subset of 660
features is duplicated on each block as a quality-control
measure. Arrays were manufactured with Agilent’s Sure-
Print Inkjet technology. In designing the targeted oligo-
nucleotide-based array, we consulted the Database of
Genomic Variants (http://projects.tcag.ca/variation/) to
avoid CNVs with no apparent clinical relevance.

cgh
Oligonucleotide-array CGH was performed according to
the manufacturer’s Oligonucleotide Array–Based CGH
for Genomic DNA Analysis protocol (version 3; Agilent
Technologies; see Supplemental Data 2 in the online Data
Supplement for a summary of the protocol).

Dye-swap verification was performed on all samples
with positive findings. For other confirmation assays, we
carried out BAC-array CGH and FISH confirmation as
described previously (12 ). MLPA confirmation was per-
formed as described previously (13 ). The MLPA oligonu-
cleotides for the CTNS8 (cystinosis, nephropathic) gene
are as follows: exon 2, GTTTTCACACTGGGCGAAGG

8 Human genes: CTNS, cystinosis, nephropathic; NPHP1, nephronophthi-

sis 1 (juvenile); CARKL, carbohydrate kinase-like.

Clinical Chemistry 53, No. 12, 2007

2053

GAGGACT and CCTGAGCTCTGCCTCTTCCAGTAA
CATTG; exon 6, CCGAGGATACGCTTTCTTGTGATCC
and GCAGCAGCGCCATTAGCATCATAAACC; exon
12, CAACCAAGTTTGGACTCGGGGT and CTTCTC
CATCGTCTT CGACGTCGTC.

data analysis
Scanned images were quantified with Feature Extraction
software (version 9.0; Agilent Technologies). We used the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and the normalized log2 ratio
(test:reference) with 40 nonpathologic individual DNA
samples to evaluate the quality and variability of each
feature/target. The SNR was calculated by dividing the
mean signal intensity of each feature by the mean back-
ground signal intensity. Features with a mean SNR ⬍4 or
an SD of the log2 ratio ⬎0.1 were considered to have poor
signal quality and high variability and were filtered out
before further analysis. These thresholds were chosen
empirically and are similar to those used in similar
studies (1, 14 ).

We visualized the filtered data further with CGH
Analytics software (version 3.4; Agilent Technologies)
and evaluated the quality of each test with the quality-
control metrics generated with CGH Analytics software.
Copy-number aberration was indicated with the Aberra-
tion Detection Method 2 algorithm for the data that
passed quality-control testing. The Aberration Detection
Method 2 algorithm finds intervals of varying size with a
consistent, appreciably low, or high log2 ratio. An aberra-
tion filter was set to indicate regions with at least 3 targets
showing the same direction in copy-number change. The
mean log2 ratio of each region of potential imbalance was
calculated and compared with the SD for the whole
dataset. A copy-number gain was called if the mean log2
ratio was greater than twice the SD of the whole dataset,
and a loss was called if the mean was less than ⫺2 SDs.
These thresholds were chosen empirically and are similar
to those used in other such studies (15, 16 ). Cutoff values
for genomic imbalance can be adjusted and set accord-
ingly with the threshold function of CGH Analytics
software, especially when a potential mosaic scenario is
encountered. Variants not known to be pathogenic were
compared with the Database of Genomic Variants (http://
projects.tcag.ca/variation/) to facilitate interpretation.

Results

evaluation of target loci and overall chip
performance
Forty sex-matched samples from healthy individuals
were analyzed on the array, including 2 self-self hybrid-
izations, to evaluate each feature on the array. Signal
quality, log2 ratio variability, mean SNR, and SD of the
log2 ratio were calculated for each noncontrol feature. The
mean and median signal intensities of all the noncontrol
features were 251 and 178, respectively. The mean and
median values of the mean SNRs from all noncontrol
features were 9.05 and 6.39, respectively. More than 91%

of the target features had a mean SNR ⬎4. Mean log2
ratios were distributed symmetrically around the zero
value. Only a small fraction of features (52 of 10 025,
0.52%) exhibited mean values ⬎0.1 or ⬍⫺0.1. These
features were excluded from the dataset before further
analysis. The mean SD of the log2 ratio of all noncontrol
features was 0.062 (median SD, 0.055).

We demonstrated a log2 ratio SD of ⬎0.1 for 714
features (7.12%); we categorized these features as non-
ideal targets and excluded them from further analysis.
More than 90% of the features passed the feature level
filter criteria: an absolute mean log2 ratio ⬍0.1, a log2 ratio
SD ⬍0.1, and a mean SNR ⬎4. After excluding nonideal
features, the dataset quality improved dramatically. For
example, the SD of the log2 ratio dropped from ⬎0.06 to
⬍0.03. Features with a large log2 SD largely overlapped
those with a low SNR, further validating this filtering
approach. Because the nonideal targets are approximately
evenly distributed across the target regions, the overall
resolution of the chip is not appreciably affected.

Several key variables were used to evaluate chip qual-
ity and to describe the quality of the dataset as a whole.
These variables included probe-to-probe log2 ratio noise
(DLRSpread), the median signal intensity of both chan-
nels, background noise for both channels, and SNR. The
following cutoffs were used to pass our quality-control
testing: DLRSpread ⱕ0.25, median signal intensity ⱖ50,
background noise ⱕ10, and SNR ⱖ15. None of the sam-
ples failed quality-control testing because of poor chip
quality or problems with hybridization. Two samples
failed testing because of DNA impurities; both samples
passed quality-control tests after we repurified the DNA.

chip validation with blinded samples
We next blindly tested 65 samples for further chip vali-
dation. Genomic imbalance had previously been detected
in 51 of the 65 samples by BAC-array CGH, FISH,
karyotyping, or MLPA, or by some combination of these
analyses, and these 51 samples served as positive controls
for validation. The remaining 14 samples had previously
been tested by targeted BAC-array CGH with nonpatho-
logic results and thus served as negative controls for
validation. All samples were traceable to the technologist
who performed the hybridizations.

Of the 51 validation samples with a previously de-
tected genomic imbalance (see Supplemental Data 3 in the
online Data Supplement), the samples from 2 cases dem-
onstrated aneuploidy for an entire chromosome, 3 cases
involved unbalanced chromosomal rearrangements, 13
cases had subtelomeric deletions/duplications, 17 cases
had interstitial deletions/duplications, and 15 cases were
associated with known segmental aneuploidy regions,
including Angelman/Prader–Willi syndrome (4 cases),
atypical Angelman syndrome on 22q13.3 (1 case), an
autism phenotype associated with duplication of 15q11-
q13 (1 case), a velocardiofacial/DiGeorge syndrome re-

2054

Shen et al.: Oligonucleotide-Array CGH Chip for Clinical Diagnosis

gion (5 cases with deletions and 2 with duplication), and
Williams–Beuren syndrome (2 cases).

Across all samples, results from oligonucleotide-array
CGH were consistent with the results obtained with the 4
prior methods, but oligonucleotide-based array CGH pro-
vided the most precise breakpoint boundaries. Fig. 1A
shows a genomic-imbalance event (2q37.3 deletion) iden-
tified by oligonucleotide-based array CGH, and Fig. 1B
shows the FISH confirmation of the 2q37.3 deletion.

Oligonucleotide-array CGH detected no appreciable
imbalance events in any of the 14 negative controls, with
the exception of several reported CNVs. The dye-swap
scheme essentially eliminated false-positive results.

To further evaluate the confidence of each imbalance
call by oligonucleotide-array CGH analysis, we calculated
the mean log2 ratios for each detected imbalance region
and compared them with the SD for the whole dataset.
The value of the mean log2 ratio/SD indicates the sepa-
rability of each imbalance event from the background
noise of the whole dataset. For the majority of deletion
events detected, the value was less than ⫺3.2, whereas the
value was ⬎2.6 for the majority of gain events detected.

genomic imbalance detected in clinical
samples
We used focused oligonucleotide-array CGH to test 211
clinical samples that had been ascertained to have come
from individuals with developmental delay, unexplained
mental retardation, dysmorphic features, or multiple con-
genital anomalies. In this cohort, the detection rate for
genomic imbalance was approximately 11.9% (25 of 211
samples). All abnormal findings were first verified with a
dye-swap array CGH and then independently confirmed
by either FISH or MLPA. All the genomic-imbalance
events, including CNVs with unknown significance, were
divided into 3 categories, as is described below. The
imbalance events associated with known disorders or
likely to cause disease are listed in Table 1.

genomic imbalance associated with
well-defined disorders
Table 1A lists 12 samples with 10 genomic imbalance
events associated with known genetic disorders. In this
group, 2 of the samples revealed a complex pattern
involving both gain and loss on 2 different chromosomes
(case 1) or on the same chromosome (case 2), 2 samples
had a well-defined microdeletion syndrome (cases 3 and
4), 1 sample had a subtelomeric deletion (case 5), and 2
samples had whole-chromosome aneuploidy (cases 6 and
7). One dominantly inherited disorder could be diagnosed
by the detection of haploinsufficiency for the relevant
gene (cases 8 and 9), and 3 cases involved carriers of a
recessive allele: deletion at the NPHP1 [nephronophthisis
1 (juvenile); cases 10 and 11] and CTNS loci (case 12). The
last 3 cases featured deletions of ⬍100 kb, each of which
covered defined disease genes.

Oligonucleotide-array CGH was able to detect cryptic
rearrangements, submicroscopic alterations, and even
single-gene deletions. The smallest imbalance event de-
tected in this study was a heterozygous genomic deletion
of 3 consecutive probes covering a minimal 23-kb interval.
Fig. 2A shows the targeted array CGH data, and deletion
of the 3 targets was confirmed by dye-swap hybridization
(green in the forward hybridization and red in the reverse
hybridization). In this case, we repeated the CGH analysis
with Agilent’s 244K whole-genome oligonucleotide array
and confirmed the deletion, which includes the entire
CARKL (carbohydrate kinase-like) gene and part of CTNS
(Fig. 2B). The partial deletion of CTNS was independently
confirmed by MLPA analysis. Fig. 2C shows a 1-copy
deletion for CTNS exons 2 and 6 and a typical dosage for
CTNS exon 12. To further characterize the deletion, we
amplified the deletion junction by the PCR and confirmed
by sequencing (Fig. 2D) that the deletion detected by
array CGH is the common “European” deletion associ-
ated with cystinosis (17 ). This case further demonstrated
the excellent resolution and sensitivity of the custom
oligonucleotide-array CGH method.

genomic imbalance probably causing a
disorder
Table 1B lists 5 samples with interstitial deletions/dupli-
cations that may be clinically relevant. The list includes 3
interesting cases: a 3.3 Mb duplication at 17p11.2, which is
similar to that of a recently reported 17p11.2-duplication
syndrome (18 ), and 2 cases of a 546 kb de novo deletion at
16p11.2, which is within a region of frequently observed
cytogenetic polymorphism but is not observed in the
CNV database. Neither individual with the de novo
546-kb 16p11.2 deletion had specific dysmorphic features,
but the absence of this deletion in the parents suggests
that the deletion is responsible for the phenotype of
developmental delay.

genomic CNVs with unknown significance
Nine patients had unreported CNVs with relatively small
genomic deletions of between 50 and 200 kb (data not
shown). The clinical significance of
these imbalance
events is unclear. Although this custom oligonucleotide
array was designed to avoid CNVs, many new CNV loci
have been reported since the design of
the array
(http://projects.tcag.ca/variation/).

Discussion

Array CGH is a valuable clinical diagnostic assay for
patients with mental retardation and other genetic condi-
tions. Although high-resolution whole-genome oligonu-
cleotide microarrays are commercially available for re-
search, targeted array CGH offers several advantages in a
clinical diagnostic laboratory (8 ). We chose genomic re-
gions with well-documented clinical relevance, analogous
to those of the currently accepted BAC-based arrays
designed by the leading array CGH laboratories (19, 20 ).

Clinical Chemistry 53, No. 12, 2007

2055

Fig. 1. Genomic-imbalance event (2q37.3 deletion) identified by oligonucleotide-based array CGH and FISH confirmation of the deletion.
(A), chromosome view of array CGH results showing a terminal deletion on 2q37.3. Arrowhead points to the targets with a downward-shifted log2 ratio. (B), 2q37.3
deletion confirmed by metaphase FISH. The small arrowhead indicates the signal of the region-specific BAC clone RP11-367H1, and the larger arrowheads indicate the
signals of the chromosome 2 centromere–specific BAC clone.

2056

Shen et al.: Oligonucleotide-Array CGH Chip for Clinical Diagnosis

Table 1. Genomic imbalance identified in clinical samples by oligonucleotide-array CGH and confirmed with

alternative methods.

Genomic imbalance detected by focused oligonucleotide-

array CGH

Cytogenetics (FISH/karyotype), MLPA,

whole-genome CGH/targeted PCR

(A) Associated with disorders

13qter gain, 20.7 Mb; 18qter loss, 5.6 Mb

(partial trisomy 13q and partial monosomy 18q)

18pter-p11.21 loss, 13.4 Mb; 18p11.21 gain,

1.3 Mb (partial monosomy 18p and partial
trisomy 18p)

17p11.2 loss, 3.6 Mb (Smith–Magenis syndrome)
1p36.21 loss, 1.8 Mb (1p36 deletion syndrome)
4q35.2 loss, 1.1 Mb (autism spectrum disorder)
X gain (aneusomy X)
Y gain (aneusomy Y)
Yp11.2 loss, 2.7 Mb: 2 cases
2q13 loss, 100 kb (NPHP1 deletion): 2 cases
17p13 loss, 23 kb (CARKL and CTNS deletion;

familial)

(B) Likely clinically relevant

17p11.2 gain, 3.3 Mb
16p11.2 loss, 546 kb (de novo): 2 cases
15q13.3 gain, 1.5 Mb
5q22.1–q23.1 loss, 8.5 Mb

46,XX, add(18)(q2?1.3) ish

der(18)t(13;18)(D13S327⫹, 18qtel11–)

46,XX ish 18pter(D18S552 ⫻ 1), 18p11.21 (RP11-

720L3 ⫻ 3)

46,XX, ish del(17)(p11.2 p11.2)
46,XY, ish del(1)(p36.2)
46,XY, ish del(4)(qter–)
47,XXY
47,XYY
ish Yp11.2 (RP11-115H13 ⫻ 0)
Confirmed by whole-genome array CGH
Confirmed by whole-genome array CGH, MLPA,

parental array CGH, and PCR flanking the deletion

46,XY, nuc ish 17p11.2 (RP11-363P3 ⫻ 3)
46,XY, ish del(16)(p11.2 p11.2)
nuc ish 15q13.3 (RP11-303I13 ⫻ 3)
Confirmed by whole-genome array CGH

Confirmation

Consistent

Consistent

Consistent
Consistent
Consistent
Consistent
Consistent
Consistent
Consistent
Consistent

Consistent
Consistent
Consistent
Consistent

Genomic imbalance identified on the targeted oligonucle-
otide array can be verified with existing FISH or MLPA
probes, whereas secondary methods are not readily avail-
able for a whole-genome array.

Uniformly manufactured arrays facilitate reproducible
results in the clinical laboratory. On BAC-based arrays,
each BAC clone may include both unique and repetitive
sequences. Each BAC must be propagated in culture,
introducing possible variability in BAC inserts or DNA
contamination between batches and potentially affecting
the reproducibility and consistency of the manufactured
arrays. In contrast, 60-mer oligonucleotide probes are
synthesized robotically in situ and have a fixed GC
content and melting temperature that facilitate uniform
hybridization. Although all targets in Agilent’s eArray
library were designed in silico with narrow melting
temperature ranges, the actual performance of each target
needed to be evaluated in practice. Some features exhib-
ited large variability, possibly due to properties of these
unique sequences. Genomic CNVs unquestionably con-
tribute to the variability in the performance of some
probes.

The sensitivity and specificity of the oligonucleotide-
array platform were excellent because of the high SNRs
and low SDs. We observed the SDs of all targets to be
consistently ⬍0.1—with the majority being ⬍0.08—with
this oligonucleotide-based array. Given the nice separa-
bility of imbalance events above the baseline, we can
identify genomic imbalance events with a high level of
confidence. In addition to the 100% concordance between
the oligonucleotide-array CGH results and the results
generated by other methods for both positive and nega-

tive samples, we were able to identify smaller imbalance
events (unreported CNVs; data not shown) that were not
detected with other methods.

Oligonucleotide platforms can quickly and easily ac-
commodate changes in genomic coverage. Manufacturing
costs are not prohibitive and the list of available probe
sequences extends the length of the genome. Thus, up-
dates to oligonucleotide-based arrays can be accom-
plished more quickly and with less postproduction vali-
dation than BAC-based arrays, which require new BAC
clones to be individually validated and DNA to be pre-
pared from each clone before chips can be manufactured.
This focused oligonucleotide-based array CGH plat-
form detected all genomic imbalance events in the 65
validation samples, with 100% concordance with BAC-
based array CGH, FISH/karyotyping, or MLPA. Cover-
age of clinically relevant loci (see Supplemental Data 1 in
the online Data Supplement) is equivalent to other BAC-
based targeted array CGH platforms (19, 20 ). The en-
hanced sensitivity and specificity of oligonucleotide-array
CGH compared with other methods are attributable to
better resolution and the custom design, respectively.

Despite the superior technical performance of oligonu-
cleotide-based array CGH, clinical interpretation can be
challenging. We encountered several scenarios: (a) known
genomic-imbalance events with well-documented clinical
relevance (Table 1A) that were verified with dye-swap-
ping and either FISH or MLPA (on smaller regions); (b)
known genomic-imbalance events with possible clinical
relevance (Table 1B) that were verified by dye-swapping
and the 244K whole-genome array for further character-
ization of the genomic-imbalance events; and (c) novel

Clinical Chemistry 53, No. 12, 2007

2057

Fig. 2. Oligonucleotide-array CGH detection of a heterozygous genomic deletion of 3 consecutive probes covering a minimal 23-kb interval.
(A), the deletion of 3 consecutive targets (underlined with rectangular bar) was confirmed by dye-swap array CGH. Note the symmetrical opposite ratios between
forward-labeled (downward-shift) and reverse-labeled (upward-shift) array CGH. (B), 244K whole-genome oligonucleotide-array CGH confirmation of the deletion. The
rectangular bar underlines the deleted region. Note the entire CARKL gene deletion and the partial CTNS gene deletion (forward labeling only). (C), MLPA confirmation
of the deletion. The trace in lighter gray is a sample from a healthy control individual; the trace in darker gray is the patient sample. The dosage of CTNS exons 2 and
6 appears reduced by half (underlined with the rectangular bar), whereas the dosage of CTNS exon 12 is unchanged. (D), a segment of the sequencing trace around
the deletion junction of the common European deletion. One base (C) overlaps.

2058

Shen et al.: Oligonucleotide-Array CGH Chip for Clinical Diagnosis

genomic imbalance with uncertain clinical relevance,
cases of which were verified by dye-swapping, 244K
whole-genome array analysis, and examination of paren-
tal samples to determine whether the imbalance was a de
novo event.

Adding to the complexity of interpretation is that an
apparent familial variant can actually be pathogenic. For
example, a deletion variant that appears in a healthy
parent and an affected child could be acting as a recessive
allele in the parent. Likewise, a de novo region of genomic
imbalance could be a previously undescribed nonpatho-
genic CNV or a case of nonpaternity. Dozens of CNVs are
present in every human genome (21, 22 ).

Although this custom oligonucleotide array has an
average resolution of approximately 35 kb within the
targeted regions, the fact that array formats continue to
evolve provides ample opportunities to increase resolu-
tion through the selection of additional probes from
available oligonucleotide databases or the design of cus-
tom oligonucleotide arrays. The flexibility of the oligonu-
cleotide-array design allows individual laboratories to
interrogate different genomic regions at the most biolog-
ically relevant level of resolution. For example, arrays can
be designed to detect single-exon deletions and duplica-
tions in a gene of interest.

Resolution beyond that provided by this custom oligo-
nucleotide array may not be necessary or desirable in all
cases, however. A majority of the CNVs detected on
high-resolution oligonucleotide platforms are ⬍150 kb
(23, 24 ), and the detection of these CNVs complicates the
clinical interpretation. CNV databases are highly valuable
research tools, but they have limitations in the clinical
setting. CNVs in databases are often determined by a
variety of methods that may not provide accurate break-
points. These databases are often not annotated with
clinical information and thus do not indicate genotype-
phenotype associations.

As the knowledge of genotype-phenotype associations
in disorders of genomic imbalance accumulates, however,
precise and accurate determination of the genomic se-
quences involved is critically important in the clinical
diagnostic setting. FISH and BAC clones can detect im-
balance equal to or larger than the size of clone insert,
typically approximately 150 kb; thus, smaller deletions or
duplications can be missed on a BAC-based array. Even
genome-wide tiling BAC arrays do not have a resolution
of less than approximately 46 kb (25, 26 ).

Oligonucleotide-based arrays provide an unprece-
dented degree of resolution for determining both the size
and breakpoints of regions of genomic imbalance. Our
current design was able to precisely define a heterozy-
gous deletion of 23 kb, a level of resolution not possible on
a BAC-based array. This improvement in resolution could
be important in the clinical interpretation of cases in
which the inclusion or exclusion of certain genes may
predict clinical features of the condition.

In conclusion, the custom oligonucleotide array that we
have described offers a sensitive and specific clinical assay
for detecting genomic imbalance. The platform can easily
accommodate new information to keep pace with re-
search advances. This methodology offers a proof of
principle that well-designed oligonucleotide-based arrays
offer substantial
technical advantages over currently
available platforms and at a comparable cost. We antici-
pate widespread adoption of this methodology in the
clinical diagnostic setting.

Grant/funding support: This work was supported in part by
National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grant NS24279 (to J.F.G.)
and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
Grant R37 NS35129 (to C.A.W.). Y.S. is the recipient of a
Young Investigator Award from the Children’s Tumor Foun-
dation. B.-L.W. received support from the NIH-CETT Pro-
gram and the MDA Foundation for the development of
cost-effective assays for genetic diagnostics.
Financial disclosures: None declared.
Acknowledgments: We thank the referring physicians and
genetic counselors at the Children’s Hospital Boston for their
cooperation, Dr. Arthur L. Beaudet of Baylor College of
Medicine for thoughtful discussion of the study, and Dr.
Arthur R. Brothman and Emily Aston of the University of
Utah for FISH confirmation of clinical cases.

References

1. Shaw-Smith C, Redon R, Rickman L, Rio M, Willatt L, Fiegler H, et
al. Microarray based comparative genomic hybridisation (array-
CGH) detects submicroscopic chromosomal deletions and dupli-
cations in patients with learning disability/mental retardation and
dysmorphic features. J Med Genet 2004;41:241– 8.

2. Schoumans J, Ruivenkamp C, Holmberg E, Kyllerman M, Anderlid
BM, Nordenskjold M. Detection of chromosomal imbalances in
children with idiopathic mental retardation by array based compar-
ative genomic hybridisation (array-CGH). J Med Genet 2005;42:
699 –705.

3. Shevell M, Ashwal S, Donley D, Flint J, Gingold M, Hirtz D, et al.
Practice parameter: evaluation of the child with global develop-
mental delay: report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the
American Academy of Neurology and The Practice Committee of
the Child Neurology Society. Neurology 2003;60:367– 80.

4. de Vries BB, Pfundt R, Leisink M, Koolen DA, Vissers LE, Janssen
IM, et al. Diagnostic genome profiling in mental retardation. Am J
Hum Genet 2005;77:606 –16.

5. Pinkel D, Segraves R, Sudar D, Clark S, Poole I, Kowbel D, et al.
High resolution analysis of DNA copy number variation using
comparative genomic hybridization to microarrays. Nat Genet
1998;20:207–11.

6. Bejjani BA, Shaffer LG. Application of array-based comparative
genomic hybridization to clinical diagnostics. J Mol Diagn 2006;
8:528 –33.

7. Bejjani BA, Theisen AP, Ballif BC, Shaffer LG. Array-based compar-
ative genomic hybridization in clinical diagnosis. Expert Rev Mol
Diagn 2005;5:421–9.

8. Bejjani BA, Saleki R, Ballif BC, Rorem EA, Sundin K, Theisen A, et
al. Use of targeted array-based CGH for the clinical diagnosis of
chromosomal
is less more? Am J Med Genet A
2005;134:259 – 67.

imbalance:

Clinical Chemistry 53, No. 12, 2007

2059

9. Friedman JM, Baross A, Delaney AD, Ally A, Arbour L, Armstrong L,
et al. Oligonucleotide microarray analysis of genomic imbalance in
children with mental retardation. Am J Hum Genet 2006;79:500 –
13.

10. Ylstra B, van den Ijssel P, Carvalho B, Brakenhoff RH, Meijer GA.
BAC to the future! or oligonucleotides: a perspective for micro
array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH). Nucleic
Acids Res 2006;34:445–50.

11. Agilent Technologies. eArray 4.5. http://earray.chem.agilent.

com/earray/login.do (accessed August 2006).

12. Cheung SW, Shaw CA, Yu W, Li J, Ou Z, Patel A, et al. Development
and validation of a CGH microarray for clinical cytogenetic diagno-
sis. Genet Med 2005;7:422–32.

13. Shao H, Lip V, Wu BL. Effectiveness of multiplex ligation-depen-
dent probe amplification assay used for detecting deletion of
Prader-Willi syndrome. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao 2005;37:64 –7.

14. Wong KK, deLeeuw RJ, Dosanjh NS, Kimm LR, Cheng Z, Horsman
DE, et al. A comprehensive analysis of common copy-number
variations in the human genome. Am J Hum Genet 2007;80:91–
104.

15. Locke DP, Sharp AJ, McCarroll SA, McGrath SD, Newman TL,
Cheng Z, et al. Linkage disequilibrium and heritability of copy-
number polymorphisms within duplicated regions of the human
genome. Am J Hum Genet 2006;79:275–90.

16. Sharp AJ, Hansen S, Selzer RR, Cheng Z, Regan R, Hurst JA, et al.
Discovery of previously unidentified genomic disorders from the
duplication architecture of the human genome. Nat Genet 2006;
38:1038 – 42.

17. Forestier L, Jean G, Attard M, Cherqui S, Lewis C, van’t Hoff W, et
al. Molecular characterization of CTNS deletions in nephropathic

cystinosis: development of a PCR-based detection assay. Am J
Hum Genet 1999;65:353–9.

18. Potocki L, Bi W, Treadwell-Deering D, Carvalho CM, Eifert A,
Friedman EM, et al. Characterization of Potocki-Lupski syndrome
(dup(17)(p11.2p11.2)) and delineation of a dosage-sensitive crit-
ical interval that can convey an autism phenotype. Am J Hum
Genet 2007;80:633– 49.

19. Baylor College of Medicine. Chromosomal Microarray Analysis.

http://www.bcm.edu/cma (accessed August 2006).

20. Signature Genomic Laboratories. Home page. http://www.signa

turegenomics.com (accessed August 2006).

21. Iafrate AJ, Feuk L, Rivera MN, Listewnik ML, Donahoe PK, Qi Y, et
al. Detection of large-scale variation in the human genome. Nat
Genet 2004;36:949 –51.

22. Eichler EE. Widening the spectrum of human genetic variation. Nat

Genet 2006;38:9 –11.

23. Redon R, Ishikawa S, Fitch KR, Feuk L, Perry GH, Andrews TD, et
al. Global variation in copy number in the human genome. Nature
2006;444:444 –54.

24. Komura D, Shen F, Ishikawa S, Fitch KR, Chen W, Zhang J, et al.
Genome-wide detection of human copy number variations using
high-density DNA oligonucleotide arrays. Genome Res 2006;16:
1575– 84.

25. Osoegawa K, Mammoser AG, Wu C, Frengen E, Zeng C, Catanese
JJ, et al. A bacterial artificial chromosome library for sequencing
the complete human genome. Genome Res 2001;11:483–96.

26. Krzywinski M, Bosdet I, Smailus D, Chiu R, Mathewson C, Wye N,
et al. A set of BAC clones spanning the human genome. Nucleic
Acids Res 2004;32:3651– 60.

