Published Online: 19 October, 2015 | Supp Info: 
Downloaded from 

jcb.rupress.org 

http://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201503081

on June 12, 2018

Y
G
O
L
O

I

B

L
L
E
C

F
O

L
A
N
R
U
O
J

E
H
T

NF2/Merlin mediates contact-dependent inhibition 
of EGFR mobility and internalization via cortical 
actomyosin

Christine Chiasson-MacKenzie,1,2,4 Zachary S. Morris,1,2,4* Quentin Baca,5* Brett Morris,1,2,4* Joanna K. Coker,1,2,4 
Rossen Mirchev,5 Anne E. Jensen,1,3 Thomas Carey,1,3 Shannon L. Stott,1,3,6 David E. Golan,5 and 
Andrea I. McClatchey1,2,4

1Center for Cancer Research, 2Department of Pathology, and 3BioMEMs Resource Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129
4Department of Pathology, 5Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, and 6Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115

The proliferation of normal cells is inhibited at confluence, but the molecular basis of this phenomenon, known as con-
tact-dependent inhibition of proliferation, is unclear. We previously identified the neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) tumor 
suppressor  Merlin  as  a  critical  mediator  of  contact-dependent  inhibition  of  proliferation  and  specifically  found  that 
Merlin inhibits the internalization of, and signaling from, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in response to cell 
contact. Merlin is closely related to the membrane–cytoskeleton linking proteins Ezrin, Radixin, and Moesin, and local-
ization of Merlin to the cortical cytoskeleton is required for contact-dependent regulation of EGFR. We show that Merlin 
and Ezrin are essential components of a mechanism whereby mechanical forces associated with the establishment of 
cell–cell junctions are transduced across the cell cortex via the cortical actomyosin cytoskeleton to control the lateral 
mobility  and  activity  of  EGFR,  providing  novel  insight  into  how  cells  inhibit  mitogenic  signaling  in  response  to  cell 
contact.

Introduction

The failure to undergo contact-dependent inhibition of prolif-
eration  is  a  hallmark  of  tumor  cells  (Hanahan  and Weinberg, 
2011),  but  a  mechanistic  understanding  of  how  normal  cells 
stop  dividing  in  response  to  cell–cell  contact  is  lacking. Any 
mechanism  of  contact-dependent  inhibition  of  proliferation 
must invoke the ability of cells to “sense” the degree of contact 
that they share with neighboring cells; whether this is achieved 
via the generation of contact-dependent biochemical and/or me-
chanical signals is unknown. Early studies of contact-dependent 
inhibition of proliferation concluded that the responsiveness of 
growth factor receptors on the cell surface, including the EGF 
receptor (EGFR), is inhibited by cell contact despite a continu-
ous supply of ligand (McClatchey and Yap, 2012). Many stud-
ies have since supported the notion that signaling from various 
growth factor receptors is inhibited in response to cell contact, 
but the mechanistic basis for this is unknown.

*Z.S. Morris, Q. Baca, and B. Morris contributed equally to this paper.
Correspondence to Andrea I. McClatchey: mcclatch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu
Abbreviations used in this paper: AJ, adherens junction; ANO VA, analysis of 
variance;  CMV,  cytomegalovirus;  EGFR,  EGF  receptor;  ERM,  Ezrin,  Radixin, 
and  Moesin;  HB,  hepatoblast;  LDC,  liver-derived  epithelial  cell;  MSD,  mean 
square  displacement;  shSCR,  scrambled  short  hairpin;  SPTM,  single-particle 
tracking  microscopy;  TJ,  tight  junction;  TR-EGF,  Texas  red–labeled  EGF;  ZA, 
zonulae adherens.

The Rockefeller University Press 
J. Cell Biol. Vol. 211 No. 2  391–405
www.jcb.org/cgi/doi/10.1083/jcb.201503081

 $30.00

The EGFR was the first discovered tyrosine kinase recep-
tor and is a model for this critical class of mitogenic receptors 
(Lemmon and Schlessinger, 2010). EGFR signaling is initiated 
by  ligand-induced  conformational  changes  that  facilitate  di-
merization,  activation  of  the  intracellular  kinase  domain,  and 
recruitment of downstream effectors including components of 
the  endocytic  machinery  (Lemmon  and  Schlessinger,  2010). 
Endocytosis  has  long  been  considered  the  definitive  mech-
anism  for  negative  regulation  of  activated  EGFR,  leading  to 
pH-dependent  dissociation  of  the  receptor–ligand  complex 
within  endocytic  vesicles  (Avraham  and Yarden,  2011).  Prior 
to  ligand  dissociation,  however,  activated  endosomal  EGFR 
is  sufficient  to  drive  cell  proliferation;  in  fact,  internalization 
of  ligand-bound  receptor  is  necessary  for  the  activation  of 
major  downstream  EGFR  signaling  pathways  (Lemmon  and 
Schlessinger, 2010). If endocytosis were the principal mecha-
nism for negatively regulating ligand-activated EGFR, the cell 
would be able to do so only after exposure to the potent sig-
naling  capacity  of  endosomal  EGFR.  Therefore,  mechanisms 

©  2015  Chiassson-MacKenzie  et  al.  This  article  is  distributed  under  the  terms  of  an 
Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after 
the  publication  date  (see  http://www.rupress.org/terms).  After  six  months  it  is  available 
under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license, as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).

391

JCB: ArticleJCBlikely exist that enable a cell to prevent EGFR signaling at the 
plasma membrane upon cell contact.

In  previous  studies,  we  identified  the  neurofibromatosis 
type 2 (NF2) tumor suppressor Merlin as a critical mediator of 
contact-dependent inhibition of proliferation and specifically of 
contact-dependent inhibition of EGFR internalization and sig-
naling (Lallemand et al., 2003; Curto et al., 2007; Cole et al., 
2008). These studies revealed that Merlin can block the inter-
nalization of activated EGFR in a contact-dependent manner via 
a mechanism that does not involve gross changes in ligand bind-
ing or in EGFR phosphorylation, localization, or bulk plasma 
membrane levels (Curto et al., 2007). Merlin is a unique type of 
tumor suppressor that localizes predominantly to the cell cor-
tex and is closely related to the membrane–cytoskeleton link-
ing proteins Ezrin, Radixin, and Moesin (ERMs; McClatchey 
and Fehon, 2009; Fehon et al., 2010). When activated, ERMs 
assemble multiprotein complexes at the plasma membrane via 
their N-terminal four-point-one ERM domain and link them to 
the  cortical  actin  cytoskeleton  via  a  C-terminal  actin-binding 
domain (Fehon et al., 2010). In doing so, ERMs dynamically 
organize  the  morphological  and  mechanical  properties  of  the 
cell cortex, as exemplified by their essential roles in building 
and elaborating the apical surface of epithelia and in driving in-
creased cortical rigidity during mitotic rounding (McClatchey, 
2014). Merlin lacks a C-terminal actin-binding domain but lo-
calizes to the cortical cytoskeleton and can interact directly with 
the  actin-binding  protein α-catenin  (Gladden  et  al.,  2010).  In 
fact, a key function of Merlin is to limit the cortical distribu-
tion of Ezrin via a mechanism that involves α-catenin (Hebert 
et al., 2012). Localization of Merlin to the cortical cytoskeleton 
is necessary for contact-dependent inhibition of EGFR internal-
ization, but the mechanism by which cortical Merlin controls 
EGFR is unknown (Cole et al., 2008). Importantly, pharmaco-
logic EGFR inhibitors block the proliferation of NF2−/− primary 
and tumor cells in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that this mecha-
nism is central to the tumor suppressor activity of Merlin (Mor-
ris and McClatchey, 2009; Benhamouche et al., 2010).

Membrane–cytoskeleton linking proteins such as Merlin/
ERMs dynamically attach the cortical actomyosin cytoskeleton 
to  the  plasma  membrane  (Gauthier  et  al.,  2012). The  cortical 
cytoskeleton  can  thereby  impact  the  dynamic  distribution  of 
plasma  membrane  receptors  (Jaqaman  and  Grinstein,  2012). 
The cortical cytoskeleton is also physically and mechanically 
coupled  to  cell  junctions  that,  in  turn,  transduce  intercellular 
forces that enable cells to sense and respond to changes in their 
mechanical environment (Lecuit et al., 2011). It seems logical 
that these functions of the cortical cytoskeleton would be coor-
dinated, but this has not been demonstrated. Mechanical forces 
experienced by cells within tissues can dramatically modulate 
cell signaling and behavior (DuFort et al., 2011). In fact, signal-
ing downstream of EGFR is particularly sensitive to experimen-
tal manipulation of the mechanical forces that are transduced 
across  cell  junctions,  but  the  molecular  basis  of  this  is  not 
known (Kim et al., 2009; Kim and Asthagiri, 2011). Coordina-
tion between mechanosensing at cell junctions and control of 
receptors across the cortex is therefore a critical “black box” in 
our understanding of normal tissue morphogenesis and homeo-
stasis  and  of  how  deregulation  of  cell  and  tissue  architecture 
contributes to tumorigenesis.

Given its localization to the cortical actomyosin network, 
we  hypothesized  that  Merlin  may  be  central  to  a  mechanism 
whereby mechanical signals are transduced from cell contacts 

across  the  cortex  to  regulate  the  dynamic  distribution  and  in-
ternalization of EGFR. Here, we show that Merlin controls the 
properties of the cortical actomyosin network, which both im-
mobilizes EGFR at the plasma membrane and stabilizes asso-
ciated cell junctions in response to cell contact. In the absence 
of Merlin, ectopic apical Ezrin drives increased contractility of 
the cortical cytoskeleton, excess pulling on associated cell junc-
tions, altered cortical Myosin IIA (MyoIIA) distribution, and a 
failure to inhibit EGFR internalization upon cell contact. These 
results uncover a novel mechanism of contact-dependent con-
trol of mitogenic signaling, provide new insight into the cortical 
function of Merlin, and suggest novel links between the control 
of cellular mechanics and receptor trafficking.

Results

Merlin is required for cytoskeleton- and 
signaling-dependent immobilization of apical 
EGFR in response to cell contact
Liver-derived epithelial cells (LDCs) from mice with a liver-spe-
cific Nf2 deletion fail to undergo contact-dependent inhibition of 
proliferation (Curto et al., 2007; Cole et al., 2008). This overpro-
liferation is associated with persistent internalization of activated 
EGFR and is blocked by EGFR inhibitors but not by elimination 
of Yap, the primary effector of the Hippo signaling pathway that 
can also be controlled by Merlin in some settings (Curto et al., 
2007; Benhamouche et al., 2010; Boggiano and Fehon, 2012). 
Reintroduction  of  wild-type  Nf2  (Nf2WT)  expression  restores 
contact-dependent inhibition of EGFR internalization/signaling 
and proliferation (Curto et al., 2007; Cole et al., 2008).

Merlin associates with the cortical cytoskeleton, and this 
association is required for Merlin-dependent inhibition of EGFR 
internalization in contacting cells (Cole et al., 2008). Given that 
the cortical cytoskeleton can control membrane receptor lateral 
mobility,  we  hypothesized  that  Merlin  might  directly  or  indi-
rectly  regulate  EGFR  internalization  by  altering  the  dynamic 
distribution of receptor molecules to specific cytoskeletal and/
or lipid compartments within the plasma membrane in response 
to cell contact. Therefore, we used single-particle tracking mi-
croscopy (SPTM) to examine Merlin-dependent effects on the 
mobility of individual EGFR molecules at the dorsal surface of 
Nf2−/− and Nf2WT-expressing LDCs (Saxton and Jacobson, 1997; 
García-Sáez  and  Schwille,  2007). We  found  that  in  confluent 
Nf2WT-expressing  cells,  the  mean  macro-diffusion  coefficient 
(Dmacro) of the total EGFR population was markedly decreased 
relative to that in Nf2−/− cells (4.4 ± 0.4 × 10−12 cm2 s−1 vs. 18 ± 
1.5 × 10−12 cm2 s−1; P = 4.6 × 10−9), resulting in near-immobili-
zation of the receptor (Fig. 1 A and Table S1). In contrast, non-
confluent Nf2WT-expressing cells exhibited a moderate increase 
in the lateral mobility of EGFR relative to nonconfluent Nf2−/− 
cells (Fig. S1 A). The Dmacro values that we observed in these 
experiments were comparable to those previously reported for 
EGFR lateral mobility in other epithelial cells (Kusumi et al., 
1993). Like that prior study, we also observed heterogeneity in 
EGFR mobility. We found that SPTM datasets from our cells 
were best modeled as two distinct receptor subpopulations with 
Gaussian distributions of Dmacro values—a slower moving, im-
mobilized or confined subpopulation and a faster moving, freely 
diffusible subpopulation (Fig. 1 A).

To confirm that acute inactivation of endogenous Merlin 
led  to  similar  changes  in  the  lateral  mobility  and  internaliza-

392

JCB • Volume 211 • NumBer 2 • 2015

Figure 1.  EGFR is immobilized at the plasma membrane in a Merlin- and actin-dependent manner. (A) SPTM depicting the mean diffusivity of EGFR 
molecules in the plasma membrane of Nf2−/− (left) or Nf2WT-expressing (right) LDCs. Histograms (purple) show the relative frequency at which beads were 
observed (y axis) with a given coefficient (Dmacro; x axis). Overlaid on each histogram is a two-Gaussian fit (orange and blue) and its sum (solid black). The 
log-scale x axis displays Dmacro representing increasing lateral diffusivity from left to right. The underlying chart displays the log mean of Dmacro ± SEM as 
well as the mean of the two-Gaussian fit subpopulations (right) and the percentage of receptors that fall into each subpopulation (parentheses). Subsequent 
figures show only the log mean of the Dmacro ± SEM for comparison. Numerical values of calculated Dmacro for all experiments are displayed in Table S1. (B) 
Lateral mobility of EGFR in Nf2−/− or Nf2WT-expressing LDCs with and without 5-µM cytochalasin D or 5-µM latrunculin A treatment. (C) Internalization of TR-
EGF, which reliably marks EGF–EGFR complexes in Nf2−/− or Nf2WT-expressing LDCs with and without cytochalasin D or latrunculin A treatment. Numerical 
values for quantification of TR-EGF vesicles per cell for all experiments are displayed in Table S2. (D) Representative confocal images of internalized TR-EGF 
(red; 30-min stimulation) in mosaic populations of Nf2−/− and Nf2WT-expressing (green) LDCs with and without cytochalasin D. Bars, 10 µm. (B and C) 
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. ***, P < 0.001 (one-way ANO VA with multiple comparisons). Data are representative of at least three experiments.

Contact-dependent immobilization of eGFr by merlin • Chiasson-macKenzie et al.

393

tion of EGFR, we eliminated Merlin acutely via adenoviral ex-
pression of the Cre-recombinase in primary Nf2lox/lox embryonic 
hepatoblasts  (HBs).  Comparison  to  wild-type  HBs  confirmed 
that endogenous Nf2 expression was associated with a dramatic 
immobilization  of  EGFR  and  with  blocked  internalization  of 
activated  EGFR  (monitored  by  Texas  red–labeled  EGF  [TR-
EGF]) at confluence (Fig. S1, B–D; Table S1; and Table S2). 
In contrast, Nf2−/− HBs exhibited persistent EGFR mobility and 
internalization at confluence (Fig. S1, B–D).

These  results  demonstrated  a  contact-dependent  effect 
of Merlin on the lateral mobility of EGFR and confirmed that 
this  regulation  of  EGFR  occurs  at  the  plasma  membrane.  In 
fact, by expressing a version of Merlin tagged with the c-Src 
myristoylation sequence for membrane localization (Nf2myr), we 
confirmed  that  membrane-localized  Merlin  was  sufficient  for 
contact-dependent regulation of EGFR internalization (Fig. S2 
A). Importantly, Merlin blocked TR-EGF internalization at all 
time points tested (Fig. S2 B), further supporting the notion that 
Merlin prevents EGFR internalization from the plasma mem-
brane rather than altering the kinetics of endocytosis or stimu-
lating rapid recycling or degradation of internalized receptors.

The lateral mobility of membrane receptors can be altered 
by the cortical cytoskeleton and/or sterol-rich microdomains of 
the plasma membrane (Lenne et al., 2006; Jaqaman and Grin-
stein, 2012). To determine whether Merlin-dependent immobi-
lization of EGFR in confluent cells requires an intact cortical 
cytoskeleton,  we  examined  the  effects  of  latrunculin  A  and 
cytochalasin  D,  compounds  that  disrupt  actin  polymerization 
through  distinct  mechanisms,  on  EGFR  mobility  by  SPTM 
(Wakatsuki et al., 2001). Treatment of confluent Nf2WT-express-
ing  cells  with  either  compound  effectively  prevented  EGFR 
immobilization; in contrast, neither agent significantly affected 
EGFR mobility in Nf2−/− cells (Fig. 1 B). Merlin-dependent in-
hibition of TR-EGF internalization in confluent cells was also 
reversed by latrunculin A and cytochalasin D (Fig. 1, C and D). 
Moreover, a mutant version of Merlin that specifically cannot 
localize to the cortical cytoskeleton (Nf218–595) failed to immo-
bilize EGFR or block TR-EGF internalization (Fig. S2 C; Cole 
et al., 2008). In contrast, disruption of lipid rafts by depletion 
of membrane cholesterol with methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MβCD) 
did  not  prevent  EGFR  immobilization  in  confluent  Nf2WT-ex-
pressing  cells  (Fig.  S2  D).  These  findings  suggest  that  con-
tact-dependent EGFR immobilization and inhibition of EGFR 
internalization depend on both the integrity of the cortical cyto-
skeleton and the ability of Merlin to interact with it.

To further understand the molecular basis of Merlin-me-
diated  control  of  EGFR  internalization,  we  asked  whether 
this phenomenon was signaling dependent. We used SPTM to 
monitor the lateral mobility of receptors at the dorsal surface 
of  confluent  Nf2−/−  and  Nf2WT-expressing  cells  that  had  been 
serum starved overnight. Strikingly, in aggregate receptor pop-
ulation  analyses  like  those  described  in  Fig.  1,  we  found  no 
difference in EGFR mobility in Nf2WT-expressing versus Nf2−/− 
cells upon initial exposure to EGF-labeled beads in serum-free 
media  (Fig.  2  A,  left).  By  40–60  min,  however,  EGFR  was 
completely  immobilized  in  Nf2WT-expressing  cells,  mirroring 
our  previous  SPTM  measurements  on  confluent  cells  in  10% 
serum (Fig. 2 A, right). Importantly, this time-dependent effect 
of  exposure  to  EGF-labeled  beads  was  blocked  by  treatment 

394

JCB • Volume 211 • NumBer 2 • 2015

Figure 2.  Rapid, local, signal-dependent immobilization of EGFR in con-
fluent  Nf2WT-expressing  cells.  (A)  Lateral  mobility  of  EGFR  in  confluent, 
serum-starved  Nf2wt-expressing  versus  Nf2−/−  LDCs  at  early  (0–20  min) 
and late (40–60 min) time points after EGF-labeled beads were added. 
Also shown is the impact of 1-µM erlotinib treatment on EGFR mobility in 
Nf2WT-expressing cells. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. ***, P < 
0.001 (one-way ANO VA with multiple comparisons). (B) Lateral mobility 
of EGFR in confluent, serum-starved Nf2WT-expressing LDCs measured at 
2-min intervals after visually observing bead-to-cell attachment. Data are 
binned according to the time elapsed between exposing cells to EGF-la-
beled beads and observing bead-to-cell attachment. The graph shown is a 
representative time course of the mobility of a single bead over time. For 
each experiment, n > 3 beads. (C) Lateral mobility of single EGF-labeled 
beads on the surface of confluent, serum-starved Nf2WT-expressing cells at 
increasing time points after release from a laser optical trap (arrow). Data 
are representative of at least three experiments.

with the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib; in the presence of erlotinib, 
EGFR was not immobilized in confluent Nf2WT-expressing cells 
40–60  min  after  exposure  to  EGF-labeled  beads  (Fig.  2  A). 
Furthermore, EGFR was not immobilized at any time point in 
Nf2−/− cells (Fig. 2 A).

Because of the lack of a time zero (t0) for ligand binding in 
these population studies, this phenomenon could, in principle, 
reflect a global alteration of the cell cortex in response to the 
activation  of  individual  receptors  by  ligand-conjugated  beads 
(requiring >20 min). However, given the stoichiometry of bind-
ing of ligand-coated beads in these experiments (approximately 
one bead per cell), this explanation seemed unlikely, as such a 
pancellular response would require a dramatic amplification of 
very few receptor–ligand interactions for any given cell. Alter-
natively, differential receptor mobilities at 0–20 versus 40–60 
min  could  reflect  differences  in  the  mean  time  elapsed  since 
formation  of  the  receptor–ligand  complexes  under  observa-
tion.  To  determine  whether  time-dependent  effects  on  recep-
tor mobility in serum-starved Nf2WT-expressing cells reflected 
a pancellular or local phenomenon, we measured the mobility 
of individual ligand-bound receptors every 2 min starting at a 
defined t0 at which a bead was observed to associate with the 
receptor and assume a planar pattern of mobility. We found that 
regardless of when a receptor–ligand complex formed, the re-
ceptor initially displayed a significant degree of mobility and 
then was immobilized over a period of <4 min (Fig. 2 B). In 
a complementary approach, we used laser optical tweezers to 
place EGF-labeled beads on the dorsal surface of confluent, se-
rum-starved Nf2WT-expressing cells and monitor their mobility 
after release from the laser trap. After release, the beads initially 
assumed  a  freely  diffusing  lateral  mobility  followed  by  rapid 
immobilization over <100 s (Fig. 2 C). These data suggest that 
the  contact-dependent  regulation  of  EGFR  by  Merlin  is  also 
dependent on ligand-induced stimulation of EGFR kinase ac-
tivity and may represent a mechanism of rapid feedback. Col-
lectively,  our  findings  indicate  that  Merlin  inhibits  the  lateral 
mobility  and  internalization  of  activated  EGFR  at  the  plasma 
membrane in a rapid and localized manner in response to the 
establishment of cell contact.

Loss of Merlin yields increased mechanical 
stress at the apical junction
Merlin, like the ERMs, localizes to the cell cortex and to api-
cal  cell–cell  junctions  (Fig.  S3  A;  Cole  et  al.,  2008)  and  is 
important for the integrity of mature adherens junctions (AJs; 
Lallemand et al., 2003; Gladden et al., 2010), raising the pos-
sibility that Merlin controls EGFR indirectly by stabilizing cell 
junctions. However, we recently found that a basic function of 
Merlin is to restrict the cortical distribution of Ezrin in single 
cells,  suggesting  that  Merlin  controls  cortical  cytoskeletal  or-
ganization in the absence of cell junctions (Hebert et al., 2012). 
To define the relationship between cell contact and EGFR inter-
nalization, we examined cell junction establishment in LDCs, 
which  are  HB-like  cells  that  establish  immature  AJs  and  do 
not  form  tight  junctions  (TJs)  or  apical  microvilli  (Curto  et 
al., 2007). We found that in both Nf2−/− and Nf2WT-expressing 
LDCs, AJ components form discrete linear cell–cell boundar-
ies at early time points after establishing contact (Fig. 3, A and 
B; and Fig. S3 B). In contrast, at late confluence, AJs become 
disrupted,  and AJ  components  are  mislocalized  in  Nf2−/−  but 
not Nf2WT-expressing LDCs (Fig. 3, A and B; and Fig. S3 B). 
We hypothesized that Merlin-deficient AJs may be fragile as a 

result of a failure to stably associate with the actin cytoskeleton 
(Takeichi,  2014).  Surprisingly,  however,  Merlin-deficient AJs 
recruit similar levels of actin, as well as a marked increase in 
vinculin, which is recruited to AJs as they experience elevated 
mechanical tension (Fig. 3, C–E; and Fig. S3 C; Yonemura et 
al., 2010). Moreover, reducing the mechanical stress on AJs via 
either treatment with the type II myosin inhibitor blebbistatin 
or culturing on soft hydrogels of defined stiffness (12 kPa; Fig. 
S3 D), which reduces junctional forces (Maruthamuthu et al., 
2011),  completely  rescued  late  junction  morphology  (Fig.  3, 
F–H;  and  Fig.  S3  E).  Notably,  pharmacologic  inhibition  of 
EGFR  did  not  rescue  junction  integrity  in  Nf2−/−  LDCs  (Fig. 
S3 F). Together, these data suggest that loss of Merlin confers 
excess mechanical stress on AJs.

To corroborate these findings in a well-studied model of 
junction formation, we examined Caco2 colonic epithelial cells. 
Cultured Caco2 cells form a columnar monolayer with apical 
junctions that mature to form distinct circumferential zonulae 
adherens (ZAs) and apically positioned TJs (Otani et al., 2006; 
Leerberg et al., 2014). We previously found that Merlin is es-
sential for organotypic cyst formation by Caco2 cells but did not 
investigate EGFR internalization or junction formation in these 
studies (Hebert et al., 2012). Therefore, we first established that 
EGFR  internalization  is  regulated  similarly  in  these  cells.  In-
deed, TR-EGF  internalization  is  inhibited  in  confluent  Caco2 
monolayers in the presence (cells expressing a scrambled short 
hairpin [shSCR]) but not absence (shNF2-expressing) of Mer-
lin, despite equivalent levels of EGFR activation (Fig. 4, A and 
D; and not depicted). Furthermore, in control Caco2 cells, both 
the ZA and apically positioned TJ form concise linear intercel-
lular boundaries, but loss of Merlin yielded a markedly sinuous 
junction  morphology  that  was  maintained  at  late  confluence 
(Fig. 4, B, C, E, and F). Notably, this phenotype is distinct from 
that caused by experimentally interfering with AJ or TJ integ-
rity in the same cells (Dunagan et al., 2012; Verma et al., 2012). 
Importantly,  as  in  LDCs,  blebbistatin  treatment  rescues  junc-
tion morphology (Fig. 4, G and H). Thus, in two different types 
of  epithelial  cells,  loss  of  Merlin  is  associated  with  a  loss  of 
contact-dependent regulation of EGFR internalization and with 
junctional changes that are caused by excess MyoII activity.

Increased medioapical contraction in 
confluent Merlin-deficient cells
Mechanical stress on apical junctions can be driven by circum-
ferential contraction of the actomyosin belt at the ZA or by con-
traction of the medioapical cortical cytoskeleton, which exerts 
radial inward pulling forces upon the ZA (Martin and Goldstein, 
2014). Both are well-studied mechanisms of apical constriction 
that drive tissue morphogenesis in other organisms, including 
Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans (Martin 
and Goldstein, 2014). However, ZA contraction, which is driven 
by  junctional  Myosin  II  activity,  is  typically  accompanied  by 
a  smooth  ZA  morphology  (Hildebrand,  2005;  Nishimura  and 
Takeichi,  2008;  Chua  et  al.,  2009).  In  contrast,  medioapical 
contraction, driven by Myosin II activity at the cell apex, ap-
plies force at discrete points along cell junctions, causing them 
to bend inward and adopt a junctional morphology similar to 
that  of  shNF2-expressing  Caco2  cells  (Martin  et  al.,  2009). 
The altered junctional morphology apparent in the absence of 
Merlin  could  reflect  a  reorientation  of  forces  from  parallel  to 
orthogonal,  as  would  accompany  medioapical  contraction.  In 
fact, in contrast to confluent control cells in which MyoIIA lo-

Contact-dependent immobilization of eGFr by merlin • Chiasson-macKenzie et al.

395

Figure 3.  Cell junctions in Nf2−/− LDCs are under increased mechanical stress. (A) Confocal images showing Nf2−/− or Nf2WT-expressing LDCs at early 
(left) and late (right) stages of confluence; cells were labeled with an anti–β-catenin antibody (red) and with phalloidin to detect F-actin (green). (B) Junc-
tional localization of β-catenin was quantified by fluorescence intensity analysis of AJs in early and late confluent Nf2−/− and Nf2WT-expressing LDCs. (C) 
Junctional localization of F-actin was quantified by fluorescence intensity analysis of AJs in late confluent Nf2−/− and Nf2WT-expressing LDCs. (D) Confocal 
images showing endogenous vinculin at AJs in Nf2−/− and Nf2WT-expressing LDCs. (E) The amount of vinculin at AJs in Nf2−/− and Nf2WT-expressing LDCs 
was quantified by measuring the junctional area stained for vinculin. (F) Confocal images showing endogenous β-catenin (red) and/or F-actin (green) in 
Nf2−/− LDCs treated with 100-µM blebbistatin or vehicle (DMSO). (G) Junctional localization of β-catenin in DMSO- and blebbistatin-treated confluent 
Nf2−/− LDCs was quantified by fluorescence intensity analysis of AJs. (H) Junctional localization of β-catenin in Nf2−/− LDCs cultured on stiff (40 kPa) and 
soft (12 kPa) polyacrylamide hydrogels. (B, C, E, G, and H) Error bars indicate SEM (n = 25 junctions per group). *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001. Data are 
representative of at least three experiments. Bars, 10 µm. a.u., arbitrary units.

calized to the ZA and uniformly across the medioapical cortex, 
MyoIIA formed condensed apical foci in Merlin-deficient cells 
that are strikingly reminiscent of the coalescence of apical My-
osin II that is driven by centripetal cortical flow and accompa-
nies medioapical contraction in flies (Fig. 5, A and B; Martin 

and Goldstein, 2014). Notably, actin was not strongly enriched 
in  the  MyoIIA  foci  (Fig.  S4  A). Apical  MyoIIA  coalescence 
was also seen in Nf2−/− LDCs, which also exhibited increased 
cortical levels of activated myosin regulatory light chain, con-
sistent with increased apical contractility (Fig. S4, B and E). In 

396

JCB • Volume 211 • NumBer 2 • 2015

Figure 4.  Merlin limits EGFR internalization and junctional stress in Caco2 colonic epithelial cells. (A) Confocal images of control (shSCR) and shNF2-ex-
pressing Caco2 cells showing the localization of β-catenin (green) and internalized TR-EGF (red; 30 min after stimulation). (B) Confocal images of control 
and shNF2-expressing Caco2 cells showing junctional localization of β-catenin (red) and F-actin (green). (C) Linearity index of β-catenin–labeled cell junc-
tions in the experiment in B was quantified and graphed as the mean of the ratio of the length of a freehand-drawn line to a straight line drawn between 
two junctional vertices. (D) Internalized TR-EGF was quantified by fluorescence intensity thresholding to measure the number of TR-EGF vesicles per cell. (E) 
Confocal images showing junctional localization of ZO-1 (red) and F-actin (green). (F) Linearity index of ZO-1–labeled junctions calculated from the experi-
ment in E. (G) Confocal images of shNF2-expressing Caco2 cells treated with 100-µM blebbistatin or DMSO showing junctional localization of E-cadherin 
(red) and F-actin (green). (H) Linearity index of F-actin–labeled junctions calculated from the experiment in F. (C, D, F, and H) Error bars indicate SEM. n = 
at least 25 junctions per group. *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001. Data are representative of at least three experiments. Bars, 10 µm.

contrast, the distribution of Myosin IIB was similar in wild-type 
and Merlin-deficient cells of both types (Fig. 5 F and Fig. S4 C).
Apical constriction in Drosophila ventral furrow cells is 
accompanied by an apical shift and vertical shortening of the 
apical junction that is thought to be caused by increased medio-
apical pulling (Dawes-Hoang et al., 2005). We suspected that, 

as during apical constriction, MyoIIA foci form as a result of a 
ratchet-like mechanism that reflects apically restricted cortical 
pulling  against  stable  apical  junctions.  Indeed,  we  found  that 
Merlin-deficient junctions were condensed vertically at the api-
cal junction complex, rather than evenly distributed along the 
lateral  boundary,  despite  the  fact  that  shNF2-expressing  cells 

Contact-dependent immobilization of eGFr by merlin • Chiasson-macKenzie et al.

397

Figure 5.  Features of apical contraction in Merlin-deficient cells. (A) Confocal images showing the cortical distribution of MyoIIA (green) and E-cadherin 
(red) in control (shSCR) and shNF2-expressing Caco2 monolayers. Bars, 10μm. The distributions of E-cadherin and F-actin along the z axis are shown in 
accompanying y-z views (apical = top). Bars, 5μm. (B) The cortical area covered by MyoIIA was quantified by calculating the ratio of cortical MyoIIA to the 
total cortical area delimited by F-actin. n = 25 cells per group. (C) Y-Z confocal images of control and shNF2-expressing Caco2 cells showing the vertical 
height and apical position of the ZA marked by β-catenin and F-actin. Arrows indicate the apical junction region. Bars, 5μm. (D) Ratio of E-cadherin–marked 
cell junction height to total cell height in control and shNF2-expressing Caco2 cells. n = 10 cells per group. (E) Y-Z confocal images depicting the vertical 
height and position of the E-cadherin and F-actin–stained ZA in shNF2-expressing Caco2 cells treated with either 100-µM blebbistatin or DMSO. Bars, 
5μm. (F) Confocal images showing the distribution of Myosin IIB in control and shNF2-expressing Caco2 cells. Bars, 10μm. Error bars indicate SEM. ***, 
P < 0.001. Data are representative of at least three experiments.

exhibit a slightly greater average cell height (Fig. 5, C and D). 
Notably, this aspect of Merlin-deficient AJs was also rescued by 
blebbistatin, confirming that it is also a consequence of excess 
mechanical force (Fig. 5 E). Together, these data are consistent 
with a model wherein loss of Merlin drives increased medioap-
ical  contraction,  MyoIIA  coalescence,  and  excess  mechanical 
pulling forces on the ZA.

Apical MyoIIA is required for contact-
dependent inhibition of EGFR internalization
Loss of the uniform distribution of apical MyoIIA in favor of 
coalesced apical foci correlates with persistent TR-EGF inter-
nalization  at  confluence  in  Merlin-deficient  LDCs  and  Caco2 
cells (Fig. 5 A and Fig. 4 A). Indeed, blebbistatin treatment of 

established Merlin-deficient monolayers rescues junction mor-
phology (Fig. 4, G and H) but does not restore MyoIIA corti-
cal distribution or block TR-EGF internalization in either cell 
type (Fig. 6, A and B; and Fig. S4 B). This suggests that uni-
formly distributed cortical MyoIIA activity is essential for the 
inhibition  of  EGFR  internalization  in  confluent  control  cells. 
In fact, we identified a strong anticorrelation between TR-EGF 
internalization and the cortical area covered by MyoIIA in con-
trol  populations  (Fig.  6  C).  To  further  test  this,  we  inhibited 
Myosin  II  activity  in  confluent  wild-type  Caco2  monolayers. 
Although blebbistatin had no apparent effect on the ZA or on 
MyoIIA  distribution,  it  completely  reversed  the  inhibition  of 
TR-EGF  internalization,  mimicking  the  effect  of  Merlin  defi-
ciency (Fig. 6, D and E). Together, these data suggest that in 

398

JCB • Volume 211 • NumBer 2 • 2015

Figure  6.  Uniformly  distributed  MyoIIA  is 
essential  for  contact-dependent  inhibition  of 
EGFR internalization. (A) Confocal images of 
shNF2-expressing  cells  treated  with  100-µM 
blebbistatin or DMSO and stained for MyoIIA 
and F-actin. (B) Quantification of internalized 
TR-EGF–containing vesicles (30 min after stim-
ulation)  in  DMSO  and  blebbistatin-treated 
shNF2-expressing  cells.  n  =  >50  cells  per 
group. P > 0.05. (C) Graph shows the fraction 
of cortical area covered by MyoIIA in shSCR 
cells that do not (left) versus do (right) display 
internalized  TR-EGF  at  30  min  after  stimula-
tion. n = 25 cells per group. (D) Internalized 
TR-EGF (30 min after stimulation) was quanti-
fied in DMSO and blebbistatin-treated control 
cells.  n  =  >50  cells  per  group.  (E)  Confocal 
images  depict  MyoIIA  and  junctional  F-actin 
localization in control Caco2 cells treated with 
DMSO or 100-µM blebbistatin. Error bars in-
dicate  SEM.  *,  P  <  0.05;  ***,  P  <  0.001. 
Data  are  representative  of  at  least  three 
experiments. Bars, 10 µm.

normal  cells,  maintenance  of  active  MyoIIA  across  the  corti-
cal cytoskeleton in response to cell–cell contact is required for 
immobilizing EGFR and blocking EGFR internalization. Con-
versely,  the  restriction  of  apical  MyoIIA  into  cortical  foci  in 
the absence of Merlin eliminates the MyoIIA-dependent block 
of EGFR internalization.

Ectopic apical Ezrin in confluent Merlin-
deficient cells
Increased  medioapical  contractility  in  Merlin-deficient  cells 
could  be  caused  by  increased  membrane  tension  (Gauthier  et 
al., 2012). The ERM proteins are well-established membrane–
cytoskeleton cross-linking proteins that drive increased mem-
brane  tension  and  contractility  during  mitotic  rounding  in  fly 
and mammalian cells (Carreno et al., 2008; Kunda et al., 2008; 
Luxenburg et al., 2011). In fact, our earlier studies revealed that 
a key consequence of Merlin loss in Caco2 cells, and in sev-

eral  tissues  in  vivo,  is  increased  cortical  Ezrin  (Hebert  et  al., 
2012).  In  Caco2  monolayers,  Ezrin  is  restricted  to  the  apical 
surface; therefore, we asked whether excess Ezrin at the apical 
cortex  is  a  feature  of  confluent  Merlin-deficient  monolayers. 
Indeed, we found that the levels of apical Ezrin are markedly 
increased in shNF2-expressing Caco2 cells and in Nf2−/− LDCs, 
which also exhibit increased levels of activated ERM (pERM; 
Fig.  7, A  and  B;  and  Fig.  S5,  A  and  B). Activation  of  Ezrin/
ERMs in control cells using the cell-permeable phosphatase in-
hibitor Calyculin A, which drives Ezrin/ERM phosphorylation 
(Kunda et al., 2008; Viswanatha et al., 2012), promotes MyoIIA 
coalescence and sinuous junction morphology, mirroring Mer-
lin  deficiency  (Fig.  7,  C–F).  Moreover,  depletion  of  Ezrin  in 
shNF2-expressing  Caco2  cells  completely  rescues  both  junc-
tion morphology and MyoIIA distribution, demonstrating that 
excess Ezrin drives the cortical and junction defects observed 
in Merlin-deficient cells (Fig. 7, G–I; and Fig. S5 C). Finally, 

Contact-dependent immobilization of eGFr by merlin • Chiasson-macKenzie et al.

399

in  confluent  control  cultures,  we  occasionally  observed  cells 
with sinuous junctions that mirrored those of shNF2-express-
ing Caco2 cells; closer inspection revealed that these cells were 
mitotic and also exhibited increased apical Ezrin (Fig. S5 C). 
The  apical  surface  of  mitotic  cells  was  constricted  relative  to 
neighboring cells, with the bulging mitotic equator positioned 
beneath  the  apical  surface  of  the  monolayer.  These  data  are 
consistent with a model whereby in the absence of Merlin, in-
creased  apical  Ezrin  drives  medioapical  contraction,  MyoIIA 
redistribution,  loss  of  actomyosin-mediated  EGFR  immobi-
lization,  and  persistent  internalization  of,  and  signaling  from, 
ligand-bound EGFR at confluence.

Discussion

Our study indicates that mechanical forces associated with the 
establishment  of  cell–cell  junctions  are  transduced  across  the 
cell  cortex  via  the  cortical  actomyosin  cytoskeleton  to  con-
trol  the  mobility  and  activity  of  plasma  membrane  receptors. 
For EGFR, the consequence of this contact-dependent control 
is  actin-  and  MyoII-dependent  immobilization  at  the  cortex, 
which prevents internalization and recruitment of downstream 
signaling effectors (Curto et al., 2007). Importantly, this mech-
anism of control also requires EGFR kinase activity, suggesting 
that in contacting cells activated EGFR recruits an alternative 
effector that both immobilizes EGFR and impedes its associa-
tion with canonical effectors, such as Grb2 and Cbl, that drive 
endocytosis and mitogenic signaling. Notably, there are intrigu-
ing parallels between our study and that of Lidke et al. (2005), 
who showed that EGFR associates with filopodial actin and is 
transported by retrograde flow toward the cell body via a mech-
anism that requires EGFR kinase activity; once activated EGFR 
dimers reach the cell body they are endocytosed, which would 
enable mitogenic signaling (Lemmon and Schlessinger, 2010). 
Although the mechanism by which EGFR communicates with 
actin filaments in filopodia is not known, elimination of actin 
treadmilling immobilized filopodial EGFR in that study (Lidke 
et  al.,  2005).  We  propose  that  the  association  of  EGFR  with 
a  mechanically  immobilized  cortical  cytoskeleton  in  contact-
ing cells could proceed via a similar mechanism. The require-
ment  for  EGFR  kinase  activity  for  contact-dependent  control 
suggests that this mechanism may be unique to EGFR or to a 
subset  of  receptors  that,  when  activated,  can  recruit  such  ac-
tin-associating effectors.

Merlin itself could link EGFR to a cortical cytoskeleton 
that has been mechanically stabilized in response to cell con-
tact via the PDZ domain–containing adapter NHE RF1 (Curto 
et al., 2007). Alternatively, the primary effect of Merlin could 
be to alter the configuration of the cortical cytoskeleton itself, 
thereby facilitating the appropriate distribution and activation of 
MyoIIA and other factors that immobilize EGFR and limit me-
dioapical contraction at confluence. Most interesting is the pos-
sibility that Merlin simultaneously alters the actin cytoskeleton 
and links EGFR to it via NHE RF1; indeed, the closely related 
ERM proteins seem designed to simultaneously link membrane 
complexes to, and alter the properties of, the cortical cytoskele-
ton (Fehon et al., 2010; McClatchey, 2014).

Merlin  could  alter  the  configuration  of  the  cortical  cy-
toskeleton  in  two  nonexclusive  ways:  (1)  by  limiting  cortical 
Ezrin  and  (2)  by  controlling  the  activity  of  the  actin-binding 
protein α-catenin, with which Merlin directly interacts (Glad-

den et al., 2010). Although best known for its mechanosensitive 
role in linking the AJ to the actin cytoskeleton, mounting evi-
dence indicates that α-catenin can remodel actin away from cell 
junctions (Lien et al., 2008; Benjamin et al., 2010; Buckley et 
al., 2014). Most recently, it has been shown that α-catenin binds 
cooperatively to, and alters the conformation of, actin filaments, 
impeding the loading of other actin-modifying proteins (Han-
sen et al., 2013). Merlin and α-catenin stabilize each other at the 
cortex of single cells, and α-catenin loss mimics Merlin loss in 
single cells, yielding ectopic cortical Ezrin (Hebert et al., 2012); 
therefore, Merlin restricts cortical Ezrin via a mechanism that 
involves α-catenin. An intriguing possibility then is that Merlin 
facilitates α-catenin–dependent remodeling of actin filaments, 
which in turn impedes the association of Ezrin. Such a mecha-
nism could explain the propagation of mechanical signals from 
the AJ/ZA, where α-catenin mechanosensitively links junction 
complexes to the cortical cytoskeleton, across the cortex.

Our data best fit a model wherein the primary consequence 
of Merlin loss is excess medioapical contraction, which causes 
secondary defects in apical cell junctions. The coalescence of 
apical MyoIIA, together with both planar and vertical aspects 
of junction morphology, mirror that of established examples of 
medioapical contraction (Martin and Goldstein, 2014), and both 
junctional  phenotypes  are  rescued  by  blebbistatin  treatment. 
Medioapical  and  junctional  forces  must  be  balanced  in  order 
to maintain proper intrajunctional tension and monolayer integ-
rity, although how this coordination is achieved remains to be 
defined (Wu et al., 2014). Merlin, Ezrin, and α-catenin all local-
ize to both the medioapical cortex and to apical junctions, and 
mutants that distinguish these localizations have not been iden-
tified; therefore, we cannot rule out contributions of junctional 
Merlin/Ezrin/α-catenin to maintaining this balance. Indeed, the 
apical junction and medioapical cortex are perhaps best thought 
of  as  a  continuum,  and  the  dual  localization  of  proteins  like 
Merlin/Ezrin/α-catenin  and  actin  itself  is  likely  central  to  the 
ability of cells to sense and respond to cell contact. Our data 
argue that increased medioapical contraction in the absence of 
Merlin is driven by Ezrin-induced changes in the configuration 
of  the  cortical  cytoskeleton.  In  mitotic  cells,  elevated  cortical 
Ezrin increases cortical rigidity by increasing local actin fila-
ment  concentration  and  MyoII  accumulation  (Carreno  et  al., 
2008; Kunda et al., 2008; Luxenburg et al., 2011). In the ab-
sence of Merlin, an increase in cortical Ezrin, specifically across 
the apical surface, could similarly drive minifilament formation, 
actomyosin flow, and excess medioapical contraction (Lecuit et 
al., 2011; Martin and Goldstein, 2014).

Our studies also have important translational implications 
for NF2 mutant tumors. First, deregulation of this mechanism 
of EGFR control may be an important driver of NF2-associated 
tumorigenesis.  Indeed,  pharmacologic  EGFR  inhibitors  block 
the proliferation of neoplastic cells in Nf2 mutant mouse kidney 
and liver tumors (Morris and McClatchey, 2009; Benhamouche 
et al., 2010). Other receptors that are subject to this Merlin- and 
contact-dependent control mechanism may be additional drivers 
of NF2 mutant tumors or molecular escape pathways upon EGFR 
inhibition. Second, basic insight into the role of Merlin in con-
trolling the cortical cytoskeleton will inform our understanding 
of how Merlin controls other pathways including the Hippo path-
way, which is also sensitive to changes in the mechanical cellular 
environment (Boggiano and Fehon, 2012). In fact, our work sug-
gests that EGFR and Hippo signaling may be coordinated in re-
sponse to changes in the mechanical forces experienced by cells.

400

JCB • Volume 211 • NumBer 2 • 2015

Figure 7. 
Increased cortical Ezrin drives apical contractility. (A) Endogenous Ezrin (red) and junctional F-actin (green) in confluent control and shNF2-ex-
pressing Caco2 cells as depicted by representative confocal images. (B) The levels of apical Ezrin in A were quantified by calculating the ratio of apical 
Ezrin to the total apical area delimited by F-actin. (C) Confocal images showing apical Ezrin and junctional F-actin in shSCR Caco2 cells treated with DMSO 
or 1-µM calyculin A for 5 min. (D) Linearity index of F-actin–labeled junctions calculated from the experiment in C. (E) Levels of apical Ezrin in control or 
calyculin A–treated cells. (F) Levels of cortical MyoIIA in control or calyculin A–treated cells. (G) Confocal images depict the levels and distribution of MyoIIA 
(red) and F-actin (green) in shNF2- and shNF2/shEZR-expressing Caco2 cells. (H) Linearity index in shNF2- and shNF2/shEZR-expressing cells. (I) Cortical 
area covered by MyoIIA in shNF2- and shNF2/shEZR-expressing cells. Error bars indicate SEM. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001. Data are representative 
of at least two experiments. Bars, 10 µm.

Finally, the demonstration that the transduction of mechan-
ical forces experienced at cell junctions can influence plasma 
membrane  receptors  across  the  cell  cortex  strongly  suggests 
that changes in the external mechanical environment will have 

a strong impact on receptor signaling. Indeed, EGFR signaling 
is  known  to  be  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  mechanical  forces 
experienced  across  cell  junctions  (Kim  et  al.,  2009;  Kim  and 
Asthagiri,  2011).  Our  studies  suggest  that  apical  constriction 

Contact-dependent immobilization of eGFr by merlin • Chiasson-macKenzie et al.

401

and EGFR trafficking could be coordinated in normal tissues, for 
example during the programmed changes in apical expansion/
constriction that intestinal epithelial cells undergo during mor-
phogenesis and homeostasis (van der Flier and Clevers, 2009). 
Our studies also predict that the mechanical environment will 
markedly impact the contribution of EGFR signaling to tumori-
genesis as well as the sensitivity of cells to pharmacologic inhib-
itors of EGFR or other mechanosensitive receptors. Alterations 
in cell and tissue architecture are universal and early features 
of developing tumors, and mounting evidence indicates that the 
mechanical forces experienced by cells within a tumor are very 
different from those in normal tissues (Huang and Ingber, 2005; 
DuFort et al., 2011; Kraning-Rush and Reinhart-King, 2012). 
Moreover, most preclinical studies of drug sensitivity and re-
sistance are performed in cells cultured in polystyrene dishes, 
which are >1,000× stiffer than normal tissues (Kraning-Rush and 
Reinhart-King, 2012) and may therefore not accurately predict 
tumor cell drug sensitivity. Thus, knowledge of the impact of the 
mechanical environment on EGFR signaling and drug sensitivity 
may be essential toward predicting their clinical value in patients.

Materials and methods

Cell culture and reagents
LDCs are HB-like cells derived from early hyperproliferative lesions 
arising in Alb-Cre;Nf2lox/lox mice. Alb-Cre;Nf2lox/lox mice were generated 
by crossing homozygous Nf2lox/lox mice (FVB/N) with transgenic mice 
expressing  the  Cre-recombinase  gene  under  a  liver-specific  albumin 
promoter (Alb-Cre; B6.Cg-Tg[Alb-cre]21Mgn/J; The Jackson Labora-
tory; Giovannini et al., 2000; Postic and Magnuson, 2000). To isolate 
cells, the liver of a 12-wk-old Alb-Cre;Nf2lox/lox mouse was removed, 
minced, dissociated in Liver Dissociation Medium (Invitrogen), and cul-
tured in 10% FBS-DMEM. Clonal cell lines were established by limit-
ing dilution (Curto et al., 2007; Benhamouche et al., 2010). Wild-type 
embryonic HBs were isolated from the livers of embryonic day (E) 14.5 
Nf2lox/lox embryos as described for LDCs. HBs were plated on type I col-
lagen (BD)–coated dishes in F12-DMEM medium supplemented with 
10% FBS, 100 ng/ml EGF, 60 ng/ml IGF-II, and 10 mg/ml insulin. Once 
epithelial clones appeared, several were isolated using cloning cylin-
ders and further expanded (Benhamouche et al., 2010). Nf2 deletion in 
cultured HBs was achieved via infection with adenoviral Cre-recombi-
nase (Ad5CMV-Cre) as described previously (Lallemand et al., 2003). 
Human  Caco2  cells  were  a  gift  from  W.  Lencer  (Boston  Children’s 
Hospital, Boston, MA). AD-293 cells for adenovirus production were 
purchased from Agilent Technologies, and 293T cells for retrovirus and 
lentivirus production were purchased from ATCC. Cells were cultured 
in DMEM containing 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin.

The following conditions were used for pharmacological treat-
ments (duration of treatment before start of the experiment): cytocha-
lasin  D  (Sigma-Aldrich),  5  µM  for  30  min;  latrunculin A  (Cayman), 
5 µM for 30 min; methyl-β-cyclodextrin (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mM for 
45 min; blebbistatin (EMD Millipore), 100 µM for 30 min; erlotinib 
(ChemieTek), 1 µM for 120 min; BIBW-2992 (Selleck), 1 µM for 60 
min; and calyculin A (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 µM for 5 min. Treatment was 
continued at the stated doses for the duration of the experiment.

Plasmids and shRNA constructs
Merlin expression constructs (Nf2WT and Nf218–595) were generated by 
PCR amplification of the mouse Nf2 coding region (Lallemand et al., 
2003; Cole et al., 2008). Human NF2myr, containing the c-src myris-
toylation sequence for membrane targeting, was a gift from H. Mor-

rison (Leibniz Institute, Jena, Germany). The C-terminal myc tag was 
removed  by  PCR  (Hebert  et  al.,  2012).  Constructs  were  cloned  into 
the pBABE or pAdCMV vectors under the control of a cytomegalo-
virus (CMV) promoter. Lentiviral shRNA constructs targeting human 
NF2  (5′-GAG GAAGC AACCC AAGAC GTT-3′)  or  a  scrambled  con-
trol (shSCR; 5′-CAG TCGCG TTTGC GACTGG-3′) in a pLKO-puro.1 
vector  under  the  control  of  the  human  U6  promoter  were  gifts  from 
M. James (Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; James et al., 
2008). The shRNA construct targeting human Ezrin (5′-TTG ATTCC 
ATACA TTTCC AGG-3′) in a pLKO-puro.1 vector was purchased from 
GE Healthcare (Hebert et al., 2012).

Virus production and infection
Nf2-expressing retroviruses were produced by cotransfecting 293T cells 
with pBABE constructs and the ψ2 packaging vector using the Fugene6 
transfection reagent (Promega). The virus was harvested 24, 36, and 48 h 
after transfection. LDCs were infected with Nf2-expressing retroviruses, 
and stable cell lines were generated by selection in 5 µg/ml puromycin. 
For all experiments, an empty pBABE vector was used as a control. 
Nf2WT-expressing adenoviruses were generated using the AdEasy system 
(Agilent Technologies) as previously described (Lallemand et al., 2003). 
Full-length mouse Nf2 was subcloned into the pAdCMV shuttle vector 
under the control of a CMV promoter. The plasmid was digested with 
Pme1 and cotransformed into BJ5183 cells with the adenoviral backbone 
vector pAdEasy-1. Confirmed recombinant clones were linearized by 
Pac1 digestion to expose the viral inverted terminal repeats and trans-
fected into 293A cells for production of adenovirus. The virus was har-
vested by lysis and concentration of virus-producing 293A cells. LDCs 
were infected 24 h before the start of the experiment to induce gene 
expression. For all experiments, an empty adenoviral vector was used 
as a control. shRNA-expressing lentiviruses were generated by cotrans-
fecting 293T cells with pLKO-puro.1 vectors and the packaging vectors 
ΔVPR and VSVG. Viruses were harvested 24, 36, and 48 h after trans-
fection. shSCR-, shNF2-, or shNF2/shEZR-expressing lentiviruses were 
stably expressed in Caco2 cells after selection in 10 µg/ml puromycin.

Antibodies
Primary  antibodies  against  the  following  antigens  were  used  in  this 
study:  1:250  (D1D8;  Cell  Signaling  Technology)  anti-Merlin  rabbit 
monoclonal  antibody;  1:500  (C-18;  Santa  Cruz  Biotechnology,  Inc.) 
anti-Merlin rabbit polyclonal antibody; 1:1,000 anti–β-catenin mouse 
monoclonal  antibody  (BD);  1:500  anti–α-catenin  mouse  monoclonal 
antibody  (7A4;  Zymed);  1:500  anti–N-cadherin  mouse  monoclonal 
antibody (Transduction Labs); 1:500 anti–E-cadherin mouse monoclo-
nal  antibody  (BD);  1:100  anti-Vinculin  mouse  monoclonal  antibody 
(Sigma-Aldrich); 1:500 anti-nonmuscle Myosin IIA heavy chain rab-
bit polyclonal antibody (Covance); 1:500 anti-nonmuscle Myosin IIB 
heavy chain rabbit polyclonal antibody (Covance); anti–phospho-My-
osin  light  chain  2  (serine  19)  1:100  rabbit  polyclonal  antibody  (Cell 
Signaling  Technology);  1:500  anti–ZO-1  rabbit  polyclonal  antibody 
(Life Technologies); 1:500 immunofluorescence and 1:1,000 Western 
blot anti-Ezrin mouse monoclonal antibody (Neomarkers); 1:100 an-
ti-pERM rabbit polyclonal antibody (Cell Signaling Technology); and 
1:2,000 actin (Sigma-Aldrich). F-actin was labeled with Alexa Fluor 
488–phalloidin  or  Rhodamine-phalloidin  (1:500;  Life  Technologies). 
Secondary antibodies were species-specific antibodies conjugated with 
Alexa Fluor 488, 555, or 647 for immunofluorescence (Life Technolo-
gies). DAPI was added to cells during the final wash to label the nuclei.

SPTM
EGF-conjugated polystyrene microspheres were used to track EGFR 
lateral mobility at the dorsal membrane of cells plated on 12-mm cov-

402

JCB • Volume 211 • NumBer 2 • 2015

erslips. Bead binding was typically 0.5% of cells for BSA-labeled con-
trol beads and 3% (sixfold selectivity) for EGF-labeled beads. SPTM 
experiments were typically conducted in the presence of DMEM/10% 
FBS.  Where  indicated,  SPTM  was  conducted  in  serum-free  DMEM 
after overnight starvation after two PBS washes.

Cells  were  observed  on  a  microscope  (TE2000-E;  Nikon) 
equipped with differential interference contrast optics using a 60× oil 
objective with an oil condenser (NA 1.4; Mirchev and Golan, 2001). 
Images  of  a  single  bead  on  individual  cells  were  captured  at  1,000 
frames per second with a camera (Fastcam Super10K; Photron), and 
2,000  frames  were  recorded. Video  data  were  processed  with  Meta-
Morph  software  (Molecular  Devices)  and  converted  to  trajectories. 
Trajectory data were analyzed using mean square displacement (MSD) 
analysis  implemented  in  custom  programs  written  in  MAT LAB  (po-
pall,  popfunL,  popfunN,  sptload,  and  sptworkup;  see  supplemental 
materials;  MathWorks).  Dmacro  coefficients  were  calculated  by  fitting 
the initial third of the MSD versus time interval curve to the follow-
ing equation: MSD = 4Dmacrotα. Statistical significance was determined 
using a one-way analysis of variance (ANO VA) with multiple compari-
sons. Distinct populations of trajectories were identified by using a ker-
nel density function to calculate a population density estimate based on 
the calculated Dmacro parameter and determine the relative contributions 
of each subpopulation (Cairo et al., 2006).

For laser optical tweezers, the beam was supplied by a 1,064-nm 
neodymium-doped yttrium orthovanadate laser (Millennia IR; Spectra 
Physics). The beam was expanded and directed through steering optics 
consisting of a motorized gimbal mirror, used for moving the trap in the 
x and y directions (i.e., in the sample plane), and a lens on a motorized 
linear stage was used for positioning the trap in the z direction (i.e., per-
pendicular to the sample plane). A dichroic filter was used to introduce 
the  beam  into  the  microscope  light  path,  and  the  beam  was  focused 
inside  the  sample  volume  by  a  100/1.3  NA  oil  immersion  objective. 
The  sample  was  placed  on  a  stage  (XY-piezo;  Physik  Instrumente). 
Laser tweezer manipulation and data collection were managed through 
a custom-designed graphic user interface. Stage steering moved the cell 
in contact with the functionalized bead captured in the laser trap. The 
bead was held in contact with the cell membrane for 30 s to allow for-
mation  of  ligand–receptor  interactions. The  trap  was  then  turned  off 
and the bead was allowed to diffuse freely. Trajectories of beads that 
remained attached to the cell were recorded and processed as described 
in the previous paragraph.

Polyacrylamide gel fabrication, collagen coating, and mechanical 
validation
Polyacrylamide solutions were prepared as previously described (Tse 
and Engler, 2010). In brief, acrylamide and bis-acrylamide were com-
bined  to  desired  concentrations  in  PBS.  Stiffness  was  controlled  by 
varying  acrylamide  (40%  solution;  Sigma-Aldrich)  and  n,n′-meth-
ylene-bis-acrylamide  (2%  solution;  Sigma-Aldrich)  concentrations; 
acrylamide/bis-acrylamide  concentrations  for  soft  or  stiff  gels  were 
5%/0.2%  or  8%/0.5%,  respectively.  Glass  coverslips  were  function-
alized using 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate (Sigma-Aldrich). 
Gels  were  molded  into  a  125  µm  ×  12  mm–diameter  form  using  la-
ser-cut  adhesive-backed  polyimide  film  (McMaster-Carr)  attached  to 
hydrophobic cyclic olefin copolymer slides (Pure Slides) and polymer-
ized on functionalized coverslips using 1:100 volume 10% ammonium 
persulfate (Sigma-Aldrich) in H2O as an initiator and 1:1,000 volume 
n,n,n′,n′-tetramethylethylenediamine  (Sigma-Aldrich)  as  a  catalyst. 
Sulfo-SAN PAH (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to cross-link type 
I collagen (BD) to the surface of the gels. Sulfo-SAN PAH was pho-
toactivated using a UV cross-linker (UVP). Collagen was added at a 
concentration of 0.1 mg/ml and allowed to incubate at 4°C for 24 h.

Gel stiffness was determined by compressing a defined area of 
hydrated 5 mm × 25 mm–diameter gels a known distance and measur-
ing  the  reactive  force  using  a  parallel  plate  mounted  on  a  rheometer 
(Discovery Hybrid HR-3; TA Instruments). From these bulk measure-
ments, highly linear force-displacement curves were obtained. Stress 
was calculated as the reactive force per unit area of the contact region of 
the gel and parallel plate. A least squares fitting was applied to a linear 
region of these curves corresponding to 7% strain, and the initial height 
of the gels was calculated by finding the indentation value correspond-
ing to zero force along this curve. The elastic modulus, E, was obtained 
from this calculated initial height and the slope of the least squares fit.

Immunofluorescence microscopy and TR-EGF internalization assay
Cell  confluence  was  defined  as  previously  described  (Curto  et  al., 
2007). In brief, early confluent cells were defined as those plated on 
glass coverslips and allowed to grow until a monolayer formed (24–
48 h). Late confluent cells were cultured for an additional 3–4 d after 
initial monolayer formation. Internalization of TR-EGF was measured 
as previously described (Curto et al., 2007). In brief, confluent mono-
layers were serum starved in DMEM/1% BSA for 2 h and then incu-
bated for 30 min at 37°C with 2 µg/ml TR-EGF (Life Technologies). 
Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in cytoskeletal stabilization 
buffer (10-mM Pipes, pH 6.8, 100-mM KCl, 300-mM sucrose, 2-mM 
EGTA, and 2-mM MgCl2) for 15 min followed by permeabilization in 
0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 min. Confocal images were captured 
on  an  inverted  laser-scanning  confocal  microscope  (LSM  710;  Carl 
Zeiss) equipped with a 63× oil immersion objective (Plan Apochromat 
NA 1.4; Carl Zeiss). All samples were fixed and were imaged at room 
temperature.  DAPI  was  excited  with  a  405-nm  laser  line  of  a  diode 
laser. Green and red fluorescent probes (Alexa Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 
555, and Rhodamine) were excited with the 488-nm or 514-nm laser 
line of an argon laser, respectively. Far-red fluorescent probes (Alexa 
Fluor 647) were excited with the 633-nm laser line of a helium–neon 
laser. Two- or three-color fluorescent images were acquired as z stacks 
in sequential mode using Zen software (2012; Carl Zeiss).

Image analysis and statistics
ImageJ software (version 1.4; National Institutes of Health) was used 
for all image processing and analysis. For presented images, original z 
stack images were converted to maximum intensity projections, and a 
rolling ball background subtraction was applied to remove background 
signal. The application of lookup tables was used to produce final im-
ages. For fluorescent intensity analysis of cell–cell junctions, the region 
of  interest  tool  was  used  to  define  areas  of  cell  contact  from  vertex 
to vertex, as identified by β-catenin or α-catenin localization. Junction 
intensity was determined by applying a threshold mask to the region of 
interest and measuring the mean pixel intensity of the area within the 
mask. Cortical MyoIIA or Ezrin localization was measured by applying 
a thresholding mask and calculating the ratio of the area of MyoIIA or 
Ezrin localization to the total surface area of the cell, as bounded by 
F-actin or ZO-1 staining. The linearity index was determined similarly 
to the method described previously (Tokuda et al., 2014). Cell–cell junc-
tions stained for either ZO-1 or F-actin were manually traced from ver-
tex to vertex using either a freehand line or a straight line. The linearity 
index was calculated as the ratio of the length of the freehand line to the 
length of the straight line. The results were graphed as the mean ratio 
of freehand to straight line. TR-EGF internalization was quantified by 
using a thresholding mask to identify internalized TR-EGF vesicles. The 
number of vesicles per image was divided by the number of nuclei (as 
determined by DAPI staining). Data from all analyses were imported 
into Prism 6 software (GraphPad Software) for statistical analysis and 
plotting of graphs. The Mann-Whitney test was used to compare groups.

Contact-dependent immobilization of eGFr by merlin • Chiasson-macKenzie et al.

403

Online supplemental material
Fig.  S1  shows  that  exogenous  and  endogenous  Merlin  regulate  the 
lateral  mobility  and  internalization  of  EGFR  in  a  contact-dependent 
manner. Fig. S2 demonstrates that EGFR immobilization and inhibi-
tion of internalization occurs at the plasma membrane independently of 
sterol-rich membrane microdomains. Fig. S3 shows the localization of 
Merlin and AJ proteins in Nf2−/− and Nf2WT-expressing LDCs. Fig. S4 
shows that LDCs exhibit MyoIIA coalescence and Myosin-dependent 
regulation  of  TR-EGF  internalization.  Fig.  S5  shows  ectopic  apical 
Ezrin  localization  and  increased  pERM  levels  in  Nf2−/−  LDCs,  de-
creased Merlin and Ezrin levels in shNF2/shEzrin Caco2 cells, and that 
mitotic control Caco2 cells exhibit sinuous junctions and increased api-
cal Ezrin. Table S1 lists the Dmacro coefficients for EGFR under all ex-
perimental conditions tested. Table S2 lists all of the data for TR-EGF 
internalization under all experimental conditions tested. The following 
custom MAT LAB programs were used to analyze trajectory data to de-
termine MSD: popall loads the dataset and analyzes micro, macro, and 
α diffusion; popfunL carries out population analysis of SPTM results 
using log normal distribution analysis; popfunN carries out population 
analysis  of  SPTM  results  using  normal  distribution  analysis;  sptload 
reads all SPTM files and ensures the frame rates match; and sptworkup 
loads all trajectories into an array and analyzes them using MSD and 
subconfinement algorithms. Online supplemental material is available 
at http://www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.201503081/DC1.

Acknowledgments

We thank present and past members of the McClatchey laboratory for 
valuable discussions; Helen Morrison, Marianne James, and Wayne 
Lencer for reagents; Mathew Ulman for assistance in the generation of 
polyacrylamide hydrogels; and Chris Chen and Nabeel El-Bardeesy 
for helpful comments.

This  work  was  supported  by  grants  from  the  National  Institutes  of 
Health  (R01  CA113733  to  A.I.  McClatchey;  R01  HL032854  to 
D.E.  Golan;  F31  GM78720  to  Q.  Baca;  and  T32  GM07306  to 
Z.S. Morris) and a fellowship from the Children’s Tumor Foundation (to 
C.  Chiasson-MacKenzie).  A.I.  McClatchey  is  the  Patricia  and  Scott 
Eston MGH Reseach Scholar.

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Submitted: 17 March 2015
Accepted: 1 September 2015

References
Avraham,  R.,  and Y.  Yarden.  2011.  Feedback  regulation  of  EGFR  signalling: 
Decision making by early and delayed loops. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
12:104–117. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrm3048

Benhamouche, S., M. Curto, I. Saotome, A.B. Gladden, C.H. Liu, M. Giovannini, 
and A.I. McClatchey. 2010. Nf2/Merlin controls progenitor homeostasis 
and tumorigenesis in the liver. Genes Dev. 24:1718–1730. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1101/gad.1938710

Benjamin,  J.M.,  A.V.  Kwiatkowski,  C.  Yang,  F.  Korobova,  S.  Pokutta, 
T. Svitkina, W.I. Weis, and W.J. Nelson. 2010. αE-catenin regulates actin 
dynamics independently of cadherin-mediated cell–cell adhesion. J. Cell 
Biol. 189:339–352. http://dx.doi.org/10.1083/jcb.200910041

Boggiano, J.C., and R.G. Fehon. 2012. Growth control by committee: Intercellular 
junctions,  cell  polarity,  and  the  cytoskeleton  regulate  Hippo  signaling. 
Dev. Cell. 22:695–702. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2012.03.013

Buckley,  C.D.,  J.  Tan,  K.L.  Anderson,  D.  Hanein,  N.  Volkmann,  W.I.  Weis, 
W.J.  Nelson,  and  A.R.  Dunn.  2014.  Cell  adhesion.  The  minimal  cad-
herin-catenin  complex  binds  to  actin  filaments  under  force.  Science. 
346:1254211. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1254211

Cairo, C.W., R. Mirchev, and D.E. Golan. 2006. Cytoskeletal regulation couples 
LFA-1 conformational changes to receptor lateral mobility and clustering. 
Immunity. 25:297–308. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2006.06.012

Carreno,  S.,  I.  Kouranti,  E.S.  Glusman,  M.T.  Fuller, A.  Echard,  and  F.  Payre. 
2008. Moesin and its activating kinase Slik are required for cortical sta-
bility and microtubule organization in mitotic cells. J. Cell Biol. 180:739–
746. http://dx.doi.org/10.1083/jcb.200709161

Chua, J., R. Rikhy, and J. Lippincott-Schwartz. 2009. Dynamin 2 orchestrates 
the global actomyosin cytoskeleton for epithelial maintenance and apical 
constriction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:20770–20775. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.0909812106

Cole, B.K., M. Curto, A.W. Chan, and A.I. McClatchey. 2008. Localization to the 
cortical  cytoskeleton  is  necessary  for  Nf2/merlin-dependent  epidermal 
growth factor receptor silencing. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28:1274–1284. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01139-07

Curto,  M.,  B.K.  Cole,  D.  Lallemand,  C.H.  Liu,  and  A.I.  McClatchey.  2007. 
Contact-dependent inhibition of EGFR signaling by Nf2/Merlin. J. Cell 
Biol. 177:893–903. http://dx.doi.org/10.1083/jcb.200703010

Dawes-Hoang, R.E., K.M. Parmar, A.E. Christiansen, C.B. Phelps, A.H. Brand, 
and  E.F.  Wieschaus.  2005.  folded  gastrulation,  cell  shape  change  and 
the control of myosin localization. Development. 132:4165–4178. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1242/dev.01938

DuFort,  C.C.,  M.J.  Paszek,  and  V.M.  Weaver.  2011.  Balancing  forces: 
Architectural control of mechanotransduction. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
12:308–319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrm3112

Dunagan, M., K. Chaudhry, G. Samak, and R.K. Rao. 2012. Acetaldehyde dis-
rupts tight junctions in Caco-2 cell monolayers by a protein phosphatase 
2A-dependent  mechanism.  Am.  J.  Physiol.  Gastrointest.  Liver  Physiol. 
303:G1356–G1364. http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/ajpgi.00526.2011

Fehon, R.G., A.I. McClatchey, and A. Bretscher. 2010. Organizing the cell cor-
tex:  The  role  of  ERM  proteins.  Nat.  Rev.  Mol.  Cell  Biol.  11:276–287. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrm2866

García-Sáez, A.J.,  and  P.  Schwille.  2007.  Single  molecule  techniques  for  the 
study of membrane proteins. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 76:257–266. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00253-007-1007-8

Gauthier, N.C., T.A. Masters, and M.P. Sheetz. 2012. Mechanical feedback be-
tween membrane tension and dynamics. Trends Cell Biol. 22:527–535. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2012.07.005

Giovannini,  M.,  E.  Robanus-Maandag,  M.  van  der Valk,  M.  Niwa-Kawakita, 
V. Abramowski, L. Goutebroze, J.M. Woodruff, A. Berns, and G. Thomas. 
2000. Conditional biallelic Nf2 mutation in the mouse promotes manifes-
tations of human neurofibromatosis type 2. Genes Dev. 14:1617–1630.

Gladden, A.B., A.M. Hebert, E.E. Schneeberger, and A.I. McClatchey. 2010. The 
NF2 tumor suppressor, Merlin, regulates epidermal development through 
the  establishment  of  a  junctional  polarity  complex.  Dev.  Cell.  19:727–
739. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2010.10.008

Hanahan, D., and R.A. Weinberg. 2011. Hallmarks of cancer: The next genera-

tion. Cell. 144:646–674. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.013

Hansen, S.D., A.V. Kwiatkowski, C.Y. Ouyang, H. Liu, S. Pokutta, S.C. Watkins, 
N.  Volkmann,  D.  Hanein,  W.I.  Weis,  R.D.  Mullins,  and  W.J.  Nelson. 
2013. αE-catenin  actin-binding  domain  alters  actin  filament  conforma-
tion  and  regulates  binding  of  nucleation  and  disassembly  factors.  Mol. 
Biol. Cell. 24:3710–3720. http://dx.doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E13-07-0388

Hebert, A.M., B. DuBoff, J.B. Casaletto, A.B. Gladden, and A.I. McClatchey. 
2012.  Merlin/ERM  proteins  establish  cortical  asymmetry  and  centro-
some  position.  Genes  Dev.  26:2709–2723.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/
gad.194027.112

Hildebrand, J.D. 2005. Shroom regulates epithelial cell shape via the apical po-
sitioning of an actomyosin network. J. Cell Sci. 118:5191–5203. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1242/jcs.02626

Huang,  S.,  and  D.E.  Ingber.  2005.  Cell  tension,  matrix  mechanics,  and  can-
cer  development.  Cancer  Cell.  8:175–176.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ccr.2005.08.009

James,  M.F.,  J.M.  Lelke,  M.  Maccollin,  S.R.  Plotkin,  A.O.  Stemmer-
Rachamimov, V.  Ramesh,  and  J.F.  Gusella.  2008.  Modeling  NF2  with 
human arachnoidal and meningioma cell culture systems: NF2 silencing 
reflects the benign character of tumor growth. Neurobiol. Dis. 29:278–
292. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2007.09.002

Jaqaman, K., and S. Grinstein. 2012. Regulation from within: The cytoskeleton 
in transmembrane signaling. Trends Cell Biol. 22:515–526. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.tcb.2012.07.006

Kim, J.H., and A.R. Asthagiri. 2011. Matrix stiffening sensitizes epithelial cells 
to EGF and enables the loss of contact inhibition of proliferation. J. Cell 
Sci. 124:1280–1287. http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/jcs.078394

Kim,  J.H.,  K.  Kushiro,  N.A.  Graham,  and A.R.  Asthagiri.  2009.  Tunable  in-
terplay  between  epidermal  growth  factor  and  cell–cell  contact  governs 

404

JCB • Volume 211 • NumBer 2 • 2015

the  spatial  dynamics  of  epithelial  growth.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA. 
106:11149–11153. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0812651106

Kraning-Rush, C.M., and C.A. Reinhart-King. 2012. Controlling matrix stiffness 
and topography for the study of tumor cell migration. Cell Adhes. Migr. 
6:274–279. http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/cam.21076

Kunda,  P., A.E.  Pelling, T.  Liu,  and  B.  Baum.  2008.  Moesin  controls  cortical 
rigidity, cell rounding, and spindle morphogenesis during mitosis. Curr. 
Biol. 18:91–101. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2007.12.051

Kusumi, A., Y.  Sako,  and  M.  Yamamoto.  1993.  Confined  lateral  diffusion  of 
membrane  receptors  as  studied  by  single  particle  tracking  (nanovid 
microscopy).  Effects  of  calcium-induced  differentiation  in  cultured 
epithelial  cells.  Biophys.  J.  65:2021–2040.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0006-3495(93)81253-0

Lallemand,  D.,  M.  Curto,  I.  Saotome,  M.  Giovannini,  and  A.I.  McClatchey. 
2003. NF2 deficiency promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis by desta-
bilizing  adherens  junctions.  Genes  Dev.  17:1090–1100.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1101/gad.1054603

Lecuit, T., P.F. Lenne, and E. Munro. 2011. Force generation, transmission, and in-
tegration during cell and tissue morphogenesis. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 
27:157–184. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-cellbio-100109-104027

Leerberg,  J.M.,  G.A.  Gomez,  S.  Verma,  E.J.  Moussa,  S.K.  Wu,  R.  Priya, 
B.D.  Hoffman,  C.  Grashoff,  M.A.  Schwartz,  and  A.S.  Yap.  2014. 
Tension-sensitive  actin  assembly  supports  contractility  at  the  epithelial 
zonula adherens. Curr. Biol. 24:1689–1699. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
cub.2014.06.028

Lemmon, M.A., and J. Schlessinger. 2010. Cell signaling by receptor tyrosine ki-
nases. Cell. 141:1117–1134. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.06.011
Lenne, P.F., L. Wawrezinieck, F. Conchonaud, O. Wurtz, A. Boned, X.J. Guo, 
H. Rigneault, H.T. He, and D. Marguet. 2006. Dynamic molecular con-
finement  in  the  plasma  membrane  by  microdomains  and  the  cytoskel-
eton  meshwork.  EMBO  J.  25:3245–3256.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
sj.emboj.7601214

Lidke,  D.S.,  K.A.  Lidke,  B.  Rieger,  T.M.  Jovin,  and  D.J.  Arndt-Jovin.  2005. 
Reaching out for signals: Filopodia sense EGF and respond by directed 
retrograde  transport  of  activated  receptors.  J.  Cell  Biol.  170:619–626. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1083/jcb.200503140

Lien, W.H., V.I. Gelfand, and V. Vasioukhin. 2008. α–E-catenin binds to dyna-
mitin and regulates dynactin-mediated intracellular traffic. J. Cell Biol. 
183:989–997. http://dx.doi.org/10.1083/jcb.200805041

Luxenburg, C., H.A. Pasolli, S.E. Williams, and E. Fuchs. 2011. Developmental 
roles for Srf, cortical cytoskeleton and cell shape in epidermal spindle ori-
entation. Nat. Cell Biol. 13:203–214. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncb2163
Martin, A.C.,  and  B.  Goldstein.  2014. Apical  constriction: Themes  and  varia-
tions  on  a  cellular  mechanism  driving  morphogenesis.  Development. 
141:1987–1998. http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/dev.102228

Martin, A.C., M. Kaschube, and E.F. Wieschaus. 2009. Pulsed contractions of 
an actin–myosin network drive apical constriction. Nature. 457:495–499. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature07522

Maruthamuthu,  V.,  B.  Sabass,  U.S.  Schwarz,  and  M.L.  Gardel.  2011.  Cell-
ECM traction force modulates endogenous tension at cell–cell contacts. 
Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA.  108:4708–4713.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1011123108

McClatchey, A.I. 2014. ERM proteins at a glance. J. Cell Sci. 127:3199–3204. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/jcs.098343

McClatchey,  A.I.,  and  A.S.  Yap.  2012.  Contact  inhibition  (of  proliferation) 
redux.  Curr.  Opin.  Cell  Biol.  24:685–694.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ceb.2012.06.009

Mirchev,  R.,  and  D.E.  Golan.  2001.  Single-particle  tracking  and  laser  optical 
tweezers  studies  of  the  dynamics  of  individual  protein  molecules  in 
membranes of intact human and mouse red cells. Blood Cells Mol. Dis. 
27:143–147. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/bcmd.2000.0367

Morris,  Z.S.,  and A.I.  McClatchey.  2009. Aberrant  epithelial  morphology  and 
persistent epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in a mouse model 
of renal carcinoma. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:9767–9772. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0902031106

Nishimura, T., and M. Takeichi. 2008. Shroom3-mediated recruitment of Rho 
kinases  to  the  apical  cell  junctions  regulates  epithelial  and  neuroepi-
thelial  planar  remodeling.  Development.  135:1493–1502.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1242/dev.019646

Otani,  T.,  T.  Ichii,  S.  Aono,  and  M.  Takeichi.  2006.  Cdc42  GEF  Tuba  regu-
lates the junctional configuration of simple epithelial cells. J. Cell Biol. 
175:135–146. http://dx.doi.org/10.1083/jcb.200605012

Postic,  C.,  and  M.A.  Magnuson.  2000.  DNA  excision 

an 

by 
age. 
(SICI)1526-968X(200002)26:2<149::AID-GENE16>3.0.CO;2-V

albumin-Cre 
Genesis. 

transgene 
26:149–150. 

occurs 

liver 
progressively  with 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/

in 

Saxton, M.J., and K. Jacobson. 1997. Single-particle tracking: Applications to 
membrane dynamics. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol.  Struct. 26:373–399. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.biophys.26.1.373

Takeichi, M. 2014. Dynamic contacts: Rearranging adherens junctions to drive 
epithelial  remodelling.  Nat.  Rev.  Mol.  Cell  Biol.  15:397–410.  http://
dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrm3802

Tokuda,  S.,  T.  Higashi,  and  M.  Furuse.  2014.  ZO-1  knockout  by  TAL EN-
mediated  gene  targeting  in  MDCK  cells:  Involvement  of  ZO-1  in  the 
regulation of cytoskeleton and cell shape. PLoS ONE. 9:e104994. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0104994

Tse,  J.R.,  and A.J.  Engler.  2010.  Preparation  of  hydrogel  substrates  with  tun-
able mechanical properties. In Current Protocols in Cell Biology. John 
Wiley  &  Sons  Inc.,  New York.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/0471143030.
cb1016s47

van der Flier, L.G., and H. Clevers. 2009. Stem cells, self-renewal, and differenti-
ation in the intestinal epithelium. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 71:241–260. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.physiol.010908.163145

Verma,  S.,  S.P.  Han,  M.  Michael,  G.A.  Gomez,  Z.  Yang,  R.D.  Teasdale, 
A.  Ratheesh,  E.M.  Kovacs,  R.G.  Ali,  and A.S.  Yap.  2012. A WAVE2–
Arp2/3  actin  nucleator  apparatus  supports  junctional  tension  at  the  ep-
ithelial  zonula  adherens.  Mol.  Biol.  Cell.  23:4601–4610.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1091/mbc.E12-08-0574

Viswanatha, R., P.Y. Ohouo, M.B. Smolka, and A. Bretscher. 2012. Local phos-
phocycling  mediated  by  LOK/SLK  restricts  ezrin  function  to  the  api-
cal  aspect  of  epithelial  cells.  J.  Cell  Biol.  199:969–984.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1083/jcb.201207047

Wakatsuki, T., B. Schwab, N.C. Thompson, and E.L. Elson. 2001. Effects of cy-
tochalasin D and latrunculin B on mechanical properties of cells. J. Cell 
Sci. 114:1025–1036.

Wu,  S.K.,  G.A.  Gomez,  M.  Michael,  S.  Verma,  H.L.  Cox,  J.G.  Lefevre, 
R.G.  Parton,  N.A.  Hamilton,  Z.  Neufeld,  and A.S.  Yap.  2014.  Cortical 
F-actin stabilization generates apical–lateral patterns of junctional con-
tractility  that  integrate  cells  into  epithelia.  Nat.  Cell  Biol.  16:167–178. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncb2900

McClatchey, A.I., and R.G. Fehon. 2009. Merlin and the ERM proteins—regu-
lators of receptor distribution and signaling at the cell cortex. Trends Cell 
Biol. 19:198–206. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2009.02.006

Yonemura,  S.,  Y.  Wada,  T.  Watanabe,  A.  Nagafuchi,  and  M.  Shibata.  2010. 
α-Catenin as a tension transducer that induces adherens junction devel-
opment. Nat. Cell Biol. 12:533–542. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncb2055

Contact-dependent immobilization of eGFr by merlin • Chiasson-macKenzie et al.

405

