May/June 2002 䡠 Vol. 4 䡠 No. 3

r e v i e w

Cardiovascular disease in neurofibromatosis 1:
Report of the NF1 Cardiovascular Task Force

J. M. Friedman, MD, PhD1, Jack Arbiser, MD3, Jonathan A. Epstein, MD4, David H. Gutmann, MD-PhD5,
Stephen J. Huot, MD, PhD6, Angela E. Lin, MD7, Bruce McManus, MD, PhD2, and Bruce R. Korf, MD, PhD8

Purpose: Patients with neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) are at increased risk for a variety of cardiovascular disorders, but
the natural history and pathogenesis of these abnormalities are poorly understood. Methods: The National
Neurofibromatosis Foundation convened an expert task force to review current knowledge about cardiovascular
manifestations of NF1 and to make recommendations regarding clinical management and research priorities
related to these features of the disease. Results: This report summarizes the NF1 Cardiovascular Task Force’s
current understanding of vasculopathy, hypertension, and congenital heart defects that occur in association with
NF1. Recommendations are made regarding routine surveillance for cardiovascular disease and diagnostic
evaluation and management of cardiovascular disorders in individuals with NF1. Conclusion: Our understanding of
the natural history and pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease in NF1 has improved substantially in the past few
years, but many clinically important questions remain unanswered. Genet Med 2002:4(3):105–111.
Key Words: neurofibromatosis 1, vasculopathy, hypertension, congenital heart defects

Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1), an autosomal dominant dis-
ease, is one of the most common mendelian disorders.1 It is
characterized by extremely variable expressivity, but most pa-
tients have cafe´-au-lait spots, intertriginous freckling, dermal
and plexiform neurofibromas, and learning disabilities.2 Peo-
ple with NF1 may also develop cardiac and vascular disease,
but the frequency, natural history, and pathogenesis of these
abnormalities are uncertain. The National Neurofibromatosis
Foundation convened an expert panel, the NF1 Cardiovascular
Task Force, to review current knowledge about the cardiovas-
cular manifestations of NF1 and to make recommendations
regarding clinical management and research priorities. This is
the report of that Task Force.

Neurofibromas, the characteristic tumors of NF1, can de-
velop within the heart, obstruct blood flow in the heart or
major vessels by compression or invasion, or erode a vessel and
cause hemorrhage. Fortunately, these are rare complications.
This report will concentrate on the three most common car-
diovascular manifestations of NF1, viz., vasculopathy, hyper-
tension, and congenital heart defects.

From the 1Department of Medical Genetics and 2Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada; 3Department of Dermatol-
ogy, Emory University Medical School, Atlanta, Georgia; 4Cardiovascular Division, Depart-
ment of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 5Department of
Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; 6Department of
Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut; and the
7Teratology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, and 8Partners’ Center for Human Genet-
ics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

J.M. Friedman, MD, PhD, Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia,
6174 University Boulevard, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Received: November 16, 2001.

Accepted: February 15, 2002.

Genetics IN Medicine

People with NF1 constitute a substantial fraction of all pa-
tients with dysplastic renal artery stenosis,3 early-onset cere-
brovascular disease,4 or pheochromocytomas,5 and cardiovas-
cular disease is a frequent cause of premature death in
individuals with NF1. Sørensen and associates6 found that
myocardial infarction and cerebrovascular accidents often oc-
curred at a younger than expected age among NF1 patients.
Zo¨ller et al.7 reported that cardiovascular disease, hemorrhage,
and embolism were frequent causes of death in 70 adult NF1
patients who were followed for 12 years. Hypertension was
significantly associated with mortality, and the mean age at
death among the NF1 patients was approximately 14 years
younger than expected. The median age of death reported on
death certificates of 3,253 individuals with probable NF1 was
approximately 15 years less than expected in another study.8
Diagnoses suggestive of NF1 vasculopathy were listed 7.2 times
more often than expected among NF1 patients ⬍ 30 years old
and 2.2 times more often than expected among those who were
30 to 40 years old at the time of death.

NF1 VASCULOPATHY
Epidemiology and clinical features

NF1 can cause a vasculopathy, but the frequency is un-
known. Symptomatic involvement is uncommon,9 and many
affected patients remain asymptomatic throughout life.10 NF1
vasculopathy may affect vessels ranging in size from the prox-
imal aorta to small arterioles and may produce vascular steno-
sis, occlusion, aneurysm, pseudoaneurysm, rupture, or fistula
formation.11 The systemic arterial circulation is usually af-
fected, but involvement of the veins or pulmonary arteries has
been reported. Most NF1 patients with vasculopathy have

105

Friedman et al.

multiple affected vessels. NF1 vasculopathy is usually recog-
nized in childhood or early adulthood, often in association
with pregnancy.

The renal arteries are the most frequent sites of symptomatic
vasculopathy, and hypertension is the usual manifestation. Re-
nal artery dysplasia occurs in at least 1% of patients with NF1.12
Abdominal aortic coarctation may be seen in association with
renal artery stenosis in NF1 patients,13 raising the possibility
that the vasculopathy and aortic narrowing may be pathogen-
ically related.14

Cerebrovascular abnormalities in NF1 patients usually re-
sult from stenoses or occlusions of the internal carotid, middle
cerebral, or anterior cerebral artery.15,16 Small telangiectatic
vessels form around the area of the stenosis and appear as a
“puff of smoke” (“moya-moya”) on cerebral angiography17
(Fig. 1). Intracranial aneurysms and cervical arteriovenous fis-
tulae and aneurysms may also occur in NF1 patients but are
less common and tend to be seen in older patients.18

NF1-associated cerebrovascular disease is most often diag-
nosed in children who present with weakness, involuntary
movements, headaches, or seizures as a result of cerebral isch-
emia.4 Acute neurological deficits may reflect the formation of
a thrombus or embolization. Adults present with similar
symptoms, although the cause may be intracranial hemor-
rhage. Hemorrhage is responsible for approximately half of all
deaths resulting from NF1 cerebrovascular disease.

Pathology and pathogenesis

The histopathology of NF1 vascular lesions was first de-
scribed by Reubi19 and Feyrter20 and subsequently classified by
Salyer and Salyer10 and by Orcel and Chometter.21 The classi-

Fig. 1 A cerebral arteriogram illustrates the moya-moya (“puff of smoke”) appearance
in small telangiectatic blood vessels that surround the stenosis at the level of the internal
carotid artery in a patient with NF1. Telangiectatic blood vessels are denoted by the
“blush” of radiographic contrast dye (white arrows) surrounding the internal carotid
artery occlusion (black arrow). Photograph provided by Dr. Bruce Korf, taken from
Gutmann.4

fications are based on vessel diameter, histology, and morphol-
ogy (Table 1). Both classification systems focus on the com-
mon histological features of small artery disease—abnormal
proliferation of spindle cells in the wall, degeneration, healing,
and subsequent muscle loss accompanied by extensive fibrosis.
The process may culminate in formation of micronodular
smooth muscle aggregates in the vessel wall.22 Mixed, interme-
diate, and variant forms occur in many cases, suggesting that
these lesions are pathogenetically related.10 All may result from
cellular proliferation in the wall, with the differences reflecting
variations in severity, maturation, and extent of healing.

Feyrter20 proposed that NF1 vascular lesions develop by
proliferation of nerves within affected vessel walls, whereas
Reubi suggested an origin from non-nervous tissue.19 Greene
et al.23 and Huffman et al.22 observed that Schwann cell prolif-
eration dominates large vessel disease, whereas mesodermal
dysplasia or fibromuscular hyperplasia is most important in
the small artery vasculopathy. Large vessel disease usually ter-
minates with rupture as a result of compressive force from
surrounding ganglioneuromatous or neurofibromatous tis-
sue. In contrast, small vessel disease usually presents as a ste-
notic or occlusive lesion that lacks an obvious neural compo-
nent. Small vessel lesions appear to be composed of smooth
muscle nodules (Figs. 2 and 3) that arise from the walls of the
arteries themselves.23,24 Fibromuscular hyperplasia and neural
proliferation in vessel walls may exist at different stages of dis-
ease progression.

Table 1

Histological classification of NF1 arterial lesions

Purely intimal (circumscribed)

50–400 ␮m

Intimal proliferations/stenosis

Medial thinning

Normal adventitia

Intimal aneurysm (circumscribed)

500–1000 ␮m

Glycosaminoglycan-rich intimal thickening

Elastic disruption/medial loss

Normal adventitia/small aneurysms

Arterial nodules (nodular)

100–700 ␮m

NF nodules of 300-␮m diameter between media and adventitia

Protrudes into intima/stenosis

Epithelioid (diffuse)

200–700 ␮m

Spindle cell proliferation throughout wall

Stenosis

Modified from Huffman et al. 22

106

Genetics IN Medicine

Cardiovascular disease in NF1

Fig. 2 Electron micrograph of a myofibroblast-like cell with a cleaved nucleus, prom-
inent nucleoli, and cytoplasmic dense bodies, taken from an affected muscular artery.
Reprinted from Finley and Dabbs12 with permission.

Management

The accuracy of noninvasive diagnostic tests such as capto-
pril renal scans or renal ultrasound examinations to detect re-
nal artery stenosis in NF1 patients with renovascular hyperten-
sion has not been studied. The possible coexistence of multiple
forms of NF1 vasculopathy in any given patient (e.g., stenosis
of the renal artery and saccular aneurysm of intrarenal vessels)
further complicates interpretation of these diagnostic tests.
Therefore, we recommend renal arteriography as the preferred
test for renal artery stenosis in patients with NF1 and hyper-
tension. For patients who cannot tolerate arteriography, e.g.,
those with impaired renal function, we recommend magnetic
resonance angiography as an alternative imaging modality.
Magnetic resonance angiography can detect atherosclerotic
stenosis of the main renal artery accurately but does not reli-
ably identify significant stenosis of accessory renal arteries,25
which is why we recommend it only in NF1 patients who can-
not tolerate direct arteriography.

It is important to recognize that NF1 patients found to have
an anatomic narrowing of the renal artery do not necessarily
have renovascular hypertension, and correction of the narrow-
ing may or may not correct the elevated blood pressure. This
uncertainty is because of the high incidence of essential hyper-
tension in NF1 patients and the difficulty in identifying ana-
tomic lesions that are causally related to high blood pressure.
Thinning of the renal cortex and discrepancy in renal length
when comparing a kidney with a stenotic lesion to the con-
tralateral nonstenotic kidney are helpful in identifying patients
with an increased likelihood of having renovascular hyperten-
sion. Renal vein renin sampling may also have a role in this
setting.26

“Moya-moya” is a rare complication of NF1, and no infor-
mation is available that justifies a diagnostic approach in NF1
patients that is different from that used in people with “moya-
moya” disease who do not have NF1. Therefore, we recom-

Fig. 3 Photomicrographs of cross-sectionally (A, hematoxylin and eosin; original mag-
nification, ⫻170) and somewhat obliquely sectioned (B, hematoxylin and eosin; original
magnification, ⫻170) vessels demonstrating thickened intima and the presence of several
smooth muscle cell nodules. Reprinted from Greene et al.23 with permission.

mend use of the general guidelines for diagnosis and treatment
of “moya-moya” disease that have recently been formulated.27
The diagnosis is typically based on cerebral angiography, dem-
onstrating bilateral stenosis or occlusion at the terminal por-
tion of the internal carotid artery and/or the proximal portion
of the anterior or middle cerebral arteries in proximate associ-
ation with abnormal vascular networks.

NF1 patients of any age who present with a neurological
deficit of sudden onset should be evaluated promptly for cere-
brovascular disease. Initial assessment includes brain imaging.
Cerebral angiography may also be appropriate when the his-
tory and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggest deficits in
a vascular distribution. Magnetic resonance angiography may
eventually supplant conventional cerebral angiography for the
evaluation of NF1 patients. Because “moya-moya” is etiologi-
cally heterogeneous, other causes should be eliminated before
attributing cerebral vascular disease to NF1 vasculopathy.
Treatment of cerebrovascular abnormalities in individuals
with NF1 is identical to that in other patients and may include
both surgical and medical options.

May/June 2002 䡠 Vol. 4 䡠 No. 3

107

Friedman et al.

HYPERTENSION
Epidemiology and clinical features

Hypertension is common among NF1 patients, and the
prevalence increases with age.28,29 High blood pressure is espe-
cially frequent in women with NF1 during pregnancy.30 Essen-
tial hypertension is the most common form in adults with NF1,
but it is uncertain whether essential hypertension is a feature of
NF1 or just a coincidental disease that is often recognized dur-
ing medical evaluation for other reasons.

Renal artery stenosis from NF1 vasculopathy is a well-doc-
umented cause of hypertension.31 It usually presents in child-
hood or young adulthood, often during pregnancy. Pheochro-
mocytomas are an uncommon cause of hypertension, but they
occur in 0.1 to 1.5% of older patients with NF1.32

Management

Although hypertension among people with NF1 is usually
“essential,” thoughtful evaluation for identifiable secondary
causes is necessary. Children with hypertension and/or dis-
crepancies in pulses or blood pressures between upper and
lower extremities should be screened for aortic coarctation.
Renovascular disease should be considered in any child or
young adult, and particularly in any pregnant woman, with
hypertension and NF1. Renovascular hypertension is less likely
in older NF1 patients but should be considered if the hyper-
tension is severe or refractory to treatment or if an upper ab-
dominal bruit is heard.

Given the potential for poor outcome in patients with undi-
agnosed pheochromocytoma33 and the sensitivity of biochem-
ical testing, clinicians should consider evaluation for pheo-
chromocytoma in all NF1 patients who develop hypertension
during pregnancy and those with refractory hypertension or
symptoms of catecholamine excess. The diagnosis is confirmed
by imaging studies and measurement of urinary or plasma cat-
echolamines. Both plasma and urinary catecholamines have
been shown to be highly sensitive and specific for pheochro-
mocytoma,34,35 but accurate measurement of plasma cat-
echolamines requires strict adherence to research center pro-
tocols for patient preparation and blood sampling. Therefore,
we recommend the more straight-forward measurement of 24
hour urinary excretion of catecholamine metabolites (meta-
nephrines and vanillylmandelic acid) and total plus fraction-
ated catecholamines. In patients who have positive biochemi-
cal tests, MRI or computed tomography can be used to localize
the pheochromocytoma. Imaging studies may be confusing in
patients who do not have biochemical evidence of pheochro-
mocytoma because biologically insignificant adrenal adeno-
mas may be identified incidentally. Administration of radio-
graphic contrast medium should be avoided in patients who
have a positive biochemical screen because of the potential for
contrast medium to increase catecholamine output from chro-
maffin cell. An association has been observed between the oc-
currence of pheochromocytomas and carcinoid tumors in NF1
patients,36 so pheochromocytoma should be sought if a carci-

108

noid tumor is found and a carcinoid should be sought if a
pheochromocytoma is found.

Although patients with NF1 appear to be at increased risk of
cardiovascular-associated morbidity and mortality,7 outcome
data are not available to support recommending a lower target
blood pressure than in the general population. Goal blood
pressure for patients without target organ damage or diabetes
should, therefore, be 140/90 mm Hg, as in the general popula-
tion. For patients with end organ damage and/or diabetes, goal
blood pressure should be 130/85 mm Hg.37

Renal artery angioplasty for stenotic lesions appears to have
a lower success rate in NF1 patients than in non-NF1 pa-
tients.38 Surgical revascularization or nephrectomy frequently
produces improvement in blood pressure in such patients, but
nephrectomy should be reserved for those with parenchymal
lesions or severe disease of the renal artery that prevents graft-
ing. The high incidence of essential hypertension among NF1
patients probably contributes to surgical treatment failures be-
cause essential hypertension cannot be diagnosed with cer-
tainty on a prospective basis. Treatment of pheochromocy-
toma includes alpha-adrenergic blockade, beta-adrenergic
blockade if needed to control heart rate or arrhythmias, and
surgical removal.39

CONGENITAL HEART DEFECTS
Epidemiology and clinical features

The frequency of congenital heart defects (CHD) ranges
from 0.4 to 6.4% in published series of NF1 patients.14 It is not
clear that all of the patients in these reports fulfill currently
accepted criteria for diagnosis of NF1 or that all of the reported
cardiac abnormalities are bona fide CHD. A recent review of
2,550 NF1 patients in the National Neurofibromatosis Foun-
dation International Database found 50 (2%) with CHD. In 42
of these patients (1.6% of the total), CHD was confirmed by an
appropriate imaging test.14 Most studies report a 0.4 to 0.9%
incidence of CHD among liveborn infants in the general pop-
ulation.40 These studies are not strictly comparable to the
NNFF International Database or other reported series of NF1
patients ascertained through specialty clinics. Nevertheless, the
available data are consistent with a higher than expected fre-
quency of CHD among NF1 patients. The strongest evidence
that NF1 and CHD are, in fact, associated, is the extraordinar-
ily high proportion of these patients in whom the CHD is pul-
monic stenosis, usually of the valvar type.

Pulmonic stenosis is a recognized feature of three uncom-
mon clinical subtypes of NF114—Watson syndrome, NF1-
Noonan syndrome, and individuals with large deletions of the
NF1 gene. Pulmonic stenosis is also unusually frequent among
patients with NF1 who do not have these clinical subtypes,
accounting for approximately one quarter of all CHD among
NF1 patients.14

Perhaps as important as the predominance of pulmonic
valve stenosis among NF1 patients is the low frequency of more
complex CHD, including conotruncal defects.14 This finding is
somewhat surprising, because double outlet right ventricle, a

Genetics IN Medicine

conotruncal defect, occurs in homozygous Nf1 “knockout”
mouse embryos.41,42 The NNFF International Database series
of 2550 NF1 patients included two with tetralogy of Fallot,
which is considered a conotruncal CHD.14 There were no
atrioventricular canal, looping, or laterality defects.

Left heart obstruction (aortic stenosis or coarctation) was
reported in 7 of 50 NF1 patients with CHD from the NNFF
International Database.14 Five of these patients had coarcta-
tion, and in at least three, the aortic narrowing was of a long
fusiform type, which differs anatomically from the abrupt seg-
mental constriction that is usually seen in patients who do not
have NF1.

Pathology and pathogenesis

The involvement of neurofibromin in cardiac development
is strongly supported by Nf1 “knockout” mouse models.41,42
Homozygous Nf1 mutant embryos succumb before Day 14 of
gestation with double outlet right ventricle and associated ab-
normalities of cardiac outflow tract formation, endocardial
cushion development, and myocardial structure. In some
cases, the enlarged endocardial cushion tissue appears to ob-
struct forward blood flow and produce severe venous conges-
tion. This finding is reminiscent of the valvar pulmonic steno-
sis seen in human NF1 patients. Nf1 is expressed by myocardial
cells and by mesenchymal cells of the endocardial cushions.
Explanted endocardial cushions from mutant embryos display
exuberant epithelial–mesenchymal transformation when cul-
tured on collagen gels designed to mimic the process of cush-
ion formation in vivo. Epithelial–mesenchymal transforma-
tion and endocardial cushion formation are complex processes
that involve signals from the overlying myocardium, where
Nf1 is also expressed, and migrating neural crest cells that pop-
ulate the endocardial cushions may influence mesenchymal
cell proliferation and/or apoptosis as well. Hence, the precise
cell type and molecular function of neurofibromin that result
in endocardial cushion defects in homozygous Nf1 knockout
mice remain to be clarified.

Management

All patients with NF1, especially those with the Watson or
NF1-Noonan phenotypes, should have a careful cardiac exam-
ination with auscultation and blood pressure measurement.
Four extremity blood pressure measurements should be con-
sidered in children suspected of having aortic coarctation. Any
patient with a suspicious heart murmur should be evaluated by
a cardiologist and examined by echocardiography for pul-
monic stenosis, aortic coarctation, or other CHD. If a CHD is
found, subsequent follow-up and treatment should be based
on the age of the patient and the nature and severity of the
lesion.

EMERGING PATHOGENETIC AND MOLECULAR
INSIGHTS

NF1 is a large gene, spanning approximately 335 kb of chro-
mosome 17q11.2.43 The protein product, neurofibromin, is an

Cardiovascular disease in NF1

activator of p21ras GTPase, which in turn fosters the conver-
sion of p21ras- GTP to inactive p21ras-GDP, thereby suppress-
ing cell growth. NF1 mutations reduce this suppression and
promote cellular proliferation. Certain neoplasms, including
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, gliomas, and
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, occur with increased fre-
quency among patients with NF1.44 – 47 NF1 is thought to func-
tion as a tumor suppressor gene, and somatic loss of the second
allele has been demonstrated in pheochromocytomas, malig-
nant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, gliomas, and juvenile
chronic myelogenous leukemia cells from NF1 patients.44 – 47
Nf1 haploinsufficiency also alters proliferation and survival of
some cell types in the knockout mouse model.48,49

Neurofibromin has other functions as well. It interacts with
tubulin.50,51 The Drosophila homologue of neurofibromin ac-
tivates an adenyl cyclase-mediated signaling pathway required
for growth, learning, and memory52; a similar pathway may be
important in humans.

Neurofibromin expression has been demonstrated in the
endothelial and smooth muscle cells of blood vessels,41,53,54
raising the possibility that NF1 vasculopathy results from ab-
normal neurofibromin function in endothelial or vascular
smooth muscle cells or both.55 One possibility is that deficient
neurofibromin expression alters the response of vascular en-
dothelial or smooth muscle cells to growth suppressive endo-
thelial signals, resulting in excessive proliferation during nor-
mal vascular maintenance. Alternatively, neurofibromin
deficiency might impair proliferation of endothelial cells,
thereby reducing the structural integrity of the endothelium
and producing secondary smooth muscle cell migration and
proliferation in the vessel wall.

Although NF1 vasculopathy typically involves multiple ves-
sels in an affected individual, the pathology is usually patchy.
All of the cells in the arteries of an NF1 patient presumably
have the same constitutional mutation of the NF1 gene, so the
patchiness suggests that other factors are also involved in the
development of vasculopathy. Development of vasculopathy
may require a “second hit” mutation of the normal NF1 allele
or a somatic mutation at one or more other loci. An attractive
alternative is that local injury in the vessel wall contributes to
development of these lesions, with intimal hyperplasia result-
ing from dysregulation of the normal repair process.55

The murine model of CHD caused by Nf1 deficiency is use-
ful for studying the role of neurofibromin in cardiac develop-
ment and in cellular growth control, but these homozygous
embryos may not be an appropriate model for CHD in human
NF1 patients. Constitutional homozygosity for NF1 mutations
has never been reported in humans1 and may be lethal, as it is
in mice. Human NF1 patients are heterozygous for an NF1
mutation, but CHD have not been observed in heterozygous
Nf1 mutant mice. Development of CHD in heterozygous hu-
man NF1 patients might reflect differences in murine and hu-
man dosage requirements for neurofibromin, occasional “sec-
ond hit” somatic mutations of the normal NF1 allele in a
critical tissue, or effects of other genetic, nongenetic, or sto-

May/June 2002 䡠 Vol. 4 䡠 No. 3

109

Friedman et al.

chastic factors that interact with neurofibromin during forma-
tion of the heart.

RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS

Although our understanding of the natural history, pathol-
ogy, and pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease in NF1 has
improved substantially during the past few years, it is still in-
adequate. We need to learn more about the nature and molec-
ular basis of NF1-associated cardiovascular disease to improve
our care for affected patients. Better understanding of the role
of neurofibromin in embryonic development and normal
function of the heart and vasculature may also provide impor-
tant insights into the pathogenesis of vascular disease, hyper-
tension, and cardiovascular malformations in the general
population.

Many questions about the natural history and pathogenesis
of cardiovascular disease in NF1 remain unanswered. We be-
lieve that the following research studies and resources are ur-
gently needed to address these questions:

● A collaborative multicenter genotype-phenotype study of
cardiovascular disease in NF1 patients with molecular
definition of the NF1 mutation, analysis of other possible
genetic and nongenetic predisposing factors, and detailed
clinical assessment of all cardiac and vascular lesions.

● Clinical studies to define the optimal blood pressure treat-

ment level for patients with NF1 and hypertension.

● Clinical studies to determine whether particular antihy-
pertensive medications are more appropriate for NF1 pa-
tients in certain specific clinical situations (e.g., angioten-
sin-converting enzyme inhibitors for patients with NF1
and renal vasculopathy).

● A multicenter cross-sectional clinical and echocardio-
graphic study of CHD, and especially pulmonic stenosis,
among patients with NF1.

● Collection protocols and a tissue bank for researchers
the pathogenesis of NF1

interested in studying
vasculopathy.

● Development of a good experimental model of NF1 vas-

culopathy in a laboratory animal or in vitro system.

● Molecular embryology studies of cardiac development in

homozygous and heterozygous Nf1 knockout mice.

Acknowledgments

The NF1 Cardiovascular Task Force was organized and
sponsored by the National Neurofibromatosis Foundation.
The authors thank Mr. Peter Bellermann for his assistance and
support. We appreciate the journalistic assistance of Ms.
Salima Harji. This report was developed while Dr. Friedman
was on sabbatical leave supported by the Association of Teach-
ers of Preventive Medicine under a cooperative agreement
from the Centers for Disease Control.

References
1. Friedman JM. Epidemiology of neurofibromatosis type 1. Am J Med Genet 1999;89:

1– 6.

110

2. Friedman JM, Gutmann DH, MacCollin M, Riccardi VM. Neurofibromatosis: phe-
notype, natural history, and pathogenesis, 3rd ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press, 1999.

3. Devaney K, Kapur SP, Patterson K, Chandra RS. Pediatric renal artery dysplasia: a

morphologic study. Pediatr Pathol 1991;11:609 – 621.

4. Gutmann DH. Abnormalities of the nervous system. In: Friedman JM, Gutmann
DH, MacCollin M, Riccardi VM, eds. Neurofibromatosis: phenotype, natural his-
tory, and pathogenesis. 3rd ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999:
190 –202.

5. Loh K-C, Shlossberg AH, Abbott EC, Salisbury SR, Tan M-H. Phaeochromocytoma.

6.

A ten-year study. Q J Med 1997;90:51– 60.
Sørensen SA, Mulvihill JJ, Nielsen A. Long-term follow-up of von Recklinghausen
neurofibromatosis:
J Med
1986;314:1010 –1015.

and malignant neoplasms. N Engl

survival

7. Zo¨ller M, Rembeck B, Åkesson HO, Angervall L. Life expectancy, mortality and
prognostic factors in neurofibromatosis type 1: a twelve-year follow-up of an epi-
demiological study in Go¨teborg, Sweden. Acta Derm Venerol 1995;75:136 –140.

8. Rasmussen SA, Yang Q, Friedman JM. Mortality in neurofibromatosis 1: an analysis

using U.S. death certificates. Am J Hum Genet 2001;68:1110 –1118.

9. Brasfield RD, DasGupta TK. Van Recklinghausen’s disease. A clinicopathological

10.

study. Ann Surg 1972;175:86 –104.
Salyer WR, Salyer DC. The vascular lesions of neurofibromatosis. Angiology 1974;
25:510 –519.

11. Riccardi VM. Type 1 neurofibromatosis and the pediatric patient. Curr Probl Pediatr

1992;22:66 –106; discussion 107.

12. Finley JL, Dabbs DJ. Renal vascular smooth muscle proliferation in neurofibroma-

13.

tosis. Hum Pathol 1988;19:107–110.
Schurch W, Messerli FH, Genest J, Lefebvre R, Roy P, Carter P, Rojo-Ortega JM.
Arterial hypertension and neurofibromatosis: renal artery stenosis and coarctation
of abdominal aorta. Can Med Assoc J 1975;113:879 – 885.

14. Lin AE, Birch PH, Korf BR, Tenconi R, Niimura M, Poyhonen M, Armfield Uhas K,
Sigorini M, Virdis R, Romano C, Bonioli E, Wolkenstein P, Pivnick EK, Lawrence M,
Friedman JM. Cardiovascular malformations and other cardiac abnormalities in
neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1). Am J Med Genet 2000;95:108 –117.

15. Zochodne D. Von Recklinghausen’s vasculopathy. Am J Med Sci 1984;287:64 – 65.
Sobata E, Ohkuma H, Suzuki S. Cerebrovascular disorders associated with von
16.
Recklinghausen’s neurofibromatosis: a case report. Neurosurgery 1988;22:544 –549.
17. Brooks BS, Gammal TE, Adams RJ, Hartlage PL, Smith WB. MR imaging of moya-

18.

moya in neurofibromatosis. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1987;8:178 –179.
Schievink WI, Michels VV, Piepgras DG. Neurovascular manifestations of heritable
connective tissue disorders. A review. Stroke 1994;25:889 –903.

19. Reubi F. Les vaisseaux et les glandes endocrines dans la neurofibromatose: Le syn-
drome sympathicotonique dans le maladie de Recklinghausen. Schweiz Z Pathol
Bacteriol 1944;7:168 –236.

20. Feyrter F. ber die vascula¨re Neurofibromatose, nach Utersuchungen am men-
schlichen Magen-Darmschlauch. Virchows Arch Pathol Anat 1949;317:221–265.

21. Orcel L, Chomette G. Anatomie pathologique vasculaire. Paris: Flammarion me´-

decine-sciences, 1978.

22. Huffman JL, Gahtan V, Bowers VD, Mills JL. Neurofibromatosis and arterial aneu-

rysms. Am Surg 1996;62:311–314.

23. Greene JF Jr, Fitzwater JE, Burgess J. Arterial lesions associated with neurofibroma-

tosis. Am J Clin Pathol 1974;62:481– 487.

24. Westenend PJ, Smedts F, de Jong MC, Lommers EJ, Assmann KJ. A 4-year-old boy
with neurofibromatosis and severe renovascular hypertension due to renal arterial
dysplasia. Am J Surg Pathol 1994;18:512–516.

25. Wasser MN, Westenberg J, van der Hulst VP, van Baalen J, van Bockel JH, van Erkel
AR, Pattynama PM. Hemodynamic significance of renal artery stenosis: digital sub-
traction angiography versus systolically gated three-dimensional phase-contrast MR
angiography. Radiology 1997;202:333–338.

26. Pickering TG, Sos TA, Vaughan ED Jr, Laragh JH. Differing patterns of renal vein
renin secretion in patients with renovascular hypertension, and their role in predict-
ing the response to angioplasty. Nephron 1986;44(suppl 1):8 –11.

27. Fukui M. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of spontaneous occlusion of
the circle of Willis (“moyamoya” disease). Clin Neurol Neurosurg 1997;99:S238 –
S240.

28. Tedesco MA, Di Salvo G, Ratti G, Natale F, Calabrese E, Grassia C, Iacono A, Lama
G. Arterial distensibility and ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in young pa-
tients with neurofibromatosis type 1. Am J Hypertens 2001;14:559 –566.

29. Friedman JM. Vascular and endocrine abnormalities. In: Friedman JM, Gutmann
DH, MacCollin M, Riccardi VM, eds. Neurofibromatosis: phenotype, natural his-
tory, and pathogenesis, 3rd ed. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
1999:274 –296.
Sharma JB, Gulati N, Malik S. Maternal and perinatal complications in neurofibro-
matosis during pregnancy. Int J Gynecol Obstet 1991;34:221–227.

30.

Genetics IN Medicine

31. Ferner RE. Medical complications of neurofibromatosis I. In: Huson SM, Hughes
RAC, eds. The neurofibromatoses: a pathogenic and clinical overview. London:
Chapman & Hall, 1994:316 –330.

32. Mulvihill JJ. Malignancy. Epidemiologically associated cancers. In: Huson SM,
Hughes RAC, eds. The neurofibromatoses: a pathogenic and clinical overview. Lon-
don: Chapman & Hall, 1994:305–315.

33. Lie JT, Olney BA, Spittel JA. Perioperative hypertensive crisis and hemorrhagic
diathesis: fatal complication of clinically unsuspected pheochromocytoma. Am
Heart J 1980;100:716 –722.

34. Young WF. Pheochromocytoma and primary aldosteronism: diagnostic ap-

proaches. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1997;26:801– 827.

35. Eisenhofer G, Lenders JWM, Linehan WM, Walther MM, Goldstein DS, Keiser HR.
Plasma normetanephrine and metanephrine for detecting pheochromocytoma in
von Hippel- Lindau disease and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. N Engl J Med
1999;340:1872–1879.

36. Griffiths DFR, Williams GT, Williams ED. Duodenal carcinoid tumours, phae-
ochromocytoma and neurofibromatosis: islet cell tumour, phaeochromocytoma
and the von Hippel-Lindau complex: two distinctive neuroendocrine syndromes.
Q J Med 1987;64:769 –782.

37. Anonymous. The Sixth Report of the Joint National Committee on Detection, Eval-
uation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC VI). Arch Intern Med 1997;57:
2413–2446.

38. Fossali E, Minoja M, Intermite R, Spreafico C, Casalini E, Serini F. Percutaneous
transluminal renal angioplasty in neurofibromatosis. Pediatr Nephrol 1995;9:623–
625.
Shapiro B, Fig LM. Management of pheochromocytoma. Endocrinol Metab Clin
North Am 1989;18:443– 481.

39.

40. Hoffman JI. Congenital heart disease: incidence and inheritance. Pediatr Clin North

Am 1990;37:25– 43.

41. Brannan CI, Perkins AS, Vogel KS, Ratner N, Nordlund ML, Reid SW, Buchberg
AM, Jenkins NA, Parada LF, Copeland NG. Targeted disruption of the neurofibro-
matosis type-1 gene leads to developmental abnormalities in heart and various neu-
ral crest-derived tissues. Genes Dev 1994;8:1019 –1029.
Jacks T, Shih TS, Schmitt EM, Bronson RT, Bernards A, Weinberg RA. Tumour
predisposition in mice heterozygous for a targeted mutation in Nf1. Nat Genet
1994;7:353–361.

42.

43. Viskochil DH. The structure and function of the NF1 gene: molecular pathophysi-
ology. In: Friedman JM, Gutmann DH, MacCollin M, Riccardi VM, eds. Neurofi-

Cardiovascular disease in NF1

bromatosis: phenotype, natural history, and pathogenesis, 3rd ed. Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999:119 –141.

44. Gutmann DH, Gurney JG. Other malignancies. In: Friedman JM, Gutmann DH,
MacCollin M, Riccardi VM, eds. Neurofibromatosis: phenotype, natural history,
and pathogenesis, 3rd ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1999:231–
249.

45. Gutmann DH, Donahoe J, Brown T, James CD, Perry A. Loss of neurofibromatosis
1 (NF1) gene expression in NF1-associated pilocytic astrocytomas. Neuropathol
Appl Neurobiol 2000;26:361–367.

46. Kluwe L, Hagel C, Tatagiba M, Thomas S, Stavrou D, Ostertag H, von Deimling A,
Mautner VF. Loss of NF1 alleles distinguish sporadic from NF1-associated pilocytic
astrocytomas. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2001;60:917–920.

47. Korf BR. Neurofibromas and malignant tumors of the peripheral nerve sheath. In:
Friedman JM, Gutmann DH, MacCollin M, Riccardi VM, eds. Neurofibromatosis:
phenotype, natural history, and pathogenesis, 3rd ed. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1999:142–161.
Ingram DA, Yan F, Travers JB, Wenning MJ, Hiatt K, New S, Hood A, Shannon K,
Williams DA, Clapp DW. Genetic and biochemical evidence that haploinsufficiency
of the Nf1 tumour suppressor gene modulates melanocyte and mast cell fates in vivo.
J Exp Med 2000;191:181–188.

48.

49. Gutmann DH, Loehr A, Zhang Y, Kim J, Henkemeyer M, Cashen A. Haploinsuffi-
ciency for the neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) tumor suppressor results in increased
astrocyte proliferation. Oncogene 1999;18:4450 – 4459.

50. Bollag G, McCormick F, Clark R. Characterization of full-length neurofibromin:

tubulin inhibits Ras GAP activity. EMBO J 1993;12:1923–1927.

51. Gregory PE, Gutmann DH, Mitchell AL, Park S, Boguski M, Jacks T, Wood DL, Jove
R, Collins FS. Neurofibromatosis type 1 gene product (neurofibromin) associates
with microtubules. Somat Cell Mol Genet 1993;19:265–274.

52. Guo H, Tong J, Hannan F, Luo L, Zhong Y. A neurofibromatosis-1-regulated path-

way is required for learning in Drosophila. Nature 2000;403:895– 898.

53. Norton KK, Xu J, Gutmann DH. Expression of the neurofibromatosis 1 gene prod-
uct, neurofibromin, in blood vessel endothelial cells and smooth muscle. Neurobiol
Dis 1995;2:13–21.

54. Ahlgren-Beckendorf JA, Maggio WW, Chen F, Kent TA. Neurofibromatosis 1
mRNA expression in blood vessels. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1993;197:1019 –
1024.

55. Hamilton SJ, Friedman JM. Insights into the pathogenesis of neurofibromatosis 1

vasculopathy. Clin Genet 2000;58:341–344.

May/June 2002 䡠 Vol. 4 䡠 No. 3

111

