Loss of tumor suppressor NF1 activates HSF1 

to promote carcinogenesis

Chengkai Dai,1,2 Sandro Santagata,1,3 Zijian Tang,2 Jiayuan Shi,2 Junxia Cao,2 Hyoungtae Kwon,1 

Roderick T. Bronson,4 Luke Whitesell,1 and Susan Lindquist1,5

1Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 2The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA. 3Department of Pathology, 

Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 4Department of Pathology, Tufts University School of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine,  

Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 5Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biology,  

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Intrinsic stress response pathways are frequently mobilized within tumor cells. The mediators of these adap-
tive mechanisms and how they contribute to carcinogenesis remain poorly understood. A striking example 
is heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), master transcriptional regulator of the heat shock response. Surprisingly, we 
found that loss of the tumor suppressor gene neurofibromatosis type 1 (Nf1) increased HSF1 levels and trig-
gered its activation in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. As a consequence, Nf1–/– cells acquired tolerance to pro-
teotoxic stress. This activation of HSF1 depended on dysregulated MAPK signaling. HSF1, in turn, supported 
MAPK signaling. In mice, Hsf1 deficiency impeded NF1-associated carcinogenesis by attenuating oncogenic 
RAS/MAPK signaling. In cell lines from human malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) driven 
by NF1 loss, HSF1 was overexpressed and activated, which was required for tumor cell viability. In surgical 
resections of human MPNSTs, HSF1 was overexpressed, translocated to the nucleus, and phosphorylated. 
These findings reveal a surprising biological consequence of NF1 deficiency: activation of HSF1 and ensuing 
addiction to this master regulator of the heat shock response. The loss of NF1 function engages an evolu-
tionarily conserved cellular survival mechanism that ultimately impairs survival of the whole organism by 
facilitating carcinogenesis.

Introduction
Evolutionarily conserved from yeasts to humans, the heat shock 
transcription factor heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is activated by a 
broad range of stressors that extend far beyond heat, including 
heavy metals, UV radiation, hypoxia, desiccation, and acidosis (1). 
During activation, HSF1 undergoes phosphorylation and other 
posttranslational modifications, trimerization, and nuclear trans-
location. This results in rapid, high-affinity binding of HSF1 to 
consensus heat shock elements (HSEs) within the promoters of 
target genes (2). Such binding drives the induction or suppression 
of hundreds of genes in mammalian cells (3).

The adaptive response unleashed by HSF1 activation is critical 
for maintaining homeostasis of the cell’s proteome, mediated in 
large part by increased expression of classical heat shock proteins 
such as HSP27, HSP70, and HSP90 (4). However, the effect of HSF1 
activation goes far beyond these chaperones. It helps coordinate a 
range of fundamental cellular processes that are important to the 
fitness of malignant cells, including cell cycle control, ribosome 
biogenesis, protein translation, and glucose metabolism (5, 6). As a 
result, HSF1 both facilitates initial oncogenic transformation and 
maintains the malignant phenotype of established cancer cell lines 
driven by a wide range of mutations. In mice and in cell culture, 
genetic ablation of Hsf1 expression potently impairs tumorigen-
esis and cellular transformation driven by oncogene activation or 
tumor suppressor loss (5). The importance of HSF1 in enabling 
malignancy has been demonstrated by other recent work as well 

Authorship note: Chengkai Dai and Sandro Santagata contributed equally to 
this work.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Citation for this article: J Clin Invest. 2012;122(10):3742–3754. doi:10.1172/JCI62727.

(7–9). Given the importance of HSF1 in diverse survival mecha-
nisms and cancer, we sought here to investigate factors that might 
increase its transcriptional activity during tumorigenesis.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common hereditary can-
cer syndrome associated with dysregulation of RAS activity (10). 
Tumor predisposition results from loss-of-function mutations in 
NF1, which encodes neurofibromin, a 280-kDa protein possessing 
a central domain with Ras GTPase activating protein (GAP) activ-
ity (11). Consistent with neurofibromin functioning as a negative 
regulator of RAS, NF1-deficient cells are hyperresponsive to sev-
eral growth factors that signal via the RAS/MAPK pathway (12). 
Indeed, when overexpressed, the GAP-related domain (NF1-GRD) 
can downregulate RAS-mediated mitogenic signaling (13).

Unexpectedly, we found that the tumor suppressor Nf1 was a 
strong regulator of HSF1 levels and activity. Indeed, genetic com-
promise of Nf1 was alone sufficient to cause immediate activation 
of HSF1 in cell culture. HSF1 levels were also increased in tumor 
samples removed directly from NF1 patients. Having found that 
Nf1 regulated HSF1 function, we investigated the underlying 
mechanisms of this control as well as its functional consequences. 
We demonstrate that HSF1 was embedded in the dysregulated 
MAPK/RAS signaling characteristic of NF1 and participated in 
a feed-forward loop that facilitated tumorigenesis in mice and 
humans. These findings suggest HSF1 as a potentially clinically 
relevant modifier of NF1-associated tumorigenesis.

Results
Nf1 deficiency upregulates HSF1 and activates the heat shock response. 
Given the importance of HSF1 in supporting tumorigenesis, we 
sought to identify genes that might modulate HSF1 function 
and the transcriptional response that it regulates. We screened a 

3742 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012

Research articleFigure 1
Genetic compromise of NF1 induces the heat shock response. (A) Whole cell–based screen of a heat shock–oriented shRNA library. Heat shock 
reporter NIH3T3 cells arrayed in a 384-well format were infected with lentiviral constructs designed to target 175 candidate genes. 5 days later, 
reporter activation was measured by luciferase assay. The mean Z score calculated from 2 biological replicates per construct is plotted as a 
measure of activation relative to the entire population of wells assayed. 2 independent Nf1-targeted shRNAs that strongly activate the heat shock 
reporter are highlighted in bold. (B) Nf1 knockdown increased HSP72 expression in an immortalized MEF cell line. MEFs were stably transduced 
with shRNA39 and shRNA42, which target different regions of the Nf1 mRNA, and a scrambled control shRNA (Scr). NF1 and HSP72 protein levels 
were examined by immunoblotting. (C) Nf1 knockdown transcriptionally activates the heat shock response. Transcript levels of chaperones in Nf1-
knockdown MEFs were measured by 2-step real-time quantitative RT-PCR technique. Transcript levels relative to cells transduced with scrambled 
control shRNA for each gene are expressed as fold changes (mean ± SD, n = 3 or 4). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, Student’s t test.

focused library of lentiviral inhibitory shRNAs targeting 175 genes 
that were selected based on (a) Gene Ontology or Panther annota-
tion under the categories of heat shock, stress response, sensitiv-
ity to stress, protein folding, or protein degradation and (b) iHOP 
interactome data indicating direct interaction with HSF1 (Sup-
plemental Figure 1; supplemental material available online with 
this article; doi:10.1172/JCI62727DS1). NF1 was added to the list 
because a deletion mutation of its yeast homolog reduces thermo-
tolerance in that organism (14).

HSF1 activation was monitored using NIH3T3 cells stably engi-
neered to express an eGFP–firefly luciferase fusion controlled by 
a highly HSF1-dependent promoter (15). Luminescence per well 
was recorded 5 days after lentiviral transduction. As expected,  
shRNAs targeting Hsp27/Hspb2, Hsp47/Serpinh1, α(B)-crystallin/ 
Cryab, and several Hsp40 family members (Dnajb6 and Dnajc17) 
strongly activated the heat shock reporter (Figure 1A). shRNAs 
targeting individual Hsp90 and Hsp70 isoforms resulted in only 
weak reporter induction, most likely because shRNA targeting of 
individual isoforms may be insufficient to impair function of the 
many isoforms comprising the HSP70 and HSP90 class of chap-
erones. Surprisingly, 2 independent Nf1-targeted shRNAs were 
among the strongest activators.

Next, we examined the effect of stable Nf1 knockdown on the 
activation of HSF1 in a mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cell line 
immortalized with the HPV16 E6/E7 oncoproteins (7). Compared 
to a scrambled control shRNA, 2 independent shRNAs (referred to 
herein as shRNA39 and shRNA42) efficiently suppressed neuro-
fibromin protein levels and induced an increase in the level of the 

heat shock protein HSP72, a classic HSF1 target (Figure 1B). The 
shRNA that suppressed neurofibromin expression most efficiently, 
shRNA42, also induced the strongest expression of HSP72. We fur-
ther examined transcript levels of HSF1 target genes by real-time 
quantitative RT-PCR analysis in these Nf1-knockdown cells. Com-
pared with the control, knockdown of Nf1 by both shRNA39 and 
shRNA42 increased transcript levels of a collection of Hsp genes, 
including Hsp70s (Hsp72/Hspa1a and Hspa4l), Hsp40s (Dnajb1 and 
Dnajb2), Hsp90 (Hsp90aa1), and a small Hsp family member (Hspb8) 
(Figure 1C). shRNA42 induced the strongest expression of these 
Hsp genes. These results demonstrate that reducing Nf1 expression 
can activate the heat shock response in premalignant cells.

To measure the effect of Nf1-targeted shRNAs on HSF1 protein 
levels, we immunoblotted lysates from the same stably transduced 
Nf1-knockdown cells (Figure 2, A and B). HSF1 normally shuttles 
between the nucleus and cytoplasm, but differential residence 
time in these compartments results in predominantly cytoplas-
mic localization under basal conditions. Upon activation, how-
ever, HSF1 accumulated in the nucleus, where a portion became 
tightly bound to DNA (Supplemental Figure 2A). Both shRNA39 
and shRNA42 increased HSF1 levels and translocation of HSF1 to 
the nucleus compared with the control shRNA (Figure 2, A and B). 
They also induced phosphorylation of HSF1 at Ser326 (referred 
to herein as p-Ser326; Figure 2, A and B), a modification strongly 
associated with HSF1 activation in vivo by thermal and chemical 
stressors (16). The kinases or signaling pathways responsible for 
this key modification has yet to be defined, but consistent with 
activation of HSF1 by stable Nf1 knockdown, HSP72 protein lev-

 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012 

3743

research articleFigure 2
NF1 loss activates HSF1 via elevated 
MAPK signaling. (A and B) Cytoplasmic 
and  nuclear  fractions  were  prepared 
from  immortalized  MEFs  after  over-
night treatment with DMSO or 10 μM 
U0126. Blotting for cytoplasmic lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH) and nuclear lam-
ins A/C confirmed appropriate fraction-
ation. (C and D) HSF1 was activated in 
primary Nf1-knockout MEFs. (E) MEK 
inhibition impaired HSF1 transcriptional 
activity. EGFP or HSF1 plasmids were 
transfected with pHSE–firefly luciferase 
reporter  plasmid  and  pCMV–renilla 
luciferase plasmid into HEK293T cells. 
After  1  day,  cells  were  treated  with 
DMSO or 20 μM U0126 overnight. Fire-
fly luciferase signals were normalized 
against renilla luciferase signals (mean 
±  SD; n  =  6).  (F)  Dominant-negative 
MEK1  impaired  p-Ser326.  EGFP  or 
MEK1AA plasmid was transfected into 
HEK293T cells; after 3 days, cells were 
harvested for immunoblotting. (G) Dom-
inant-negative MEK1 impaired HSF1 
transcriptional  activity.  In  HEK293T 
cells, EGFP or MEK1AA plasmid was 
transfected with the luciferase reporter 
plasmids.  HSF1  plasmid  was  further 
cotransfected  with  either  EGFP  or 
MEK1AA plasmid. 3 days after transfec-
tion, luciferase signals were measured 
(mean ± SD; n = 4). (H) Proteasomal 
inhibition caused HSF1 protein accu-
mulation.  MEFs  were  treated  with 
DMSO or MG132 overnight. (I) HSF1 
polyubiquitination was suppressed in 
Nf1-knockdown cells and reestablished 
after MEK inhibition. MEFs were treat-
ed with either DMSO or 20 μM U0126 
overnight, and whole cell lysates were 
immunoprecipitated for HSF1. Normal 
rat IgG served as the control. Precipi-
tates were immunoblotted for polyubiq-
uitinated conjugates and HSF1. LC, light 
chain; WLC, whole cell lysates. P values 
were determined by Student’s t test.

3744 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012

research articleFigure 3
HSF1 activation by Nf1 knockout renders cells resistant to proteotoxic stress. Primary MEFs of the indicated genotypes were plated at low den-
sity (2,000 cells/well) and exposed for 5 days to the indicated concentrations of (A) MG132, (B) radicicol, and (C) withaferin A. Resazurin dye 
reduction was assayed as a measure of relative viable cell number. The mean of triplicate determinations repeated in 2 separate experiments is 
presented (mean ± SD). ***P < 0.01, 2-way ANOVA.

els were elevated (Figure 2B). The transcript level for Hsf1 was not 
altered by Nf1 knockdown (Supplemental Figure 2B), suggestive of 
posttranscriptional regulation of HSF1 levels.

To confirm the effects demonstrated by shRNA knockdown 
experiments, we further tested the effect of Nf1 deficiency using 
primary MEFs in which the Nf1 locus was disrupted by gene 
targeting. Primary cultures derived from both Nf1+/– and Nf1–/– 
embryos had increased HSF1 protein levels compared with their 
Nf1+/+ counterparts (Figure 2, C and D). Nf1–/– cells displayed even 
higher levels of HSF1 protein and greater induction of HSP72 
than Nf1+/– cells (Figure 2, C and D). Nf1–/– cells also had an 
increase in both nuclear HSF1 and the activating p-Ser326 modi-
fication than Nf1+/+ cells (Figure 2D).

Dysregulated MAPK signaling mediates HSF1 activation. How might 
Nf1 loss increase p-Ser326, nuclear accumulation of HSF1, and 
total HSF1 levels? A hallmark of the NF1 phenotype is dysregula-
tion of RAS activation with downstream effects on the MAPK/ERK 
signaling cascade. Hence, Nf1 loss could activate HSF1 through 
the MAPK pathway. We tested this possibility using U0126, a 
potent and selective inhibitor of MEK1 and MEK2, the immediate 
upstream activators of ERK1 and ERK2. U0126 reduced activation-
associated p-HSF1 as well as nuclear accumulation of HSF1, lead-
ing to a decline in HSP72 levels in both control and Nf1-knock-
down cells (Figure 2B). Interestingly, U0126 had a greater effect on 
Nf1-knockdown cells than on control cells (Supplemental Figure 
2C). The effects of U0126 on primary Nf1–/– MEFs were similar 
to those seen on knockdown cells (Figure 2D and Supplemental 
Figure 2D). The compound also caused an increase in p-HSF1 
and HSP72 levels in primary Nf1+/+ MEFs (Figure 2D). This likely 
reflects a biological difference between immortalized and primary 
cells. Either blocking this trophic signaling pathway is stressful to 
primary Nf1+/+ cells, or basal MAPK activities actually repress HSF1 
activation in these cells. In any case, the data in Nf1-deficient cells 
indicate that hyperactivated MAPK signaling contributes to HSF1 
Ser326 phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and activation.

Next, we used a heat shock reporter assay to examine the effect 
of dysregulated MAPK signaling on HSF1 transcriptional activ-
ity in HEK293T cells. In the absence of environmental insults, the 
transfected reporter demonstrated a modest level of activation 
that was further enhanced by overexpression of HSF1 (Figure 2E). 
Inhibition of endogenous MEK activity by U0126 significantly 
suppressed both basal and HSF1-driven reporter activity (Figure 

2E). To further validate the role of hyperactive MAPK signaling in 
HSF1 phosphorylation and activation, we transiently transfected 
HEK293T cells with a dominant-negative MEK1 mutant in which  
2 key serine residues — Ser218 and Ser222 — are substituted with 
alanine (referred to herein as MEK1AA; ref. 17). In agreement with 
our U0126 data, expression of MEK1AA impaired p-Ser326 as well as 
HSF1-mediated reporter activation (Figure 2, F and G). Although 
significant, mutant MEK1 reduced reporter activity less than 
U0126. This is likely due to both the limited efficiency of HSF1 and 
MEK1AA cotransfection and the potential for MEK2 compensatory 
effects. Together, these data indicate that MEK hyperactivation is 
important for p-Ser326 and HSF1 Ser326 activation.

Does MAPK signaling also underlie the increase in total HSF1 
protein? Because HSF1 mRNA is not increased in NF1-deficient 
cells, we investigated posttranscriptional mechanisms that might 
contribute to increasing HSF1 protein after NF1 loss. Interest-
ingly, HSF1 levels in scrambled shRNA control cells increased 
more than 2-fold after proteasome inhibition with MG132, but 
there was only subtle change in HSF1 levels in cells with shRNA42-
mediated Nf1 knockdown (Figure 2H and Supplemental Figure 
2E). This finding suggested that HSF1 is a substrate for the protea-
some, but that its degradation is impaired in Nf1-deficient cells.

To further explore the impaired degradation of HSF1 in Nf1-defi-
cient cells, and to establish a link to MAPK signaling, we immuno-
precipitated polyubiquitinated HSF1 from control and Nf1-knock-
down cells (18). While polyubiquitinated HSF1 was readily detected 
in control cells, HSF1 polyubiquitination was markedly diminished 
in cells with shRNA42-mediated Nf1 knockdown (Figure 2I). Strik-
ingly, inhibiting MEK with U0126 reestablished polyubiquitina-
tion of HSF1 (Figure 2I). Thus, MEK hyperactivation also regulated 
HSF1 polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation.

HSF1 activation by Nf1 loss induces stress tolerance. Next we asked 
whether loss of Nf1 alone, and subsequent activation of HSF1, is 
sufficient to provide cells with a survival advantage in the face of 
increased levels of proteotoxic stress. To test this, we generated 
primary MEFs from mice carrying targeted Hsf1 or Nf1 knock-
outs. Because the Nf1–/– genotype is embryonic lethal (19) and 
Hsf1–/– mice have reproductive defects (20), it was necessary to 
screen more than 120 embryos in order to isolate MEFs with 4 
distinct genotypes: Hsf1+/+Nf1+/+, Hsf1+/+Nf1–/–, Hsf1–/–Nf1+/+, and 
Hsf1–/–Nf1–/–. We then measured the changes in cell number in 
the presence of 3 chemically and mechanistically distinct cellular 

 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012 

3745

research articleFigure 4
Genetic compromise of Hsf1 prolongs survival in a mouse model of NF1. (A) Tumor occurrence was suppressed in NPcis mice when Hsf1 was 
disrupted. Tumor-free survival in relationship to Hsf1 genotype is plotted for NPcis+/+ and NPcis+/– mice. Median survival for NPcis mice was 
as follows: Hsf1+/+, 22 weeks (n = 24); Hsf1+/–, 34 weeks (n = 30; P = 0.0002 vs. Hsf1+/+, log-rank test); Hsf1–/–, 29 weeks (n = 19; P = 0.028 vs. 
Hsf1+/+, log-rank test). (B) Representative micrographs of serial sections from MPNSTs arising in NPcis mice were immunostained for HSF1, 
showing increased levels in tumor, but not adjacent normal nerve (NV). The inset shows nuclear HSF1 staining in tumors. H&E staining is shown 
to demonstrate histology and provide orientation. Scale bars: 100 μm; 10 μm (inset). (C) Survival time of NPcis mice that developed MPNSTs 
only was prolonged by Hsf1 compromise. Median survival was as follows: Hsf1+/+, 19 weeks; Hsf1+/–, 23.5 weeks (P = 0.0152 vs. Hsf1+/+, log-rank 
test); Hsf1–/–, 23 weeks (P = 0.0869 vs. Hsf1+/+, log-rank test).

modest tumor predisposition, but they do not develop the classic 
spectrum of lesions characteristic of the human disease, especially 
neurofibroma and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors 
(MPNSTs; ref. 24). The observation that the tumor suppressor 
TP53 is frequently lost in human MPNSTs prompted develop-
ment of mouse models in which alleles of the closely linked Trp53 
and Nf1 genes are disrupted on the same chromosome (25, 26). 
The chromosome bearing deletion of both Nf1 and Trp53 in cis is 
designated NPcis. NPcis+/– heterozygotes develop soft tissue sarco-
mas resembling human MPNSTs with high frequency. Due to the 
close proximity of the Trp53 and Nf1 genes (in humans as well as 
in mice), such tumors often demonstrate loss of heterozygosity for 
the remaining wild-type alleles of both genes.

stressors: the proteasome inhibitor MG132 (Figure 3A), the HSP90 
inhibitor radicicol (Figure 3B), and the thiol-reactive compound 
withaferin A (Figure 3C and refs. 21, 22). Unlike the situation in 
yeast, in which deletion of the Nf1 homolog IRA2 reduces thermo-
tolerance, Hsf1+/+Nf1–/– MEFs were significantly more resistant to 
all 3 proteotoxic stressors than were Hsf1+/+Nf1+/+ MEFs (Figure 3, 
A–C). In fact, Hsf1+/+Nf1–/– MEFs showed an increase in cell number 
at low concentrations of MG132 and withaferin A. In contrast, dis-
rupting Nf1 in Hsf1–/– cells did not confer resistance to the stressors 
(Figure 3, A–C). Thus, the tolerance of Nf1-deficient cells to pro-
teotoxic stress was mediated by Hsf1.

Hsf1 compromise suppresses tumorigenesis in mice. Because tumori-
genesis imposes diverse stresses on the physiology of cells, we won-
dered whether HSF1 activation and the ensuing acquisition 
of tolerance to proteotoxic stress could facilitate NF1-asso-
ciated tumorigenesis in vivo. To investigate this, we used 
NPcis mice. The tumor predisposition syndrome caused by 
NF1 loss in humans has proven difficult to faithfully model 
in mice. Homozygous germline disruption of Nf1 is embry-
onic lethal, predominantly due to defects in cardiovascu-
lar system development (23). Heterozygous mice display 

Figure 5
Hsf1 deficiency attenuates MAPK signaling in NPcis mice. (A) 
Immunoblotting demonstrated equivalent levels of total ERK, but 
less activation-associated p-ERK, in MPNSTs arising in Hsf1–/–  
mice. Densitometric quantitation of immunoblots confirmed 
a statistically significant difference in mean ratio of p-ERK to 
total ERK (Student’s t test). (B) Basal p-ERK was diminished in 
NPcis–/– MEFs derived from Hsf1+/– and Hsf1–/– embryos.

3746 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012

research articleFigure 6
HSF1 is overexpressed and activated in human MPNST cell lines lacking neurofibromin. (A) Immunoblotting of cell lines with complete loss of 
neurofibromin showed elevated p–C-RAF, p-MEK1/2, total HSF1, p-Ser362, and HSP72 levels compared with lines that maintain full-length neu-
rofibromin expression. (B) IF staining confirmed HSF1 overexpression in cells without neurofibromin. Insets show nuclear HSF1 staining. DAPI 
counterstaining is presented to visualize cell nuclei. All images were acquired at identical magnification. Scale bars: 25 μm; 5 μm (insets). (C) 
Immunoblotting of cross-linked cell lysates demonstrated increased activation-associated trimeric (Tri) versus inactive monomeric (Mon) forms of 
HSF1 in MPNST cells without NF1 compared with lysates from NF1-expressing cell lines. The trimeric/monomeric ratio in lysates, as measured 
by densitometry, is indicated. (D and E) MEK inhibition reduced p-Ser326 and HSF1 nuclear translocation in human MPNST cells. S462 cells 
were treated with 20 μM U0126 overnight. Total p-Ser326 and nuclear HSF1 were detected by immunoblotting.

To  examine  the  effect  of  HSF1  in  this  model,  we  crossed 
NPcis+/– mice  with Hsf1+/– mice. NPcis+/–Hsf1+/– offspring  was 
intercrossed to produce NPcis+/+Hsf1+/+, NPcis+/+Hsf1–/–, NPcis+/–
Hsf1+/–,  NPcis+/–Hsf1–/–,  and  NPcis +/–Hsf1+/+  genotypes.  The 
NPcis+/+Hsf1+/+ and NPcis+/+Hsf1–/– genotypes served as controls 
for the effect of Hsf1 knockout on otherwise wild-type mice. 
As expected, these control mice had long-term tumor-free sur-
vival (Figure 4A). Genotypes NPcis+/–Hsf1+/–, NPcis+/–Hsf1–/–, and 
NPcis+/–Hsf1+/+ were tested for the effect of Hsf1 dosage on tumor-
igenesis in the NPcis background. All NPcis mice with wild-type 
Hsf1 developed tumors by about 250 days, with median tumor-
free survival of 154 days (Figure 4A). In contrast, NPcis mice with 
hemizygous or homozygous Hsf1 knockout showed significantly 

prolonged tumor-free survival, with medians of 235 and 206 
days, respectively.

Conversely, the difference in tumor-free survival between Hsf1–/–  
and Hsf1+/– knockouts was not statistically significant, in con-
trast to our previous results in mice carrying a hotspot mutation 
in Trp53. In that case, Hsf1+/– mice also had improved outcome 
compared with Hsf1+/+ mice, but Hsf1–/– mice survived even lon-
ger. While being a prominent longevity factor in nematodes (27, 
28), the influence of HSF1 on mammalian lifespan has been little 
explored. In some strains, Hsf1 compromise has no effect on lifes-
pan (5, 29). However, we found that in the mixed background used 
for our NPcis experiments, Hsf1 knockouts had a shorter lifespan 
than Hsf1+/+ controls. This effect was evident in the depiction of 

 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012 

3747

research articleFigure 7
HSF1 knockdown impairs human MPNST cell growth and attenuates MAPK signaling. (A) Differential efficacy of HSF1-targeting shRNA con-
structs. S462 cells were transduced with GSP or scrambled control or with hA9 or hA6 HSF1-targeting lentiviral supernatants and harvested for 
immunoblotting. (B) HSF1 knockdown impaired net growth and survival of MPNST cells. After plating, cells were transduced with viral superna-
tants as indicated. Relative viable cell number in each well was measured 4 days after viral transduction by resazurin dye reduction assay. Raw 
fluorescence data were normalized to values obtained in wells that underwent mock transduction (mean ± SD, n = 5). #P < 0.001, 2-way ANOVA. 
(C) Decreased levels of KSR1, p-ERK, HSP90α, and HSP72 after HSF1 knockdown. S462 cells were stably transduced with the indicated viral 
supernatants and harvested for immunoblotting. (D) Decreased levels of KSR1 and p-ERK after HSP90 inhibition. S462 cells were treated over-
night with 1 μM geldanamycin (GA) and harvested for immunoblotting. (E) KSR1 knockdown induced apoptosis in MPNST cells. S462 cells were 
transfected with a nontargeting siRNA (NC) or 3 independent KSR1-targeting siRNAs at 25 nM final concentration. 2 days after transfection, cells 
were harvested for immunoblotting. (F) KSR1 knockdown impaired net growth and survival of MPNSTs. S462 cells plated in a 96-well format 
were transiently transfected without or with 25 nM siRNAs. Relative viable cell number in each well was measured as described in B 3 days after 
transfection (mean ± SD, n = 5). ***P < 0.001, 1-way ANOVA.

overall survival shown in Supplemental Figure 3A, which includes 
deaths from all causes, not solely tumor-related deaths, as used for 
analysis of tumor-free survival (Figure 4A). Thus, the additional 
survival advantage that might have been conferred on tumor-asso-
ciated mortality by loss of the second Hsf1 allele was likely masked 
by general effects of Hsf1 on lifespan in the NPcis strain.

To characterize the tumors arising in NPcis mice, we first examined 
their HSF1 status. In the same sections, MPNST cells had much 
stronger HSF1 immunoreactivity than did adjacent normal tissues, 
such as nerve (Figure 4B). The absence of reactivity in tumors aris-
ing in Hsf1–/– mice confirmed the specificity of the HSF1 staining.

NF1 patients can develop a broad range of tumor types, most 
of which also occur in NPcis mice (Supplemental Figure 4). To 
capture all tumor types arising in this model, we performed a full 
necropsy on each euthanized animal, and all major tissues were 
harvested for histological examination. In addition to prolong-
ing tumor-free survival, Hsf1 deficiency altered the distribution of 
tumor types arising in this model. Compared with Hsf1+/+ mice, 
the incidence of lymphoma, neuroblastoma, angiosarcoma, osteo-
sarcoma, pheochromocytoma, and histocytic sarcoma were all 
reduced in Hsf1–/– mice (Supplemental Figure 3B). Surprisingly, 
the overall incidence of MPNSTs and gliomas was not significantly 
different. Excluding gliomas and MPNSTs, however, tumor inci-
dence was significantly lower in Hsf1–/– (5.9%) and Hsf1+/– (26.9%) 

mice compared with Hsf1+/+ mice (60.9%). The MPNSTs arising in 
Hsf1+/+, Hsf1+/–, and Hsf1–/– tumors appeared histologically similar.
Although MPNST incidence did not differ, Hsf1 deficiency did 
prolong survival time in mice that only developed MPNSTs (Fig-
ure 4C). This effect was statistically significant in Hsf1 hemizygous 
mice (P = 0.0152), and there was a trend toward significance in 
Hsf1–/– mice (P = 0.0869). Given the late-occurring, slowly progress-
ing behavior of glioma in this NPcis model, the apparent increase 
in glioma incidence in Hsf1-deficient mice is likely due simply to 
their prolonged survival. Indeed, there was a strong positive cor-
relation between glioma incidence and median survival across Hsf1 
genotypes (Supplemental Figure 3C).

To circumvent placental defects associated with the Hsf1-null 
state in highly inbred genetic backgrounds (20), Hsf1 mice were 
maintained on a mixed genetic background (129/SvJ and Balb/cJ). 
Previously, 2 genetic loci mapping to chromosomes 15 and 19, as 
well as sex-specific effects, have been reported to modify tumorigen-
esis in the NPcis model (30, 31). To address potential confounding 
effects of these modifiers, we examined the correlation of mapped 
genetic loci or sex with animal survival (Supplemental Tables 1 
and 2). Neither the states of these loci nor sex demonstrated  
a significant effect on survival (Supplemental Figure 5). Taken 
together, our data established Hsf1 as a modifier of NF1-associated 
tumorigenesis in this mouse model.

3748 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012

research articleFigure 8
A feed-forward loop of MEK/HSF1. (A and B) Prolonged MEK 
inhibition decreased HSF1, HSP90α, and KSR1 protein levels in 
MPNST cells. S462 cells were treated with 20 μM U0126 for 4 days 
or 20 μM CI-1040 for 3 days. Whole cell lysates were subjected to 
immuno blotting. (C) MEK inhibition enhanced HSF1 polyubiquitina-
tion. S462 cells were treated with 20 μM U0126 or CI-1040 over-
night. HSF1 polyubiquitination was detected as described in Figure 
2I. (D) MEK inhibition impaired net growth and survival of MPNST 
cells. MPNST cells were plated in a 96-well format (2,000 cells/
well) and treated with DMSO or 20 μM CI-1040 for 4 days. Rela-
tive viable cell number in each well was measured (mean ± SD,  
n = 3). (E) HSF1 overexpression increased HSP90α and KSR1 
protein levels and enhanced p-ERK. S462 cells were transduced 
with lentiviral LacZ or HSF1 particles. After stable selection with 
blasticidin, cells were harvested for immuno blotting. (F) Proposed 
feed-forward loop of MEK/HSF1.

ease. Does a pathobiology comparable to that seen in the 
NPcis mouse model operate in humans? To address this ques-
tion, we first examined HSF1 activation status in a panel of 
5 human cell lines derived from patients clinically diagnosed 
with NF1. These lines express Schwann cell markers, such 
as S100β and p75 neurotrophin receptor, consistent with 
Schwann cell origin (32). 3 cell lines (sNF96.2, 90-8TL, and 
S462) were devoid of neurofibromin, consistent with their 
reported NF1 mutation status (33–35). Despite their clinical 
derivation, however, lines sNF02.2 and sNF94.3 expressed 
full-length neurofibromin protein (Figure 6A and refs. 33, 
36, 37). Although the specific NF1 mutation(s) in these 2 cell 
lines remain unknown, despite sequencing of multiple exons, 
their elevated RAS-GTP levels suggest some impairment of 
neurofibromin function (38). However, these 2 lines exhibited  
significantly lower levels of activating phosphorylation of 
key RAS downstream effectors, C-RAF and MEK1/2 (17, 39, 
40), compared with the 3 cell lines devoid of neurofibromin 
(Figure 6A). This result supports only partial loss of neurofi-
bromin function in these 2 lines.

HSF1 supports MAPK/ERK signaling in Nf1-deficient cells. In light 
of the importance of dysregulated MAPK signaling we observed 
in cell culture, we next investigated the effect of Hsf1 loss on the 
MAPK/ERK pathway in tumors arising spontaneously in NPcis 
mice. All MPNSTs demonstrated comparable levels of total ERK 
protein, but those arising in Hsf1–/– mice had significantly lower 
levels of ERK phosphorylation (p-ERK) compared with MPNSTs 
in Hsf1+/+ mice (Figure 5A). This finding is consistent with our pre-
vious observations, in other contexts, that HSF1 supports trans-
formation and tumorigenesis by oncogenic RAS (7).

Strikingly, HSF1 supported MAPK signaling not only in Nf1-defi-
cient tumors, but also in primary MEFs. In the homozygous NPcis 
mutant background, Hsf1+/– or Hsf1–/– primary MEFs showed p-ERK 
that was much reduced compared with their Hsf1+/+ counterparts 
(Figure 5B). Reduced MAPK signaling in both tumors and primary 
cells that were Hsf1 deficient demonstrated a critical role for HSF1 
in supporting activity of the RAS/MAPK pathway. Taken together 
with data from Figure 2, these findings indicate that loss of Nf1 acti-
vates HSF1, at least in part, via activation of the MAPK/ERK path-
way, and that HSF1 in turn is necessary to support MAPK signaling.
HSF1 is activated in NF1-deficient human tumors. Results in mouse 
models do not always reflect the pathophysiology of human dis-

In analyzing our panel of human MPNST cells, our distinct 
findings demonstrated that HSF1 is activated to a greater degree 
in those cell lines lacking neurofibromin than in those expressing 
it. First, levels of HSF1 and the highly HSF1-regulated heat shock 
protein HSP72 were increased (Figure 6A). Second, as shown by 
immunofluorescent (IF) staining, HSF1 was increased and local-
ized to the nucleus (Figure 6B). Third, p-Ser326 was robust (Fig-
ure 6A). Fourth, HSF1 was trimerized, the characteristic state of 
the activated protein (Figure 6C). This activation was constitutive, 
occurring in the absence of environmental stressors.

Furthermore, consistent with the results in Nf1-deficient MEFs 
(Figure 2, B and D), U0126 reduced p-Ser326 and nuclear trans-
location of HSF1 in MPNST cells (Figure 6, D and E). Thus, in 
human NF1 tumor cells, aberrant MAPK signaling also critically 
regulated HSF1 activity.

Human MPNST cells are addicted to HSF1 and to MEK signaling. Do 
these cell lines require HSF1 to maintain their malignant pheno-
type? To test this, we knocked down HSF1 expression with len-
tiviral shRNAs. First, we tested the efficacy of different shRNAs 
on HSF1 knockdown. As previously reported in other cell types 
(5), the hA6 shRNA was more effective than the hA9 shRNA in 
MPNST cells (Figure 7A). Suppression of HSF1 by both hA6 and 

 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012 

3749

research articleFigure 9
HSF1 is overexpressed and activated in NF1 
patient tumor resections. (A) Photomicrographs 
of dual IF staining for HSF1 (green signal) and 
neurofilament protein (red signal). DAPI coun-
terstaining was used to visualize cell nuclei 
(blue signal). Scale bars: 25 μm. (B) Photomi-
crographs of IHC staining for HSF1 and p-HSF1 
in a surgical specimen that shows an MPNST 
arising from adjacent neurofibroma. Brown sig-
nal depicts immunoreactivity. Pale blue coun-
terstaining was provided by Mayer hematoxy-
lin. Scale bars: 250 μm (center); 25 μm (higher 
magnification); 10 μm (insets).

trol shRNAs, transduction with either hA6 
or hA9 virus caused a marked decline in 
p-ERK, with hA6 again having the greatest 
effect (Figure 7C). RAS requires the scaf-
fold protein KSR1 for efficient signaling of 
the MAPK/ERK pathway, and KSR1 dele-
tion inhibits RAS-driven oncogenesis (41, 
42).  HSF1  knockdown  sharply  reduced 
KSR1 levels in a dose-dependent manner. 
Because KSR1 function depends on molecu-
lar chaperones (43), the decrease in HSP72 
and HSP90 levels after HSF1 knockdown 
(Figure 7C) could contribute to KSR1 loss. 
Consistent with this hypothesis, inhibition 
of HSP90 by geldanamycin reduced KSR1 
protein levels and p-ERK in both S462 and 
90-8TL cells (Figure 7D and Supplemen-
tal Figure 6A). As expected, levels of AKT, 
a known HSP90 client protein, were also 
reduced by geldanamycin.

To examine the role of KSR1 in maintain-
ing  the  malignant  phenotype  of  human 
MPNST cells, we transiently transfected a 
nontargeting and 3 independent KSR1-tar-
geting siRNAs into S462 cells. In these cells, 
knockdown of KSR1 induced apoptosis, as 
indicated by elevated levels of cleaved PARP 
and caspase 7 (Figure 7E), and reduced cell 
number (Figure 7F). Overall, the data sup-
port a model in which HSF1 enables the malignant phenotype of 
neurofibromin-deficient cells at least in part by stabilizing KSR1 
and supporting dysregulated MAPK signaling.

MEK provides an attractive therapeutic target for human cancers. 
To examine the effects of MEK inhibition on human MPNST cells, 
S462 cells were treated with either U0126 or CI-1040, the first MEK 
inhibitor to enter clinical trials (44). Prolonged MEK inhibition over 
the course of several days markedly reduced the protein levels of 
HSF1, HSP90α, and KSR1 (Figure 8, A and B). Consistent with our 
observation that inhibiting MEK reconstituted polyubiquitination 
of HSF1 (Figure 2I), enhanced HSF1 polyubiquitination was seen in 
S462 cells after overnight exposure to U0126 or CI-1040 (Figure 8C).
We also examined whether MEK inhibition reduced the cell num-
ber of human MPNST cells. 2 neurofibromin-expressing MPNST 
cell lines and a normal diploid fibroblast control cell line were rela-
tively resistant to MEK inhibition with CI-1040. However, 2 of the 

hA9 markedly decreased cell number in lines lacking neurofibro-
min (Figure 7B). Moreover, transduction with hA6 caused a greater  
reduction than hA9, consistent with a dose-dependent effect of 
HSF1 on viability. As an additional control, we transduced one 
of the lines with low HSF1 levels that maintained neurofibromin 
expression with the same panel of lentiviral supernatants. The cell 
number was much less reduced, which not only ruled out nonspe-
cific cytotoxicity as the basis for the activity of HSF1-targeted len-
tiviral preparations, but also supported the idea that NF1 function 
is only partially compromised in sNF02.2 cells.

To provide mechanistic insight into the interplay of HSF1 and 
MAPK signaling in human MPNST cells, we examined the effect 
of HSF1 knockdown on phosphorylation of ERK, the down-
stream target of RAS/MAPK signaling. This endpoint had been 
strongly HSF1-dependent in both mouse tumors and NPcis MEFs 
(Figure 5). Compared with cells transduced with scrambled con-

3750 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012

research article3 neurofibromin-deficient cell lines displayed enhanced sensitivity 
to CI-1040 treatment (Figure 8D). Why the third line, 90-8TL, was 
relatively insensitive is unknown, but warrants further investiga-
tion. Previous reports suggest that a number of factors could be 
involved, including mutations in BRAF and PI3KCA (45, 46).

Next, we asked whether enhanced HSF1 function is sufficient 
to augment MAPK signaling. We generated isogenic S462 cells 
stably overexpressing HSF1 by viral transduction. Compared with 
cells stably transduced with LacZ, cells with HSF1 overexpression 
showed higher levels of KSR1 and p-ERK (Figure 8E). This result 
was also reproduced in HEK293 cells and immortalized MEFs 
(Supplemental Figure 6, B and C). As expected, levels of HSP90α 
and HSP72 were increased in these HSF1-overexpressing cells. 
These data, together with the role we have demonstrated for HSF1 
in supporting MAPK signaling, establish HSF1 as an important 
modulator of the RAS/MAPK signaling axis. Such a feed-forward 
loop could enable a powerful shift in the survival landscape that 
facilitates tumorigenesis (Figure 8F).

HSF1 is overexpressed and activated in MPNSTs resected from patients. 
To move from laboratory models to clinical material, we used both 
IF and immunohistochemistry (IHC) to examine HSF1 levels and 
localization in a panel of 10 human MPNST surgical resections. 
High levels of HSF1 were found in the nuclei of tumor cells in all 
specimens examined. HSF1 levels were markedly higher in MPNST 
cells than in surrounding normal tissues, including nerve and peri-
neurium (Supplemental Figure 7A). Benign neurofibroma demon-
strated an intermediate level (Supplemental Figure 7B). Co-IF also 
clearly demonstrated high HSF1 levels in MPNST cells, but very 
low levels in the infiltrated nerve (Figure 9A). Consistent with our 
findings in mice (Figure 5) and cultured human tumor cells (Fig-
ure 6), we detected activation-associated p-ERK at much higher 
levels in HSF1-overexpressing MPNST cells than in nerve (Supple-
mental Figure 8). Intermediate levels of p-ERK were observed in 
benign neurofibroma (Supplemental Figure 8).

In one specimen, we captured an MPNST developing from a neu-
rofibroma; it is uncommon to observe a truly high-grade MPNST 
adjacent to its low-grade counterpart in an individual microscopic 
specimen. This opportune sample allowed us to visualize levels of 
HSF1 and assess its phosphorylation status during tumor pro-
gression. Captured side by side, HSF1 staining was indeed pres-
ent in the nuclei of many cells in the neurofibroma, but there was 
more intense staining for HSF1 protein in the nuclei of MPNST 
cells (Figure 9B and Supplemental Figure 7, A and B). Whereas 
p-Ser326  levels  were  heterogeneous  in  benign  neurofibroma 
cells, levels were markedly higher and uniformly expressed in the 
MPNST cells, consistent with increasing activation of HSF1 dur-
ing tumor progression (Figure 9B).

Discussion
HSF1, the master regulator of the heat shock response in eukary-
otes, is a powerful modifier of carcinogenesis (5, 7–9). How HSF1 is 
activated in tumors, however, has been largely unknown. Although 
heat shock proteins were known to be elevated in cancer, this was 
commonly ascribed to a classic heat shock response in reaction to 
the environmental and proteomic stresses that are inherent to the 
malignant state. Here, we report that HSF1 is activated by a simple 
genetic alteration that underlies loss of the Nf1 tumor suppressor, 
but precedes malignancy. Upon loss of Nf1 function, dysregulated 
MAPK signaling engages HSF1. In turn, HSF1 supports and fur-
ther augments activation of the MAPK pathway to drive tumori-

genesis. This feed-forward loop arises from intrinsic genetic altera-
tion, not from environmental stress. Activation of HSF1 in this 
fashion allows cells to withstand a range of proteotoxic insults, 
even during very early stages of tumorigenesis, thereby enabling 
the process. The same pathobiology is at work in NF1-associated 
malignancies in human patients: activation of HSF1 arises in neu-
rofibroma, and more robust and uniform HSF1 activation then 
occurs during progression to MPNST.

Tumor suppressor loss as a mode of HSF1 activation. During tumorigen-
esis, microenvironmental challenges, such as nutrient deprivation 
and hypoxia (47), and cell-autonomous challenges, such as genomic 
instability, altered metabolism, reactive oxygen species, and the bur-
den of mutated and misfolded oncoproteins, must all be success-
fully managed by malignant cells to permit their survival (48, 49). 
These stresses, inherent to malignant transformation, progression, 
and metastasis, are made tolerable by a range of innate adaptive 
responses. The HSF1-mediated response is one of several critical 
systems that make adaptation not only possible, but efficient. Other 
responses mediated by regulators, such as HIF1, NF-κB, and stress-
activated protein kinases (p38 MAPK and JNK), participate as well 
to enable cancer cells to adapt and prosper (50–52).

Understanding  how  stress  response  regulators  are  engaged 
during malignant transformation is of both basic interest and 
potential therapeutic value. In the case of HSF1, the drivers of 
activation, the point in tumorigenesis at which this occurs, and 
the functional consequences have remained poorly defined. The 
stimulus most widely assigned to drive HSF1 activation in cancer 
is increased substrate burden on the heat shock protein/chaperone 
machinery. Dysregulation of the protein translation machinery 
(53), imbalanced protein production due to aneuploidy (54, 55), 
and accumulation of mutated, highly chaperone-dependent onco-
proteins all strain the chaperone machinery (56–58). Support for 
this model of HSF1 activation comes from observations that the 
HSP90-based chaperone machinery may be pressed to operate at 
its maximal capacity in cancer cells (59), thereby releasing HSF1 
from a repressive complex with HSP90 (60).

Alongside  this  model  of  HSF1  activation,  we  now  describe 
another driver for HSF1 activation: loss of the tumor suppressor 
Nf1. Not only did HSF1 accumulate in the nucleus of neurofibro-
min-deficient cells, but total levels of HSF1 protein and activating 
phosphorylation of HSF1 all increased. This indicates a role for 
the HSF1-adaptive response even in the earliest phases of tumori-
genesis, when dysplasia and premalignant alterations begin to 
arise. By coordinating the diverse biological processes required for 
tumorigenesis, HSF1 can play a critical role in providing a per-
missive cellular environment that cultivates the very inception of 
a neoplasm. Interestingly, in a recent study in breast cancer, we 
observed that HSF1 is frequently activated in developing neo-
plasms prior to invasion while the tumor cells still remain in situ 
(61). Our present findings in Nf1–/– cells suggest that HSF1 can be 
at work even earlier in tumorigenesis, before atypical changes in 
cell morphology become visually evident.

Although NF1 was cloned almost 2 decades ago (62), our under-
standing of exactly how neurofibromin affects growth, metabolism, 
and survival to act as a key tumor suppressor remains incomplete. 
The findings reported here further expand our understanding of 
this tumor suppressor, revealing a function for NF1 in modulating 
the cellular response to proteotoxic stress that we believe to be previ-
ously unrecognized. The tumor suppressor NF1 prevents activation 
of the heat shock response under basal conditions by restraining 

 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012 

3751

research articleimproper activation of MAPK signaling. Upon NF1 loss, however, 
dysregulated MAPK signaling induces p-HSF1, nuclear transloca-
tion, and an increase in the level of HSF1 protein through impaired 
proteasomal degradation.

Dysregulated MAPK signaling is important for HSF1 activa-
tion during tumor development, which supports a relationship 
between tumorigenesis and HSF1 activation that is deeply rooted 
in the molecular biology and signaling aberrations of NF1-associ-
ated tumorigenesis, not solely in environmental and proteotoxic 
triggers. The importance of MAPK signaling in HSF1 recruit-
ment suggests that other mitogenic pathways dysregulated by 
dominantly acting oncogenes may also affect HSF1 activity (56). 
The question therefore arises as to whether loss of other classical 
tumor suppressors, such as p53, RB, or PTEN, are alone sufficient 
to activate HSF1. It seems likely that many factors in combination 
evoke the robust activation of HSF1 observed in very high-grade 
tumors, compared with the more modest activation seen in the 
lower-grade counterparts from which they often develop.

HSF1 shapes the tumor landscape. The functional consequences of 
HSF1 activation are only beginning to emerge. Here, we found that 
Nf1 loss led to an HSF1-dependent capacity to tolerate a broad 
range of proteotoxic perturbations. The chemical stressors we 
used likely phenocopy some of the internal proteomic imbalances 
as well as the environmental pressures that tumors must accom-
modate during their initiation and progression. By fostering an 
ability to thrive in unfavorable conditions, HSF1 ultimately can 
promote enhanced malignant behavior (63). Indeed, in a separate 
study of more than 1,800 women with invasive breast cancer from 
the Nurses’ Health Study, we recently found that HSF1 activation 
is associated with tumor size, histologic grade, and likelihood of 
metastasis (61). This work demonstrates that HSF1 is an indepen-
dent predictor of poor outcome in breast cancer (61). These strong 
epidemiological associations implicating HSF1 in malignancy 
were supported here by knockdown experiments that demonstrat-
ed a direct and critical role for HSF1 in promoting the viability of 
MPNST cell lines derived from advanced cancers.

In addition to facilitating survival under stress, HSF1 also sup-
ported tumor growth through its integral role in a feed-forward 
loop supporting the proproliferative MAPK pathway. Not only 
was HSF1 activated by MAPK signaling, but its activation, in turn, 
robustly supported increased flux through this signaling axis, 
both in MEFs and in MPNST cells. By supporting this particu-
lar signaling pathway, which is central to the pathophysiology of 
NF1, HSF1 alters the NF1 phenotype, as suggested by our observa-
tion of a shift in tumor spectrum and latency. How it might affect 
other features of clinical NF1, such as neurodevelopmental abnor-
malities, would be fascinating to investigate. Finally, important as 
MAPK signaling may be, the effect of HSF1 on NF1-associated 
malignancies undoubtedly extends beyond effects on this one sig-
naling pathway and is likely rooted in the compendium of diverse 
cellular processes that HSF1 uniquely regulates in tumors.

HSF1 as a therapeutic target in NF1? The critical dependence of 
established MPNST cell lines on HSF1, the expression of HSF1 
at high levels in surgical resection specimens, and the activation-
associated phosphorylation of HSF1 firmly establish its impor-
tance in enabling NF1-associated tumorigenesis in humans. Tar-
geting HSF1 could represent a new way of approaching anticancer 
therapy. Nongenotoxic strategies would be particularly important 
in NF1, because patients are at a markedly increased risk of devel-
oping treatment-related myeloid leukemias after exposure to con-

ventional alkylating agents (64). Moreover, our previous finding 
that HSF1 expression and activation are associated with malig-
nant potential and outcome in breast cancer (61) suggests that 
HSF1 status should be evaluated as a potential prognostic marker 
for human NF1 malignancies, particularly MPNSTs.

Is HSF1 a plausible therapeutic target? Genetic knockout of 
Hsf1 was sufficient to completely abrogate induction of the heat 
shock response after temperature shift. Normal basal expression 
of the major heat shock protein classes was preserved, however, 
which indicates HSF1 is dispensable for growth and survival of 
mammalian cells under physiological conditions. Indeed, knock-
out mice deficient for Hsf1 develop essentially normally and pros-
per under nonstress conditions (20, 65). This feature, and our 
finding that even haploinsufficiency of Hsf1 impaired tumorigen-
esis, suggests that a useful therapeutic index for selective inhibi-
tors of HSF1 likely exists.

Unfortunately, no small, drug-like inhibitors of the heat shock 
response have yet been identified that target HSF1 in a convinc-
ingly specific manner. Most, if not all, appear to act on the cascade 
of posttranslational modifications mediated by kinases, phospha-
tases, acetylases, and conjugating enzymes involved in regulating 
HSF1 activation (66, 67). Discovery efforts are in their infancy, 
however, with great potential for further progress (66–69).

Many important questions remain, but the findings reported 
here provide a deeper basic understanding of how cellular physiol-
ogy accommodates constitutive loss of NF1 function. The adap-
tive HSF1 program set in motion enhanced cell survival, but came 
at the cost of enabling tumor formation in this common cancer 
predisposition syndrome. A similar phenomenon likely occurs in 
sporadic human cancers driven by other tumor suppressor abnor-
malities or even mutant oncogenes.

Methods
Cells, tissues, and reagents. See Supplemental Methods.

Real-time quantitative RT-PCR. Total RNAs were extracted using a USB 
Prep Ease RNA Spin Kit (Affymetrix). 100 ng RNAs were used for reverse 
transcription using a Maxima First Strand cDNA Synthesis kit (Fermen-
tas). Equal amounts of cDNA were used for quantitative PCR reaction using 
Maxima SYBR Green/ROX qPCR Master Mix (Fermentas). Signals were 
detected by an ABI 7500 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). See 
Supplemental Methods for sequences of individual primers for each gene.
Transfection and luciferase reporter assay. Plasmids were transfected into 
HEK293T cells with Arrest-In transfection reagent (Open Biosystems). The 
following plasmids were used in transfection experiments: pBabe-EGFP 
(generated from pEGFP-N3 plasmid), pBabe–MEK1AA (generated by site-
directed mutagenesis), pHSE–firefly luciferase (Clontech), pCMV–renilla 
luciferase (Promega), and pBabe-HSF1 (catalog no. 1948; Addgene). Lucif-
erase activities were quantitated using a Promega Dual-Glo Luciferase 
Assay System using a VICTOR3 Multilabel plate reader (PerkinElmer).

Tumorigenesis studies in NPcis mice. NPcis mice (129/Sv) were provided by  
K. Cichowski (Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA). C57BL/6 mice heterozygous for disruption of Nf1 were provided by 
K. Reilly (National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland, USA). Mice were 
crossed to Hsf1-modified mice (mixed 129/SvJ and Balb/cJ), a gift from  
I. Benjamin (University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA; ref. 29). Moribund 
mice or mice with severely compromised body condition were euthanized, a 
full necropsy was performed, and all major tissues were harvested and fixed 
in 10% formalin (soft tissues) or Bouin’s fixative (bone). Incidental tumors 
were documented in the spectrum of tumors depicted in Supplemental 
Figure 3B, but were not included in the assessment of tumor-free survival 

3752 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012

research article(Figure 4A). Tumors were identified and diagnosed in consultation with  
R. Bronson (Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA).

tions were 1:250 for anti-HSF1 and 1:300 for anti-NFP. DAPI (0.5 μg/ml) was 
applied to visualize cell nuclei.

Proliferation and survival assays. Relative cell growth and survival was mea-
sured in 96-well microplate format, using the fluorescent detection of resa-
zurin dye reduction as an endpoint. Proliferation of primary MEFs was 
measured after a 5-day exposure to the indicated compounds.

Statistics. All statistical analyses were performed using Prism 5.0 (Graph-
Pad software). Significance of differences was determined using 2-tailed 
Student’s t test, unless otherwise indicated as ANOVA or log-rank test. A 
P value of 0.05 or less was considered statistically significant.

Immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation. Whole-cell protein extracts were 
prepared in cold lysis buffer (100 mM NaCl; 30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6; 1% 
NP-40; 30 mM sodium fluoride; 1 mM EDTA; 1 mM sodium orthovana-
date; protease inhibitor cocktail tablet from Roche Diagnostics). Proteins 
were separated on SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose mem-
branes. Primary antibodies were applied in wash buffer for 1 hour at room 
temperature or overnight at 4°C. Peroxidase-conjugated secondary anti-
bodies were applied at room temperature for 1 hour, and signal was visual-
ized by chemiluminescent substrate (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) followed 
by exposure to film.

For immunoprecipitation, 500 μg whole-cell lysates were incubated with 
either 4 μg rat monoclonal HSF1 antibodies (catalog no. RT-629-PABX; 
Thermo-Fisher Scientific) or normal rat IgG overnight at 4°C. Next, 50 μl  
protein G magnetic beads (GenScript) were added for 1 hour at room tem-
perature. After 3 washes with PBS, beads were boiled in 50 μl sample load-
ing buffer for 5 minutes before loading on SDS-PAGE.

Immunostaining of cells and tissues. Archival clinical specimens and mouse tis-
sues were processed as formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks. Seri-
al 4-μm sections were cut for H&E staining and immuno staining. Detection 
of NFP (diluted 1:900; clone 2F11; Monosan), p-ERK (diluted 1:500; catalog 
no. 4370; Cell Signaling Technology), and p-HSF1 (diluted 1:1,200; catalog 
no. 2092-1; Epitomics) was achieved by IHC. Deparaffinized sections were 
blocked with 3% H2O2, and antigen retrieval was achieved using a pressure 
cooker with Dako citrate buffer (pH 6.0) at 120°C ± 2°C, 15 ± 5 PSI. Primary 
antibodies were incubated on sections at room temperature for 40 minutes 
followed by 30 minutes of incubation with Dako-labeled Polymer-HRP IgG 
as a secondary antibody. Immuno reactivity was visualized with 3,3′-diamino-
benzidine (Dako Envision+ System). For HSF1 immunostaining, rat mono-
clonal antibodies (diluted 1:1,000) were used with the ABC method. Slides 
were blocked with 3% normal rabbit serum. Biotinylated rabbit anti-rat (cata-
log no. BA-4000; Vector Labs) was applied as secondary antibody, and detec-
tion was achieved by 30 minutes of incubation with Vectastain Elite ABC 
reagent (catalog no. PK-6100; Vector Labs). Mayer hematoxylin was used for 
counterstaining. For IF staining, reactivity was visualized with secondary 
anti-IgG antibodies labeled with either Cy3 or Cy5. Primary antibody dilu-

Study approval. Paraffin blocks of human surgical resection specimens 
were obtained from an archive maintained by the Department of Pathol-
ogy, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, under an excess tissue protocol 
approved by the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Partners Healthcare 
Human Research Committee. Ethics committee review specifically waived 
the need for informed consent. All mouse experiments were performed 
under a protocol approved by the MIT Animal Care and Use Committee.

Acknowledgments
We thank S. Silver and D. Root (Broad Institute RNAi platform) 
for assisting in the design and execution of the shRNA screening 
experiments. We thank A.W. Cheng and E. Yeger-Lotem for assis-
tance in selecting heat shock–related genes for shRNA targeting. 
M. Topolski and M. Koeva provided expert technical assistance, 
and members of the Lindquist laboratory provided many help-
ful comments. S. Lindquist is a senior investigator of the How-
ard Hughes Medical Institute. S. Santagata is supported by NIH 
grant K08NS064168 and grants from the Valvano Foundation, the 
American Brain Tumor Association, and the Brain Science Foun-
dation. This work was supported in part by the USAMRMC Neu-
rofibromatosis Research Program (to S. Lindquist), the Johnson 
& Johnson COSAT program (to L. Whitesell), the Marble Fund (to 
S. Santagata and S. Lindquist), the Children’s Tumor Foundation, 
and NIH grant 1DP2OD007070 (to C. Dai).

Received for publication January 5, 2012, and accepted in revised 
form July 12, 2012.

Address correspondence to: Chengkai Dai, The Jackson Labora-
tory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609, USA. Phone: 
207.288.6927;  Fax:  207.288.6078;  E-mail:  Chengkai.Dai@jax.
org. Or to: Susan Lindquist, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical 
Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, 
USA. Phone: 617.258.5184; Fax: 617.258.5737; E-mail: Lindquist_
admin@wi.mit.edu.

  1. Ahn SG, Thiele DJ. Redox regulation of mamma-
lian heat shock factor 1 is essential for Hsp gene 
activation and protection from stress. Genes Dev. 
2003;17(4):516–528.

  2. Voellmy R. On mechanisms that control heat shock 
transcription factor activity in metazoan cells. Cell 
Stress Chaperones. 2004;9(2):122–133.

  3. Trinklein ND, Murray JI, Hartman SJ, Botstein D, 
Myers RM. The role of heat shock transcription fac-
tor 1 in the genome-wide regulation of the mam-
malian heat shock response. Mol Biol Cell. 2004; 
15(3):1254–1261.

  4. Balch WE, Morimoto RI, Dillin A, Kelly JW. Adapt-
ing proteostasis for disease intervention. Science. 
2008;319(5865):916–919.

  5. Dai C, Whitesell L, Rogers AB, Lindquist S. Heat 
shock factor 1 is a powerful multifaceted modifier 
of carcinogenesis. Cell. 2007;130(6):1005–1018.

  6. Mendillo ML, et al. HSF1 drives a transcriptional 
program distinct from heat shock to support highly 
malignant human cancers. Cell. 2012;150(3):549–562.
  7. Min  JN,  Huang  L,  Zimonjic  DB,  Moskophidis 
D, Mivechi NF. Selective suppression of lympho-
mas by functional loss of Hsf1 in a p53-deficient 

mouse model for spontaneous tumors. Oncogene. 
2007;26(35):5086–5097.

  8. Jin X, Moskophidis D, Mivechi NF. Heat shock 
transcription factor 1 is a key determinant of HCC 
development by regulating hepatic steatosis and 
metabolic syndrome. Cell Metab. 2011;14(1):91–103.
  9. Scott KL, et al. Proinvasion metastasis drivers in 
early-stage melanoma are oncogenes. Cancer Cell. 
2011;20(1):92–103.

  10. Bollag G, et al. Loss of NF1 results in activation of 
the Ras signaling pathway and leads to aberrant 
growth in haematopoietic cells. Nat Genet. 1996; 
12(2):144–148.

  11. Cichowski  K,  Jacks  T.  NF1  tumor  suppressor 
gene  function:  narrowing  the  GAP. Cell.  2001; 
104(4):593–604.

  12. Largaespada DA, Brannan CI, Jenkins NA, Cope-
land  NG.  Nf1  deficiency  causes  Ras-mediated 
granulocyte/macrophage colony stimulating fac-
tor hypersensitivity and chronic myeloid leukaemia. 
Nat Genet. 1996;12(2):137–143.

  13. Gutmann DH, Boguski M, Marchuk D, Wigler M, 
Collins FS, Ballester R. Analysis of the neurofibro-
matosis type 1 (NF1) GAP-related domain by site-

directed mutagenesis. Oncogene. 1993;8(3):761–769.
  14. Tanaka K, et al. S. cerevisiae genes IRA1 and IRA2 
encode proteins that may be functionally equiva-
lent to mammalian ras GTPase activating protein. 
Cell. 1990;60(5):803–807.

  15. Turbyville TJ, et al. Search for Hsp90 inhibitors 
with potential anticancer activity: isolation and 
SAR studies of radicicol and monocillin I from two 
plant-associated fungi of the Sonoran desert. J Nat 
Prod. 2006;69(2):178–184.

  16. Guettouche T, Boellmann F, Lane WS, Voellmy R. 
Analysis of phosphorylation of human heat shock 
factor 1 in cells experiencing a stress. BMC Biochem. 
2005;6:4.

  17. Zheng CF, Guan KL. Activation of MEK family 
kinases requires phosphorylation of two conserved 
Ser/Thr residues. EMBO J. 1994;13(5):1123–1131.

  18. Nalepa G, Rolfe M, Harper JW. Drug discovery in 
the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Nat Rev Drug Dis-
cov. 2006;5(7):596–613.

  19. Gitler AD, Epstein JA. Regulating heart develop-

ment: the role of Nf1. Cell Cycle. 2003;2(2):96–98.

  20. Xiao X, et al. HSF1 is required for extra-embryonic 
development, postnatal growth and protection 

 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012 

3753

research articleduring inflammatory responses in mice. EMBO J. 
1999;18(21):5943–5952.

  21. Xu YM, et al. 2,3-Dihydrowithaferin A-3beta-O-sul-
fate, a new potential prodrug of withaferin A from 
aeroponically grown Withania somnifera. Bioorg 
Med Chem. 2009;17(6):2210–2214.

  22. Santagata S, et al. Using the heat-shock response to 
discover anticancer compounds that target protein 
homeostasis. ACS Chem Biol. 2012;7(2):340–349.

  23. Gitler  AD,  et  al.  Nf1  has  an  essential  role  in 

endothelial cells. Nat Genet. 2003;33(1):75–79.

  24. Jacks T, Shih TS, Schmitt EM, Bronson RT, Ber-
nards A, Weinberg RA. Tumour predisposition in 
mice heterozygous for a targeted mutation in Nf1. 
Nat Genet. 1994;7(3):353–361.

  25. Cichowski K, et al. Mouse models of tumor devel-
opment  in  neurofibromatosis  type  1.  Science. 
1999;286(5447):2172–2176.

  26. Vogel  KS,  Klesse  LJ,  Velasco-Miguel  S,  Meyers 
K, Rushing EJ, Parada LF. Mouse tumor model 
for  neurofibromatosis  type  1.  Science.  1999; 
286(5447):2176–2179.

  27. Hsu  AL,  Murphy  CT,  Kenyon  C.  Regulation  of 
aging and age-related disease by DAF-16 and heat-
shock factor. Science. 2003;300(5622):1142–1145.
  28. Morley JF, Morimoto RI. Regulation of longev-
ity in Caenorhabditis elegans by heat shock fac-
tor and molecular chaperones. Mol Biol Cell. 2004; 
15(2):657–664.

  29. Steele AD, et al. Heat shock factor 1 regulates lifes-
pan as distinct from disease onset in prion disease. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105(36):13626–13631.
  30. Reilly KM, et al. An imprinted locus epistatically 
influences Nstr1 and Nstr2 to control resistance to 
nerve sheath tumors in a neurofibromatosis type 1 
mouse model. Cancer Res. 2006;66(1):62–68.

  31. Walrath JC, Fox K, Truffer E, Gregory Alvord W, 
Quinones OA, Reilly KM. Chr 19(A/J) modifies 
tumor resistance in a sex- and parent-of-origin-spe-
cific manner. Mamm Genome. 2009;20(4):214–223.
  32. Zhu Y, Ghosh P, Charnay P, Burns DK, Parada 
LF. Neurofibromas in NF1: Schwann cell origin 
and  role  of  tumor  environment. Science.  2002; 
296(5569):920–922.

  33. Fieber LA, Gonzalez DM, Wallace MR, Muir D. 
Delayed rectifier K currents in NF1 Schwann cells. 
Pharmacological block inhibits proliferation. Neu-
robiol Dis. 2003;13(2):136–146.

  34. Frahm S, et al. Genetic and phenotypic charac-
terization of tumor cells derived from malignant 
peripheral nerve sheath tumors of neurofibromato-
sis type 1 patients. Neurobiol Dis. 2004;16(1):85–91.
  35. Barkan B, Starinsky S, Friedman E, Stein R, Kloog 
Y. The Ras inhibitor farnesylthiosalicylic acid as 
a potential therapy for neurofibromatosis type 1. 
Clin Cancer Res. 2006;12(18):5533–5542.

  36. Li Y, et al. Notch and Schwann cell transformation. 

Oncogene. 2004;23(5):1146–1152.

  37. Miller SJ, et al. Integrative genomic analyses of 
neurofibromatosis tumours identify SOX9 as a 
biomarker and survival gene. EMBO Mol Med. 2009; 
1(4):236–248.

  38. Perrin  GQ,  et  al.  Plexiform-like  neurofibromas 
develop in the mouse by intraneural xenograft of 
an NF1 tumor-derived Schwann cell line. J Neurosci 
Res. 2007;85(6):1347–1357.

  39. Diaz B, Barnard D, Filson A, MacDonald S, King 
A, Marshall M. Phosphorylation of Raf-1 serine 
338-serine 339 is an essential regulatory event for 
Ras-dependent activation and biological signaling. 
Mol Cell Biol. 1997;17(8):4509–4516.

  40. Alessi DR, et al. Identification of the sites in MAP 
kinase kinase-1 phosphorylated by p74raf-1. EMBO 
J. 1994;13(7):1610–1619.

  41. Therrien M, Michaud NR, Rubin GM, Morrison 
DK. KSR modulates signal propagation within the 
MAPK cascade. Genes Dev. 1996;10(21):2684–2695.
  42. Kortum RL, Lewis RE. The molecular scaffold KSR1 
regulates the proliferative and oncogenic potential 
of cells. Mol Cell Biol. 2004;24(10):4407–4416.

  43. Stewart S, Sundaram M, Zhang Y, Lee J, Han M, 
Guan KL. Kinase suppressor of Ras forms a mul-
tiprotein signaling complex and modulates MEK 
localization. Mol Cell Biol. 1999;19(8):5523–5534.

  44. Allen  LF,  Sebolt-Leopold  J,  Meyer  MB.  CI-1040 
(PD184352), a targeted signal transduction inhibi-
tor of MEK (MAPKK). Semin Oncol. 2003;30(5 Suppl 
16):105–116.

  45. Corcoran  RB,  Dias-Santagata  D,  Bergethon  K, 
Iafrate AJ, Settleman J, Engelman JA. BRAF gene 
amplification can promote acquired resistance to 
MEK inhibitors in cancer cells harboring the BRAF 
V600E mutation. Sci Signal. 2010;3(149):ra84.

  46. Wee S, et al. PI3K pathway activation mediates 
resistance to MEK inhibitors in KRAS mutant can-
cers. Cancer Res. 2009;69(10):4286–4293.

  47. Fang JS, Gillies RD, Gatenby RA. Adaptation to 
hypoxia and acidosis in carcinogenesis and tumor 
progression. Semin Cancer Biol. 2008;18(5):330–337.
  48. Luo J, Solimini NL, Elledge SJ. Principles of cancer 
therapy: oncogene and non-oncogene addiction. 
Cell. 2009;136(5):823–837.

  49. Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB. 
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic 
requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 
324(5930):1029–1033.

  50. Ono K, Han J. The p38 signal transduction pathway: 
activation and function. Cell Signal. 2000;12(1):1–13.
  51. Karin  M.  NF-kappaB  as  a  critical  link  between 
inflammation and cancer. Cold Spring Harb Perspect 
Biol. 2009;1(5):a000141.

  52. Semenza GL. Defining the role of hypoxia-induc-
ible factor 1 in cancer biology and therapeutics. 
Oncogene. 2010;29(5):625–634.

  53. Cencic  R,  et  al.  Reversing  chemoresistance  by 
small molecule inhibition of the translation ini-

tiation complex eIF4F. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S  A. 
2011;108(3):1046–1051.

  54. Wang Y, Theriault JR, He H, Gong J, Calderwood SK. 
Expression of a dominant negative heat shock fac-
tor-1 construct inhibits aneuploidy in prostate carci-
noma cells. J Biol Chem. 2004;279(31):32651–32659.
  55. Pavelka N, et al. Aneuploidy confers quantitative 
proteome changes and phenotypic variation in 
budding yeast. Nature. 2010;468(7321):321–325.

  56. Khaleque MA, et al. Induction of heat shock pro-
teins by heregulin beta1 leads to protection from 
apoptosis  and  anchorage-independent  growth. 
Oncogene. 2005;24(43):6564–6573.

  57. Whitesell L, Lindquist SL. HSP90 and the chaperon-
ing of cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005;5(10):761–772.
  58. Stanhill A, et al. Ha-ras(val12) induces HSP70b tran-
scription via the HSE/HSF1 system, but HSP70b 
expression is suppressed in Ha-ras(val12)-trans-
formed cells. Oncogene. 2006;25(10):1485–1495.

  59. Kamal A, et al. A high-affinity conformation of 
Hsp90 confers tumour selectivity on Hsp90 inhibi-
tors. Nature. 2003;425(6956):407–410.

  60. Voellmy R, Boellmann F. Chaperone regulation of 
the heat shock protein response. Adv Exp Med Biol. 
2007;594:89–99.

  61. Santagata S, et al. High levels of nuclear heat-shock 
factor 1 (HSF1) are associated with poor progno-
sis in breast cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 
108(45):18378–18383.

  62. Li Y, et al. Somatic mutations in the neurofibromato-
sis 1 gene in human tumors. Cell. 1992;69(2):275–281.
  63. Whitesell L, Santagata S, Lin NU. Inhibiting HSP90 
to treat cancer: a strategy in evolution [published 
online ahead of print July 17, 2012]. Curr Mol Med. 
In press.

  64. Chao RC, et al. Therapy-induced malignant neo-
plasms  in  Nf1  mutant  mice. Cancer Cell.  2005; 
8(4):337–348.

  65. McMillan DR, Xiao X, Shao L, Graves K, Benjamin 
IJ. Targeted disruption of heat shock transcription 
factor 1 abolishes thermotolerance and protection 
against heat-inducible apoptosis. J Biol Chem. 1998; 
273(13):7523–7528.

  66. Whitesell L, Lindquist S. Inhibiting the transcrip-
tion factor HSF1 as an anticancer strategy. Expert 
Opin Ther Targets. 2009;13(4):469–478.

  67. Akerfelt M, Morimoto RI, Sistonen L. Heat shock 
factors: integrators of cell stress, development and 
lifespan. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010;11(8):545–555.
  68. Au Q, Zhang Y, Barber JR, Ng SC, Zhang B. Iden-
tification of inhibitors of HSF1 functional activity 
by high-content target-based screening. J Biomol 
Screen. 2009;14(10):1165–1175.

  69. Yoon YJ, et al. KRIBB11 inhibits HSP70 synthesis 
through inhibition of heat shock factor 1 function 
by impairing the recruitment of positive transcrip-
tion elongation factor b to the hsp70 promoter.  
J Biol Chem. 2011;286(3):1737–1747.

3754 

The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 122      Number 10      October 2012

research article