The Laryngoscope
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc.
© 2006 The American Laryngological,
Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

Growth of Benign and Malignant
Schwannoma Xenografts in Severe
Combined Immunodeficiency Mice

Long-Sheng Chang, PhD; Jacob Abraham, MD; Mark Lorenz, MD; Jonathan Rock, BS;
Elena M. Akhmametyeva, MD, PhD; Georgeta Mihai, MS; Petra Schmalbrock, PhD;
Abhik R. Chaudhury, MD; Raul Lopez, BS; Jyoji Yamate, PhD; Markus R. John, PhD;
Hannes Wickert, PhD; Brian A. Neff, MD; Edward Dodson, MD; D. Bradley Welling, MD, PhD

Objectives: Models for the development of new
treatment options in vestibular schwannoma (VS)
treatment are lacking. The purpose of this study is to
establish a quantifiable human VS xenograft model in
mice. Study Design and Methods: Both rat malignant
schwannoma cells (KE-F11 and RT4) and human ma-
lignant schwannoma (HMS-97) cells were implanted
near the sciatic nerve in the thigh of severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) mice. Additionally, human
benign VS specimens were implanted in another set
of SCID mice. Three-dimensional tumor volumes
were calculated from magnetic resonance images
over the next 6 months. Results: Mice implanted with
malignant schwannoma cells developed visible tu-
mors within 2 weeks. Imaging using a 4.7-tesla mag-
netic resonance imaging and immunohistopathologic
examination identified solid tumors in all KE-F11 and
HMS-97 xenografts, whereas RT4 xenografts consis-
tently developed cystic schwannomas. VS xenografts
demonstrated variability in their growth rates simi-
lar to human VS. The majority of VS xenografts did
not grow but persisted throughout the study, whereas
two of 15 xenografts grew significantly. Histopatho-
logic examination and immunohistochemistry con-

From the Departments of Pediatrics (L.-S.C., E.M.A.), Otolaryngology
(L.-S.C., J.A., B.A.N., E.D., D.B.W.), Pathology (L.-S.C., A.R.C.), and Radiology
(G.M., P.S.), The Ohio State University and the College of Medicine (L.-S.C.,
M.L., J.R., P.S., A.R.C., R.L., E.D., D.B.W.), Columbus, Ohio, U.S.A.; the Center
for Childhood Cancer (L.-S.C., E.M.A.), Children’s Research Institute, Colum-
bus, Ohio, U.S.A.; Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology (J.Y.), Osaka Prefec-
ture University, Osaka, Japan; Musculoskeletal Diseases Exploratory
Clinical Development Unit (M.R.J.), Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzer-
land; and Hygiene Institut (H.W.), Abteilung Parasitologie, Universita¨ -
tsklinikum Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Editor’s Note: This Manuscript was accepted for publication July

18, 2006.

Supported by grants from the U.S. Department of Defense NF Re-
search Program and National Institute of Deafness and Communication
Disorders.

Send correspondence to Long-Sheng Chang, Children’s Hospital and
Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, 700 Children’s
Drive, Columbus, OH 43205. E-mail: lchang@chi.osu.edu

DOI: 10.1097/01.mlg.0000240185.14224.7d

firmed that VS xenografts retained their original mi-
croscopic and immunohistochemical characteristics
after prolonged implantation. Conclusions: This
study describes the first animal model for cystic
schwannomas. Also, we demonstrate the use of high-
field magnetic resonance imaging to quantify VS
xenograft growth over time. The VS xenografts repre-
sent a model complimentary to Nf2 transgenic and
knockout mice for translational VS research. Key
Words: Vestibular schwannoma, neurofibromatosis
type 2 (NF2), xenograft, severe combined immunode-
ficiency (SCID) mice, magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), cystic, malignant, gadolinium.

Laryngoscope, 116:2018 –2026, 2006

INTRODUCTION

Vestibular schwannomas (VS) have no known medi-
cal therapies available. However, significant morbidity,
including hearing loss and facial weakness, remain major
concerns. VS can be divided into four general categories,
including unilateral sporadic VS, neurofibromatosis type
2 (NF2)-associated VS, cystic, and malignant schwanno-
mas.1 Among VS, sporadic unilateral solid tumors are by
far the most common, occurring in 10 to 13 persons per
million per year. The development of bilateral VS is the
hallmark of NF2, an autosomal-dominant disease caused
by mutations in the neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) gene
on chromosome 22q12.2,3 Most of these solid tumors, ei-
ther sporadic or NF2-associated, grow at a slow rate of
approximately 1 to 2 mm per year.1 Cystic schwannomas
are a particularly aggressive group of unilateral schwan-
nomas. They invade the surrounding cranial nerves,
splaying them throughout the tumor.4 Cystic tumors may
grow rapidly and are typically more difficult to manage,
often resulting in hearing loss and facial nerve paralysis
on their removal.5 In addition to NF2-associated tumors,
mutations in the NF2 gene have been detected in sporadic
VS and cystic schwannomas.6 The most aggressive and
rare variant is the malignant VS or triton tumor. These

Laryngoscope 116: November 2006

Chang et al.: Schwannoma Xenografts

2018

malignant tumors occur either sporadically or after radi-
ation and are uniformly fatal.7

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) distinguishes
clearly among the various types of VS. Cystic regions
within cystic schwannomas are signal intense on T2-
weighted images, whereas noncystic components of these
tumors enhance on T1-weighted images with gadolinium
(Gd) in a manner similar to those seen in sporadic and
NF2-associated VS.1 These represent a unique tumor type
clinically and histologically and should not be confused
with degenerative regions of larger tumors. The irregular
appearance of some heterogeneous tumors on contrast-
enhanced T1-weighted images may be accounted for by
hemosiderin deposits, which correlates with increasing
tumor size,8 but these tumors do not contain fluid as
demonstrated on T2 imaging. Although distinct clinically
and by MRI, the underlying molecular differences among
the three benign types of VS are not understood. Malig-
nant schwannomas invade surrounding tissues locally
and progress rapidly.7 Most appear solid and enhance on
T1-weighted images but lack the capsule of the more com-
mon benign VS. Additionally, the optimal treatment reg-
imen for each subtype of VS is not known because of a lack
of understanding of fundamental tumor biology and a lack
of rigorous clinical outcome studies.

Several studies previously attempted to implant hu-
man VS tissues in immunodeficient mice. Lee et al.9 im-
planted human schwannomas in nude mice and showed
that the tumors grew most consistently when placed in the
sciatic nerve region. Charabi et al.10 and Stidham et al.11
confirmed that VS tissues could be successfully implanted
and maintained in a subcutaneous pocket of nude mice.
Although these studies demonstrated macroscopic growth
in some of the transplanted VS tissues, an effective means
of assessing the survival, growth, and blood supply of
tumor xenografts was lacking. In addition, no study to
date has compared the growth potential of various types of
schwannoma tissues in mice.

We evaluated the growth characteristics of rodent
and human malignant schwannoma cells as well as be-
nign human VS xenografts in severe combined immuno-
deficiency (SCID) mice using a 4.7-T MRI. Our results
demonstrated the feasibility of using MRI to quantify VS
xenografts in mice. Interestingly, MRI also distinguished
two different schwannoma types, which were confirmed by
immuno- and histopathologic analysis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Experimental Design

The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of The
Ohio State University approved the animal protocols used in this
study. Healthy female SCID mice (Harlan Co., Indianapolis, IN)
were housed according to approved procedures. The first series of
experiments involved injecting three groups of SCID mice subcu-
taneously in the thigh with rat malignant schwannoma cells
KE-F1112 and RT413 as well as human malignant schwannoma
HMS-97 cells.14 Tumor growth was observed over 4 weeks and
measured using a 4.7-T small-animal MRI scanner (Bruker, Bil-
lerica, MA). After euthanizing the animals, specimens were har-
vested for histopathologic analysis. A second set of experiments
was performed using human VS specimens. SCID mice were

implanted with VS tissues obtained directly from patients under-
going surgical resection. All VS implants were placed in the
proximal thigh of the left leg near the sciatic nerve. Tumor
growth, if any, was accessed serially by MRI over the subsequent
months after xenotransplantation. Histopathologic examination
and immunohistochemical analysis were also performed on se-
lected mice to confirm the imaged regions contain viable tumor
rather than scar tissues.

Tissue Procurement

A human subject protocol for the acquisition and analysis of
human vestibular schwannomas was approved by our Institu-
tional Reviewed Board. Patient consents were obtained before
surgery. Each tumor specimen was confirmed by a pathologist as
schwannoma. For implantation of human VS tissues into SCID
mice, freshly removed specimen was placed in a sterile tube
containing Dulbecco modified minimum essential (DME) medium
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and transported immediately to the
animal research facility. Also, a portion of tumor was snap-frozen
in liquid nitrogen for future molecular studies.

Growth of Schwannoma Cells

Rat malignant schwannoma KE-F11 and RT4 cells and hu-
man malignant schwannoma HMS-97 cells were grown in DME
medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen).
For inoculation of rat KE-F11 or RT4 cells into each SCID mouse,
2.5 ⫻ 105 cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline and
suspended in 0.2 mL of Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA).
For inoculation of human HMS-97 cells into each SCID mouse,
5 ⫻ 105 cells were used.

Injection Technique

SCID mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of
Avertin (2,2,2-tribromoethanol ⫹ tert-amyl alcohol; Sigma-
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) or by isoflurane inhalation. Under anes-
thesia, the left flank of mouse was shaved and prepped using
aseptic technique. An 18-gauge needle was used to inject 0.2 mL
of schwannoma cells 3 mm inferior to the greater trochanter of
femur. The thigh was selected for ease of implantation and the
ability to grossly observe tumor growth. Additionally, previous
studies indicated that proximity to a peripheral nerve might
affect growth.9 –11 Injected mice were revived on a warming blan-
ket until recovery and were watched daily for tumor growth.

Surgical Implantation Technique

An incision was made along the long axis of the proximal
thigh. The contralateral leg was not dissected and used as a
control for imaging. Soft tissues were dissected bluntly to identify
the biceps femoris muscle and the sciatic nerve. A piece of VS
tumor specimen (1–5 mm in diameter) was implanted en bloc
near the nerve and the skin was closed using a single layer of
interrupted suture.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging

Mice were anesthetized with Avertin, immobilized on an
animal holder, and placed prone in a 4.7-T/cm MRI system with
a 120-mm inner diameter gradient coil (maximum 400 mT/m), a
72-mm inner diameter proton volume radiofrequency coil for
transmit, and a 4-cm surface receive coil. For T1-weighted axial
and coronal images, a spin echo sequence with TR of 550 to 600
ms and TE of 10.5 ms was used. For T2-weighted images, a rapid
acquisition with refocusing echoes (RARE) sequence with TR of
2500 to 2600 ms, an effective TE of 47 to 54 ms, and a RARE
factor of 4 was used. In-plane resolution was 156 ␮m on the axial
and 195 ␮m on the coronal images, and the slice thickness was 0.8

Laryngoscope 116: November 2006

Chang et al.: Schwannoma Xenografts

2019

mm with a 0.2-mm gap between slices. Scan time was 5 to 6
minutes per scan.

In addition, contrast-enhanced T1 axial and coronal im-
ages were acquired after a bolus injection with Gadodiamide
(Omniscan; GE Health Care, Piscataway, NJ; 0.1-mL bolus of
10 mmol/L). The contrast agent was injected through a tail
vein catheter using thin polyethylene tubing that reached out-
side the magnet and allowed quick delivery of the contrast
agent without changing the position of the mouse inside the
magnet. Mice with rat schwannoma cell implants were imaged
within 2 weeks of implantation and those with human schwan-
noma cell implants were imaged approximately 4 weeks after
inoculation. Mice with human VS implants were imaged at
indicated times over the course of a year postprocedure.

Multiplanar tumor volumes were determined from T1- and
T2-weighted images. For these measurements, tumor areas were
manually traced on axial and coronal T1 and T2 images. Postcon-
trast images were also used when available. Tumor volumes were
calculated by adding the traced areas from all slices depicting the
tumor and multiplying with the distance between slice (i.e.,
0.8-mm slice thickness ⫹ 0.2-mm gap ⫽ 1 mm). Tumor volumes
measured from axial and coronal or T1 and T2 images were in fair
agreement. All volume measurements were referenced to the first
MRIs taken 1 month after implantation.

Immunohistopathologic Analysis

Tumors grown in mice with schwannoma xenografts were
dissected, fixed in 10% buffered formalin, and embedded in par-
affin. Five-micron tissue sections were mounted, deparaffinized,
and processed for standard hematoxylin– eosin staining or immu-
nostaining with antibodies against S-100 protein (1:200 dilution
of anti-S-100 from Dako, Carpinteria, CA), myelin basic protein
(MBP) (prediluted anti-MBP from Zymed, San Francisco, CA),
and NGF-receptor (p75NGFR)/neurotrophin receptor (1:100 dilu-
tion of anti-p75NGFR from LabVision/NeoMarker, Fremont, CA)
according to previously described procedures.6 A hematoxylin
counterstain was then applied and the stained tissue visualized
by light microscopy. Negative controls were treated with the
same immunostaining procedure except without the primary
antibody.

RESULTS

KE-F11 and HMS-97 schwannoma xenografts devel-
oped solid tumor phenotypes, whereas RT4 xenografts
produced cystic tumors. SCID mice injected with either
the KE-F11 or RT4 rat malignant schwannoma cells pro-
duced visible tumors within 1 week after inoculation. On
the MRI obtained within 2 weeks of xenotransplantation,
the two sets of mice demonstrated significantly different
imaging characteristics. All mice implanted with KE-F11

Fig. 1. Magnetic resonance imaging scans of malignant schwan-
noma xenograft 2 weeks after implantation display the presence of
solid tumor mass in the left thigh (arrow). The T2-weighted rapid
acquisition with refocusing echoes images (left) and T1-weighted
images without (middle) and with contrast agent (right) were ob-
tained according to “Methods.” The tumor is seen hyperintense to
muscle on T2 and isointense on T1 images and enhances after the
injection of contrast agent (arrows). (B) Coronal
(top) and axial
(bottom) images of a rat RT4 schwannoma xenograft 2 weeks after
implantation show the presence of a cystic tumor. Blood appeared
hypointense in signal intensity on both T1 and T2 images, whereas
the cyst was hyperintense on T2 images (left) and dark on T1 images
(right).
(C) Magnetic resonance images of a human HMS-97
schwannoma xenograft 4 weeks after implantation demonstrating a
large tumor with solid architecture.

Laryngoscope 116: November 2006

Chang et al.: Schwannoma Xenografts

2020

cells developed solid tumors, and the presence of tumor
created significant asymmetry in the implanted thigh
(Fig. 1A). Coronal and axial T2-weighted RARE images
showed that the tumor mass appeared homogenous but
was hyperintense or brighter to the surrounding muscu-
lature. On T1-weighted images, the tumor-containing re-
gion was near isointense to muscle and enhanced on post-
contrast T1 images (arrows) as is characteristics of human
VS tissues in situ. In contrast, all mice injected with RT4
cells demonstrated a distinctive cystic phenotype (Fig.
1B). Within the tumor mass, blood-filled cavities appeared
darkest on both T1- and T2-weighted images, whereas the
cysts displayed high signal intensity on T2 images but
were dark on T1 images. Similar to the KE-F11 xeno-
grafts, MRIs revealed that all mice with human malignant
schwannoma HMS-97 implants developed large, homoge-
nous, solid tumors by 4 weeks postimplantation as seen on
coronal and axial T1- and T2-weighted images (Fig. 1C).
There were no cystic changes.

To confirm that

the xenografts retained their
schwannoma phenotype, histopathologic examination was
performed on tumor-bearing mice. No metastatic lesions
were found. Macroscopic and microscopic analysis con-
firmed the solid phenotype for both the KE-F11 and
HMS-97 tumors and the cystic phenotype for the RT4
xenografts (Fig. 2). The KE-F11 cell line was derived from
a spontaneous malignant schwannoma found in an aged
male F344 rat.12 The KE-F11 xenograft was a grayish,
creamy globoid mass, which histologically consisted of ac-
tively growing, heterochromatic, oval- or spindle-shaped
cells with large pleomorphic nuclei (Fig. 2A). RT4 is a
clonal schwannoma cell line derived from a peripheral
nervous system tumor induced by ethylnitrosourea injec-
tion in a newborn BDIX rat.13 The xenograft generated by
RT4 cells contained multiple cysts; some of the cysts con-
tained dark, viscous blood products, whereas others were
filled with serous fluid. Histologically, the RT4 tumor
contained compact spindle cells with a high nucleus to
cytoplasm ratio and had increased perivascular cellularity
(Fig. 2B). The HMS-97 cell line was established from a
malignant schwannoma from an adult patient with onco-
genic osteomalacia.14 Similar to KE-F11, the HMS-97 tu-
mor was a large globoid mass comprised of heterochro-
matic ovoid cells with multiple mitotic figures (Fig. 2C).
The HMS-97 xenograft was transplantable. When a small
piece of the tumor was transplanted to another SCID
mouse, tumor growth was readily seen within 2 weeks
(data not shown).

Because Schwann cells originate from the neuroecto-
dermal neural crest, Schwann cell-derived tumors often
show immunoreactions to S-100 protein, MBP, and
p75NGFR.15–18 Immunostaining with an anti-S-100 anti-
body showed that tumor cells from the HMS-97 xenograft
strongly and diffusely expressed S-100 protein (Fig. 3A).
Similarly, HMS-97 tumor cells also stained robustly for
MBP expression (Fig. 3B). The staining for p75NGFR ex-
pression was weak but detectable (Fig. 3C).

Collectively, these results are consistent with previ-
ous reports that malignant schwannomas are transplant-
able and their Schwann cell characteristics were main-
tained after xenotransplantation.12,13 Our study further

Fig. 2. Histologic analysis of malignant schwannoma xenografts.
Malignant-appearing cells with plump, pleomorphic nuclei and
densely stained chromatin were present in both the (A) KE-F11 and
(B) RT4 tumors. Numerous vascular channels in the RT4 tumor
suggest significant
tumor angiogenesis. Similarly, malignant-
appearing cells with multiple mitotic figures and a high nucleus to
cytoplasm ratio were seen in the HMS-97 tumor (C).

demonstrates the feasibility of using MRI to detect the
phenotype and growth characteristics of schwannomas in
SCID mice. The KE-F11 and HMS-97 xenografts engender
malignant solid schwannomas, whereas the RT4 cells pro-
duce distinct cystic tumors.

Human VS xenografts persisted for a long period of
time and some showed growth in SCID mice. To evalu-
ate potential growth characteristics of human VS,
freshly removed tumors were implanted in the thigh of
SCID mice. High-field MRI was used to visualize and
quantify all VS xenografts in mice as described previ-
ously. Analysis of images obtained from each animal at
various times after xenotransplantation revealed that
the majority of VS xenografts persisted but did not show
significant growth (Fig. 4). Most tumor volumes were
either unchanged or reduced over the study period. The
tumor with the most reduction diminished to about half
its original tumor volume over 6 months. It is important
to note that even without growth, the xenograft was
detectable by MRI scans (Fig. 4A). We were able to
maintain one VS xenograft for 13 months until the

Laryngoscope 116: November 2006

Chang et al.: Schwannoma Xenografts

2021

4B, 4C). One showed a 60% increase in tumor volume,
whereas the other grew to 14 times its original volume.
Representative MRIs from the mouse with the VS
xenograft whose tumor volume diminished by approxi-
mately half over 6 months are shown in Figure 4A. Al-
though the tumor was small and its size decreased over
the study period, a persistent mass could be found at the
surgical implant site (arrows) in all images obtained. Be-
cause this tumor was surrounded by fatty tissue, both
T1- and T2-weighted images depicted the tumor. The post-
contrast study at month 6 showed only weak marginal
enhancement (Fig. 4A, right column).

When similar MRI sequences were performed on the
VS xenograft showing significant growth, changes in tu-
mor growth could be easily seen from both the T1- and
T2-weighted images (Fig. 4B). Visual comparison of the
images obtained at 1 and 2 months postimplantation re-
vealed that the xenograft became larger. By 6 months, the
tumor grew so much that it created an obvious asymmetry
in the left implanted thigh. T1-weighted, postcontrast im-
ages most clearly outlined the tumor and its growth into
the adjacent muscle tissue. Together with the T2 scan,
these images confirmed the growth of the VS xenograft.

Histopathologic analysis was performed on the
mouse with significant tumor growth to confirm that the
mass seen on the MRI was in fact schwannoma tissue by
phenotype. Gross examination revealed a large globoid
mass in the implanted thigh with no sign of metastasis.
Histologically, the tumor was encapsulated and consisted
of spindle-shaped cells. Alternating compact areas of elon-
gated cells with occasional nuclear palisading (Antoni A
pattern) and less cellular, loosely textured Antoni B areas
were seen (Fig. 5A). The tumor cells had relatively abun-
dant cytoplasm with discernible cell margins. All of these
characteristics were consistent with a primary benign hu-
man VS. We also detected strong immunoreactivity to
S-100, p75NGFR, and MBP antigens in the area containing
tumor cells (Fig. 6A–C).

Similarly, we performed a histopathologic examina-
tion on the mouse with a VS implant present but without
any growth for 13 months. The xenograft tissue could still
be detected by MRI (data not shown) and macroscopic
analysis confirmed the presence of a small tumor within
the implanted region. Microscopically, the tumor was com-
posed of both ovoid and spindle-shaped cells with foci of
lipid laden tumor cells characteristic of an aged vestibular
schwannoma (Fig. 5B). Similar to those detected in the VS
tumor showing significant growth, strong immunoreactiv-
ity, to S-100 and p75NGFR proteins was found in the area
containing the tumor cells (Fig. 6D, E).

Taken together, these results show that VS xeno-
grafts can persist or grow in SCID mice and are readily
detectable and quantified by MRI. The tumors retained
their original microscopic and immunohistochemical char-
acteristics after prolonged implantation.

DISCUSSION

Meaningful translational research in chemotherapy re-
quires disease-specific, reproducible, quantifiable, and cost-
effective animal models. Mice have been an attractive spe-
cies for such models because they can be bred to have little

Fig. 3. Immunohistochemical analysis of the HMS-97 xenograft
demonstrating continued Schwann cell lineage of tumor cells. Tis-
sue sections containing tumor cells were immunostained with (A)
anti-S-100, (B) anti-MBP, and (C) and anti-p75NGFR antibodies. The
positively stained tissue appeared brown. All negative controls did
not stain (not shown).

animal was killed for histopathologic examination (see
subsequently). We also detected an increase in tumor
volume in two of 15 VS xenografts over 6 months (Fig.

Laryngoscope 116: November 2006

Chang et al.: Schwannoma Xenografts

2022

genetic variability and are accessible to genetic manipula-
tion. Over the past decade, most of the in vivo research with
schwannomas has focused on Nf2 transgenic and knockout
mice.16,17 Although soft tissue, peripheral nerve, and central
nervous system schwannomas have developed in these ani-
mals, no mouse to date has engendered a primary schwan-
noma on its eighth cranial nerve. Additionally, the condi-
tional Nf2 mutant mice with schwannomas were found at
low frequency only in older mice. Both benign and malignant
schwannomas have been found in these mice. This is in
contrast to the clearly benign phenotype of VS frequently
seen in patients with NF2. Although the reason for these
differences is not known, basic schwannoma histology and,
perhaps,
interspecies differences in normal vestibuloco-
chlear nerve microanatomy may be considered. It should be
mentioned that human vestibular bipolar ganglion cells are
devoid of myelin sheaths while these cells in rodents are
myelinated.16,17,19 Recently, Stemmer-Rachamimov et al.20
thoroughly reviewed human and murine schwannomas to
create a grading system for these tumors. The World Health
Organization describes benign human VS as composed of
encapsulated, noninfiltrative tumors composed of mature
Schwann cells in Antoni A and Antoni B patterns with Vero-
cay bodies, which are rows of palisading Schwann cell nuclei
separated from each other by stroma. The benign schwan-
nomas seen in the Nf2-knockout mice were classified as
murine genetic engineered mouse I or GEM I tumors be-
cause they were most closely related to human VS. Although
these benign mouse schwannomas displayed primarily an
Antoni A growth pattern with occasional Verocay bodies,
they were not encapsulated and were far more infiltrative
than human VS. The murine GEM II tumors, which refer to
more malignant murine schwannomas, displayed nuclear
pleomorphism, increased cellularity, and scattered mitotic
figures. These histologic differences between human and
mouse schwannomas may make it difficult to directly
translate research conclusions drawn from these models
to the human disease. For this reason, an alternative
model such as the reproducible, quantifiable VS xenograft
model that we reported here will be important for trans-
lational VS research.

Fig. 4. Quantification of human VS xenografts by magnetic resonance
imaging. (A) T2-weighted (left), pre- (middle), and postcontrast T1-
weighted images (right) of a vestibular schwannoma (VS) xenograft
showed that the tumor persisted in the severe combined immunode-
ficiency mouse over the 6-month study period. The first coronal and
axial magnetic resonance imaging scans were performed 1 month after
surgery to ensure that the animals had healed. Follow-up magnetic
resonance images were obtained at the 2- and 6-month time points.
Note that the tumor is readily visible in a fatty tissue pocket between
the thigh musculature on both T1 and T2 images (arrows). T1 post-
contrast images obtained at 6 months show some enhancement at the
tumor margins (arrowhead). (B) T2-weighted (left), pre- (middle), and
postcontrast T1-weighted images (right) of a VS xenograft demonstrat-
ing significant growth over a 6-month period. Note that the tumor
(arrow) appears larger on the 2-month images. T2-weighted imaging at
6 months showed that the tumor extended into the surrounding mus-
cles. Postcontrast T1-weighted images verified the presence of tumor
within the thigh musculature. (C) Volumetric measurement of 15 VS
xenografts over a 6-month period. Note that most tumors remained
stable or regressed slightly, whereas two xenografts demonstrated
significant growth.

Laryngoscope 116: November 2006

Chang et al.: Schwannoma Xenografts

2023

MRI of human VS xenografts revealed that although
most VS implants diminished slightly and two grew sig-
nificantly over time, all of the tumors persisted and could
be readily imaged. It is important to note that patients
with VS in situ demonstrate a similar pattern of disease.
Most individuals’ tumors persist or grow slowly over time,
approximately 5% diminish in size when imaged serially,
and approximately 10% grow rapidly.1 Interestingly, the
nongrowing human VS xenografts persisted in SCID mice
for 6 to 13 months. We were able to use the high-field MRI
to monitor a xenograft for 13 months. Histologically, the
persistent xenograft retained characteristics of an aged
vestibular schwannoma. In most of the animals imaged
over a 6-month period, the variance in tumor volumes was
limited. Defining the variance more precisely would re-
quire a larger cohort of animals imaged over a 1-year time
period. Once established, deviations from the expected
variance could be used for evaluating growth-inhibiting
effects of potential chemotherapeutic interventions.

The gold standard for evaluating human VS in situ is
T1-weighted MRI with gadolinium enhancement.1 This
technique provides sharp contrast between the tumor and
surrounding fluid spaces and neural structures. Our MRI
analysis of VS xenografts also suggests that T1 postcon-
trast images best delineate the tumor margins and con-
trast can be adequately delivered to the mouse using tail
vein catheter injections. However, this technique is not
without risk to the animal. The volume of gadolinium
along with the flush of saline that follows can fluid over-
load the animal and increase its mortality risk. We have
found that T2-weighted RARE images may adequately
delineate the xenografts margins and allow for volumetric
measurements. Thus, the injection of contrast agent is
used in those tumors that are difficult to differentiate
from adjacent thigh musculature.

Most human VS tumors are slow growing, whereas
only a few proliferate rapidly.1 Tumor genetics may play a
role in the growth potential of these benign tumors. Mu-
tations in the NF2 gene have been detected in NF2-
associated VS, sporadic VS, and cystic schwannomas.6
Several attempts have been made to correlate clinical
expression and specific NF2 mutations in VS and other
NF2-associated tumors. Initially, mutations that cause
truncation of the NF2 protein were reported to cause a
more severe phenotype, whereas missense mutations or
small in-frame insertions correlated with a mild pheno-
type. However, there have been reports of severe pheno-
types associated with missense mutations in the NF2
gene, and likewise, large deletions have been reported to
give rise to mild phenotypes. In addition, phenotypic vari-
ability within NF2 families carrying the same germline
mutation has been reported. Given this heterogeneity of
clinical response to various mutations, it remains vital to
identify key regulatory factors involved in the growth of
various types of schwannomas.

Research to better understand VS tumorigenesis has
been hampered by the lack of a spontaneous VS cell line
available for in vitro study. VS cells are difficult to culture
and have a very limited lifespan in vitro. A previous at-
tempt to immortalize VS cells using the human papilloma
virus E6 –E7 oncogenes yielded the HEI193 cell line with

Fig. 5. Histologic analysis of the human vestibular schwannoma (VS)
xenografts in severe combined immunodeficiency mice. (A) A tissue
section of a VS xenograft harvested 6 months after implantation
demonstrated significant tumor growth. The encapsulated tumor
mass consisting of spindle cells with no significant atypia and
palisading nuclei
in Antoni A and Antoni B configurations, all of
which are histologic characteristics of benign human VS. (B) A
tissue section of a VS xenograft 13 months postimplantation con-
firmed the presence of tumor cells within the mass seen on mag-
netic resonance imaging. Note the cells with bland-appearing ho-
mogeneous nuclei and some foci of lipid-laden tumor cells in the
specimen characteristic of an aged schwannoma.

We have demonstrated the use of MRI in assessing and
quantifying schwannoma xenografts in SCID mice. The
technique offers investigators the ability to assess an indi-
vidual xenograft over time without requiring serial surgery
or killing the animal. We showed that MRI reliably visual-
ized both human and rat malignant schwannoma xenografts
and distinguished between the solid and cystic tumor phe-
notypes. Immuno- and histopathologic analyses confirmed
the MRI findings. The RT4 xenograft is the first description
of an animal model for cystic schwannomas in the literature.
Human cystic tumors are clinically aggressive, may grow
rapidly, and have poorer outcomes. The unique RT4 xeno-
graft may allow the investigation of the basic science behind
cystic schwannomas.

Laryngoscope 116: November 2006

Chang et al.: Schwannoma Xenografts

2024

Fig. 6. Immunostained human vestibular schwannoma (VS) xenograft tissue sections. Tissue sections from the VS xenograft showing significant
growth over a 6-month period were stained with antibodies to (A) S-100, (B), MBP, and (C) p75NGFR. Similarly, sections from a VS xenograft
that did not grow but persisted in the mouse for 6 months were stained with (D) anti-S-100 and (E) anti-p75NGFR antibodies. These VS
xenografts retained positive immunoreactivity to these Schwann cell markers, whereas the adjacent nontumor cells showed no staining.

altered growth properties such as morphologic changes
and independence of Schwann cell growth factors.21 The
fact that some VS xenografts grow in SCID mice and may
be transplantable suggests that they may be used as a

means to enhance the growth potential of VS cells in
culture. By transplanting the growing VS tissue repeat-
edly through mice, VS cells with enhanced growth capa-
bility may be isolated and used to establish a VS cell line.

Laryngoscope 116: November 2006

Chang et al.: Schwannoma Xenografts

2025

In summary, this study established a quantifiable
human VS xenograft model in SCID mice that uses MRI to
measure tumor volumes. VS xenografts demonstrate bio-
logic variability in their growth potential, but although
individual grafts may grow, persist, or regress over time,
MRI successfully quantifies these tumors noninvasively.
VS xenografts represent a model complimentary to Nf2
transgenic and knockout mice for translational research
and improved drug screening.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Dan Scoles for the RT4 cell line,
Peter Wassenaar and Abdulkerim Eroglu for technical as-
sistance, and Sarah S. Burns for critical reading of the
manuscript. Mark Lorenz was a recipient of the Young In-
vestigator Award from the Children’s Tumor Foundation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Neff BA, Welling DB, Akhmametyeva E, Chang L-S. The
molecular biology of vestibular schwannomas: dissecting
the pathogenic process at the molecular level. Otol Neuro-
tol 2006;27:197–208.

2. Rouleau GA, Merel P, Lutchman M, et al. Alteration in a new
gene encoding a putative membrane-organising protein
causes neurofibromatosis type 2. Nature 1993;363:515–521.
3. Trofatter JA, MacCollin MM, Rutter JL, et al. A novel Moesin-,
Exrin-, Radixin-like gene is a candidate for the neurofibro-
matosis 2 tumor-suppressor. Cell 1993;72:791– 800.

4. Charabi S, Klinken L, Tos M, Thomsen J. Histopathology and
growth pattern of cystic acoustic neuromas. Laryngoscope
1994;104:1348 –1352.

5. Fundova P, Charabi S, Tos M, Thomsen J. Cystic vestibular
schwannoma: surgical outcome. J Laryngol Otol 2000;114:
935–939.

6. Welling DB, Lasak JM, Akhmametyeva EM, Chang L-S.
cDNA microarray analysis of vestibular schwannomas.
Otol Neurotol 2002;23:736 –748.

7. Shin M, Ueki K, Kurita H, Kirino T. Malignant transforma-
tion of a vestibular schwannoma after gamma knife radio-
surgery. Lancet 2002;360:309 –310.

8. Niemczyk K, Vaneecloo FN, Lecomte MH, et al. Correlation
between Ki-67 index and some clinical aspects of acoustic
neuromas (vestibular schwannomas). Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 2000;123:779 –783.

9. Lee JK, Sobel RA, Chiocca EA, Kim TS, Martuza RL. Growth

of human acoustic neuromas, neurofibromas and schwan-
nomas in the subrenal capsule and sciatic nerve of the
nude mouse. J Neurooncol 1992;14:101–112.

10. Charabi S, Rygaard J, Klinken L, Tos M, Thomsen J. Subcu-
taneous growth of human acoustic schwannomas in athy-
mic nude mice. Acta Otolaryngol 1994;114:399 – 405.

11. Stidham KR, Roberson JB Jr. Human vestibular schwan-
noma growth in the nude mouse: evaluation of a modified
subcutaneous implantation model. Am J Otol 1997;18:
622– 626.

12. Yamate J, Yasui H, Benn SJ, et al. Characterization of newly
established tumor lines from a spontaneous malignant
schwannoma in F344 rats: nerve growth factor production,
growth inhibition by transforming growth factor-␤1, and
macrophage-like phenotype expression. Acta Neuropathol
(Berl) 2003;106:221–233.

13. Imada M, Sueoka N. Clonal sublines of rat neurotumor RT4
and cell differentiation. I. Isolation and characterization of
cell lines and cell type conversion. Dev Biol 1978;66:
97–108.

14. John MR, Wickert H, Zaar K, et al. A case of neuroendocrine
oncogenic osteomalacia associated with a PHEX and fibro-
blast growth factor-23 expressing sinusidal malignant
schwannoma. Bone 2001;29:393– 402.

15. Charabi S, Simonsen K, Charabi B, et al. Nerve growth factor
receptor expression in heterotransplanted vestibular
schwannoma in athymic nude mice. Acta Otolaryngol 1996;
116:59 – 63.

16. Giovannini M, Robanus-Maandag E, Niwa-Kawakita M, et al.
Schwann cell hyperplasia and tumors in transgenic mice
expressing a naturally occurring mutant NF2 protein. Genes
Dev 1999;13:978 –986.

17. Giovannini M, Robanus-Maandag E, van der Valk M, et al.
Conditional biallelic Nf2 mutation in the mouse promotes
manifestations of human neurofibromatosis type 2. Genes
Dev 2000;14:1617–1630.

18. Hung G, Colton J, Fisher L, et al. Immunohistochemistry
study of human vestibular nerve schwannoma differentia-
tion. Glia 2002;38:363–370.

19. Ona A. The mammalian vestibular ganglion cells and the
myelin sheath surrounding them. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl
1993;503:143–149.

20. Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Louis DN, Nielsen GP, et al.
Comparative pathology of nerve sheath tumors in mouse
models and humans. Cancer Res 2004;64:3718 –3724.

21. Hung G, Li X, Faudoa R, et al. Establishment and character-
ization of a schwannoma cell line from a patient with
neurofibromatosis 2. Int J Oncol 2002;20:475– 482.

Laryngoscope 116: November 2006

Chang et al.: Schwannoma Xenografts

2026

