RESEARCH REVIEW

The Learning Disabilities Network (LeaDNet):
Using Neuroﬁbromatosis Type 1 (NF1) as a
Paradigm for Translational Research
Maria T. Acosta,1,2* Carrie E. Bearden,3 Xavier F. Castellanos,4 Laurie Cutting,5 Ype Elgersma,6
Gerard Gioia,1 David H. Gutmann,7 Yong-Seok Lee,8 Eric Legius,9 Maximillian Muenke,2 Kathryn North,9
Luis F. Parada,10 Nancy Ratner,11 Kim Hunter-Schaedle,12 and Alcino J. Silva3
1The Gilbert Neuroﬁbromatosis Institute, Children’s National Medical Center, Washington District of Columbia
2National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
3University of California, Los Angeles, California
4New York University, New York, New York
5Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
6Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
7Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
8University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
9Children’s Hospital at Westmead, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
10University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, Texas
11Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio
12Children’s Tumor Foundation, New York, New York

Manuscript Received: 10 May 2012; Manuscript Accepted: 24 May 2012

Learning disabilities and other cognitive disorders represent one
of the most important unmet medical needs and a signiﬁcant
source of lifelong disability. To accelerate progress in this area,
an international consortium of researchers and clinicians, the
Learning Disabilities Network (LeaDNet), was established in
2006. Initially, LeaDNet focused on neuroﬁbromatosis type 1
(NF1), a common single gene disorder with a frequency of
1:3,000. Although NF1 is best recognized as an inherited tumor
predisposition syndrome, learning, cognitive, and neurobeha-
vioral deﬁcits account for signiﬁcant morbidity in this condition
and can have a profound impact on the quality of life of affected
individuals. Recently, there have been groundbreaking advances
in our understanding of the molecular, cellular, and neural
systems underpinnings of NF1-associated learning deﬁcits in
animal models, which precipitated clinical trials using a molec-
ularly targeted treatment for these deﬁcits. However, much
remains to be learned about the spectrum of cognitive, neuro-
logical, and psychiatric phenotypes associated with the NF1
clinical syndrome. In addition, there is a pressing need to
accelerate the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc clinical targets and treat-
ments for these phenotypes. The successes with NF1 have allowed
LeaDNet investigators to broaden their initial focus to other
genetic disorders characterized by learning disabilities and cog-
nitive deﬁcits including other RASopathies (caused by changes in
the Ras signaling pathway). The ultimate mission of LeaDNet is
to leverage an international translational consortium of clini-

How to Cite this Article:
Acosta MT, Bearden CE, Castellanos XF,
Cutting L, Elgersma Y, Gioia G, Gutmann
DH, Lee Y-S, Legius E, Muenke M, North K,
Parada LF, Ratner N, Hunter-Schaedle K,
Silva AJ. 2012. The Learning Disabilities
Network (LeaDNet): Using
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) as a
paradigm for translational research.
Am J Med Genet Part A 158A:2225–2232.

cians and neuroscientists to integrate bench-to-bedside knowl-
edge across a broad range of cognitive genetic disorders, with the
goal of accelerating the development of rational and biologically
based treatments. Ó 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

*Correspondence to:
Maria T. Acosta, M.D., Department of Neurology, Children’s National
Medical Center, 111 Michigan Av. NW, Washington, DC 20010.
E-mail: macosta@childrensnational.org
Article ﬁrst published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com): 20 July 2012
DOI 10.1002/ajmg.a.35535

Ó 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

2225

2226

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

Key words: neuroﬁbromatosis type 1;
learning disabilities;
RAS/MAPK pathway; neurodevelopmental disorders; Learning
Disabilities Network

INTRODUCTION: DEFINING THE NF1 COGNITIVE
PHENOTYPE: WHAT WE KNOW AND DON’T KNOW

Our appreciation of the spectrum of the NF1 cognitive phenotype
has signiﬁcantly expanded over the last decade. Common features
of the NF1 cognitive phenotype include problems with visuospatial
learning and memory, deﬁcits in executive function, including
prominent working memory deﬁcits, and difﬁculties with sustain-
ing and switching of attention [Acosta et al., 2006]. Global cognitive
deﬁcits can be reliably identiﬁed in children as young as 2 years of
age [Lorenzo et al., 2011]. Behavioral problems and academic
difﬁculties that mimic the manifestations present in children
with typical attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are
present in up to 60% of patients with diagnosis of NF1 [Acosta et al.,
2006; Hyman et al., 2006]. ADHD is thought to contribute to the
learning disabilities and poor social skills in NF1 [Barton and
North, 2004]. NF1 is associated with low-to-normal IQ scores,
with mean Full Scale IQ (FSIQ) in the low 90s. The frequency of

intellectual disability in NF1 is 6%, which is about twice the

frequency in the general population. Intellectual function tends to
be stable in individuals with NF1 over time [Hyman et al., 2005].
Because of the various behavioral and cognitive problems associ-
ated with NF1, up to 75% of affected children have learning
problems, and most school-age children with NF1 need additional
support in the form of special education or remedial teaching [Krab
et al., 2008a].

Despite major recent advances in our understanding of the
clinical and neurobiological aspects of the cognitive deﬁcits in
NF1, there is a pressing need to advance current knowledge of
the behavioral and cognitive deﬁcits associated with this condition.
This information will be critical to guide potential clinical and
behavioral interventions currently envisioned for NF1. While some
areas of behavior and cognition research have advanced, others
have lagged behind. For example, the neurocognitive proﬁle of
NF1 has now been fairly well characterized. The proﬁle involves a
typical pattern of difﬁculties in attention, visuospatial skills, and
working memory [Acosta et al., 2006]. A recent translational study
[Shilyansky et al., 2010] revealed hypoactivation of cortical striatal
networks and working memory deﬁcits in Nf1 mice and in NF1
patients. The studies with NF1 patients used parametric working
memory tasks and functional neuroimaging (fMRI) to show that
the degree of hypoactivation of corticostriatal networks in NF1 was
predictive of the degree of impairment in working memory per-
formance [Shilyansky et al., 2010]. However, other areas (e.g., social
cognition) in NF1 have received comparatively little attention. For
example, there is extensive evidence that the RAS/mTOR pathway is
implicated in the autism spectrum disorders (ASD), and that NF1
affects this signaling pathway. Unfortunately, little is currently
known about ASDs and other psychiatric phenotypes in NF1.
Interestingly, there is evidence suggesting that the rates of the
ASDs are higher in the NF1 population, and that Nf1 mutations
in mice affect social interactions and other behavioral measures

associated with ASDs. Moreover, there is growing evidence that
social cognition deﬁcits are a key target for intervention in psychi-
atric disorders, such as schizophrenia, since these deﬁcits are a key
predictor of psychosocial outcome. Further investigation of social
cognition and other ASD phenotypes in NF1, may be of great
importance for the development of targeted interventions that
will improve cognitive and psychiatric health of individuals with
NF1.

Neuroimaging techniques have provided important, although
controversial, insights into speciﬁc NF1-related learning problems.
However, no systematic approach has been taken to resolve and
understand these controversial ﬁndings. Some of the neuroimaging
ﬁndings reported by multiple research groups include potential
increases in gray matter volume, increases in the cross-sectional
area of the corpus callosum, and the presence of T2 hyperintensities
(T2H) in the thalamus [Hyman et al., 2005, 2007; Acosta et al., 2006;
Pride et al., 2010]. Unfortunately, the tentative and controversial
nature of some of these measures has prevented them from being
used clinically. Larger sample sizes and longitudinal studies are
necessary to better understand and characterize both possible
neuroanatomic changes in NF1 over time and the real impact of
these changes in cognitive and behavioral deﬁcits.

The purpose of our review is to provide a comprehensive over-
view of the current state of knowledge of cognitive disorders in NF1
and their treatment and illustrate how Learning Disabilities
Network (LeaDNet) represents a paradigm for related translational
research.

THE GENETICS OF NFI-ASSOCIATED COGNITIVE AND
BEHAVIORAL DEFICITS

As a single gene disorder, NF1 has enormous potential for elucidat-
ing gene–brain–behavior connections. These connections are far
more difﬁcult and problematic to establish in multigenic disorders,
such as ADHD, autism, and schizophrenia, where both the under-
lying mechanisms and associated phenotypes are far more diverse
and complex [Acosta et al., 2004]. Hopefully, the lessons learned in
NF1 may be helpful for designing similar studies in more complex
and heterogeneous conditions. Data from animal models and
clinical neuroimaging studies have shown that NF1 genetic deﬁcits
impact both adult function and early brain development. These
deﬁcits ultimately manifest in a wide variety of clinical features,
from clinically asymptomatic to severe phenotypes. Insights gained
from studies of the genetic basis of NF1 phenotypes have been
crucial for understanding and developing treatments for this
condition.

The NF1 gene encodes neuroﬁbromin, a large 2,818 amino acid
protein containing a GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-related
domain, which serves to accelerate the inactivation of the RAS
signaling molecule. Previous studies with Nf1 heterozygous mutant
mice (Nf1þ/ ) showed that these mice have learning and memory

and other behavioral deﬁcits that parallel key features of the
cognitive phenotype of NF1 patients [Silva et al., 1997; Costa
et al., 2002; Cui et al., 2008]. Studies of these mutant mice revealed
that their hippocampal learning and memory deﬁcits are caused by
impairments in long-term potentiation (LTP) [Costa et al., 2002;

ACOSTA ET AL.

2227

Cui et al., 2008], a synaptic mechanism involved in learning and
memory [Lee and Silva, 2009]. Further studies of these LTP deﬁcits
revealed that neuroﬁbromin, the protein encoded by the NF1 gene,
regulates Ras/MAPK signaling presynaptically in hippocampal
GABAergic neurons, and that in Nf1þ/  mice GABA release is

enhanced [Cui et al., 2008]. A number of observations showed that
this increase in GABA release is the cause for the LTP and learning

deﬁcits described for the Nf1þ/  mice. These included the ﬁnding

that doses of a GABA receptor blocker that do not affect LTP or
learning in control mice, completely reverse the LTP and learning

deﬁcits of the Nf1þ/  mutant mice [Cui et al., 2008]. More

importantly, lovastatin, an FDA-approved drug that decreases
the isoprenylation and therefore the activation of RAS, can reverse

the GABA release, LTP and learning impairments of the Nf1þ/ 

mutant mice [Li et al., 2005].

There are three major alternatively spliced exons of the NF1 gene:
exon 9a, 23a, and 48a. The NF1 isoform containing exon 48a is
highly expressed in adult and embryonic cardiac and muscle tissues,
but not in the adult brain [Gutmann et al., 1995]. In contrast, the
most commonly expressed alternative isoform NF1-Ex23a (NF1
type II) is expressed in the brain, and is particularly highly expressed
in astrocytes. This isoform has decreased RAS-GAP activity, and
mice lacking exon 23a show speciﬁc hippocampal learning impair-
ments [Costa et al., 2001]. Interestingly, expression of the alter-
native isoform NF1-exon 9a is exclusively restricted to neurons of
the central nervous system [Gutmann et al., 1999]. Exon 9a encodes
only 10 amino acids in the amino terminal region of neuroﬁbromin.
NF1-exon 9a expression is enriched in the septum, striatum, cortex,
and hippocampus beginning in the ﬁrst week of postnatal life.
However, until recently, the importance of this neuronal isoform
was unclear. Nf1-9a*/9a*mutant mice, which express neuroﬁbro-
min at normal levels but lack exon 9a, have spatial learning and
hippocampal plasticity deﬁcits that are similar to Nf1þ/  mice.
Like the Nf1þ/  mice, the Nf1-9a*/9a*mutant mice show an

increase in GABA-mediated inhibition which leads to LTP deﬁcits.
All together, these results indicate that neuroﬁbromin exon 9a is
critical for synaptic plasticity and learning in the central nervous
system.

In addition to functioning as a negative RAS regulator, studies
in Drosophila and mouse homozygous cells indicate that neuro-
ﬁbromin is also a positive regulator of the cAMP/PKA pathway
[Dasgupta et al., 2003; Brown et al., 2011, 2012]. In ﬂies, cAMP
signaling is critical for learning. Nf1 null Drosophila mutants
showed reduced AC activity as well as deﬁcits in olfactory learning,
which can be rescued by expression of rutabaga, a constitutively
active AC [Guo et al., 2000]. Interestingly, unlike learning deﬁcits,
Nf1-regulated RAS activity and its GAP domain are responsible for
long-term memory in Drosophila. Thus, neuroﬁbromin regulates
learning and memory in Drosophila by two separate signaling
mechanisms (cAMP and Ras signaling, respectively) [Medeiros
et al., 2007]. Distinct functional domains of neuroﬁbromatosis type
1 (NF1) regulate immediate memory versus long-term memory
formation [Ho et al., 2007]. Abnormal RAS/MAPK signaling is
also responsible for circadian deﬁcits in Nf1 mutant Drosophila,
a result that suggests that it may be worth testing the hypothesis
that sleeping problems in NF1 could be treated drugs that target
this signaling pathway (e.g., statins) [Williams et al., 2001].

LESSONS FROM OTHER COGNITIVE DISORDERS

For the ﬁrst time [Costa et al., 2002] animal model studies of NF1
showed that it was possible to intervene in adult mice and dra-
matically rescue a number of behavioral phenotypes, including
attention and cognitive deﬁcits [Li et al., 2005; Cui et al., 2008].
Previous dogma maintained that neurodevelopmental disorders,
such as NF1, are caused by developmental changes irreversible in
adults. The work with NF1 motivated similar studies in a dozen
other conditions, including tuberous sclerosis, fragile X, Angelman
syndrome, Down syndrome, and Rett syndrome. All together, these
studies showed that it is possible to reverse key cognitive deﬁcits
associated with neurodevelopmental disorders, even when the
treatments are initiated in adult mice [Ehninger et al., 2008b].
Although this effort is still in its infancy, follow-up clinical trials
suggest that similar adult interventions may also be successful in
patients from these various disorders.

Importantly, research in an array [Arcos-Burgos et al., 2004] of
other medical conditions associated with cognitive deﬁcits can also
inform our understanding of the NF1 phenotype. Examples include
(but are not limited to) ADHD, Williams syndrome, ASD, tuberous
sclerosis (TSC), and fragile X syndrome, all conditions with some
parallel neurological deﬁcits (and therefore clinical needs) as NF1.
A decade of genetic studies of ADHD—the most common
behavioral disorder in children with a prevalence of up to 10%
[Acosta et al., 2008]—has provided an invaluable opportunity to
study and better understand the connections between genetics,
behavior, and biological mechanisms. Genome-wide linkage stud-
ies in large multigenerational families have identiﬁed chromosomal
regions containing putative ADHD genes [Arcos-Burgos et al.,
2010; Jain et al., 2011]. Recently, the ﬁrst ADHD susceptibility
genes were identiﬁed, and interactions between them have been
reported to double the risk for ADHD. Interestingly, detailed
clinical studies have shown that interactions between two gene
loci may be able to predict both ADHD severity and its long-term
outcome [Acosta et al., 2011b]. ADHD is common in individuals
affected with the RASopathies.

The RASopathies are a group of clinically overlapping disorders
caused by mutations in genes coding for key components of the
RAS-MAP-kinase pathway [Rauen et al., 2010]. The NF1 gene was
the ﬁrst gene identiﬁed in a human genetic disorder that coded for a
protein of the RAS-MAP-kinase pathway. Clinical studies have
shown that the RASopathies are generally associated with cognitive
and behavioral problems. In addition to NF1, studies in individuals
with Legius, Costello, Noonan, and CFC syndrome
(all
RASopathies) showed cognitive and behavioral problems of differ-
ent degrees. For example, learning and attention deﬁcits are fre-
quently reported in children with Legius syndrome caused by
mutations in SPRED1 [Messiaen et al., 2009; Rauen et al., 2010]
a negative regulator of the RAS-MAPK pathway at the level of
RAS–RAF interaction. Further studies in Spred1 knockout mice
revealed hippocampal synaptic plasticity and learning deﬁcits
similar to those previously described in Nf1þ/  heterozygous

mice [Denayer et al., 2008]. A considerable amount of data from
humans and animal models indicate that the RAS-MAP-kinase
pathway is an important regulator of learning, memory, and
behavior. Pharmacological manipulations of this pathway are

2228

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

obvious choices for clinical trials designed to test treatments for the
learning disabilities in these children [Li et al., 2005; Acosta et al.,
2011a]. Similarly, studies in animal models of Noonan syndrome
also point to deregulations in Ras/MAPK signaling responsible
for deﬁcits in plasticity and subsequent learning and memory
impairments.

Recent human genetic studies have implicated the PI3 kinase/
mTOR pathway in a small subset of autism cases that are related to
genetically inherited diseases [Hoeffer and Klann, 2010]. A condi-
tional knockout mouse line with Pten deleted in a subset of
postmitotic neurons in the cortex and hippocampus had normal
life span, but exhibited stereotypic behavioral abnormalities rem-
iniscent of ASDs [Kwon et al., 2006; Zhou et al., 2009]. This led to
the development of an inducible Nestin-creERT2; Ptenﬂox/ﬂox
mouse line in which cre gene expression, and therefore Pten
ablation, can be induced pharmacologically (by tamoxifen) at
various developmental stages in the neural stem cell population.
Studies using this inducible line addressed two important issues:
First, whether targeting Pten ablation to the stem/progenitor
cell lineage is sufﬁcient to cause ASD behaviors in this mouse
model. Second, whether the previous PI3K pathway mouse model
(Nse-cre; Ptenﬂox/ﬂox) identiﬁed a speciﬁc anatomic region
responsible for certain forms of ASDs. Preliminary results show
that Pten deletion in hippocampal stem cells results in many
phenotypic similarities with a previous mouse model, where
Pten was deleted in mature neurons of the hippocampus and cortex.
This suggests a role for hippocampal stem cells in the development
of ASDs. It is possible that social cognition deﬁcits in NF1 are caused
by a similar mechanism since NF1/MAPK signaling may affect
common downstream signaling components, including mTOR
signaling [Li et al., 2012].

Animal studies with TSC, a genetic condition caused by muta-
tions in a GTPase complex, have also recently pointed to a potential
targeted treatment. Just as NF1, TSC is characterized by somatic and
CNS phenotypes, and an increase in the incidence of ASDs,
cognitive deﬁcits, and seizures. Studies of animal models of TSC
revealed changes in synaptic plasticity and learning and memory

[Ehninger et al., 2008a; Auerbach et al., 2011]. As with Nf1þ/ 
mutant mice, Tsc2þ/  mice show alterations in hippocampal LTP

and deﬁcits in hippocampal learning and memory. Interestingly,
important aspects of the phenotypes associated with TSC are only
fully revealed when environmental factors (i.e., immune activation
during pregnancy) are considered and included [Zhao et al., 2010].

Tsc2þ/  mutant mice only show social interaction deﬁcits, a

hallmark phenotype of the ASDs, when their mothers’ immune
system is challenged during pregnancy [Zhao et al., 2010]. Impor-
tantly, studies in TSC patients found evidence consistent with
this hypothesis [Zhao et al., 2010]. This suggests the possibility
that important aspects of the phenotypes of neurodevelopmental
disorders, including those in NF1, may only be revealed, studied,
and understood, when environmental
factors are taken into
consideration.

A combination of clinical observations and neurobiological
ﬁndings will be critical for advancing the understanding and
developing treatments for complex genetic or/and clinical condi-
tions. Some examples of those complex genetic conditions include
extreme conditions like holoproscencephaly (HPE). HPE has been

used as a model of the potential effects of complex genetic deﬁcits in
normal brain development. HPE is the most common anomaly of
the developing human forebrain, seen in 1:250 conceptions, with a
high rate of fetal demise and a birth prevalence of 1:8,000 live births
[Solomon et al., 2010]. Over a dozen genes, contributing to several
signaling pathways have been implicated in the etiology of HPE
[Roessler and Muenke, 2010]. In addition, a number of environ-
mental factors including maternal serum cholesterol levels, and
teratogens, have also been implicated [Edison and Muenke, 2004;
Johnson and Rasmussen, 2010]. Incomplete penetrance and var-
iable expressivity has led to tremendous interfamilial phenotypic
variability in HPE. Infants with severe CNS anomalies and severe
cognitive disability have been observed to have family members
with identical gene mutations but very different phenotypes. These
family members with identical mutations appear to be clinically and
phenotypically normal, and may even be intellectually gifted with
an above average IQ. Partial penetrance is also observed in NF1
phenotypes, and understanding its causes is an important future
goal of NF1 research.

The variability in the clinical cognitive proﬁle of NF1 could
be caused by a number of factors, including the presence of micro-
deletions [Descheemaeker et al., 2004], somatic mosaicism, subtle
NF1 missense mutations, modifying genes, factors governing bial-
lelic NF1 gene inactivation during brain development, and poorly
understood environmental factors [Ehninger et al., 2012]. Future
cognitive studies of NF1 will require more extensive genetic and
genomic approaches. These studies could be directed at unraveling
the complex genomic and environmental factors that can modify
NF1 phenotypes (learning deﬁcits, ADHD, etc.) in both animal
models and human subjects. To understand and treat this and other
disorders of ras signaling, it will be critical to understand the
genomic and environmental complexity behind the cluster of
phenotypes associated with each of these disorders, since this
information most likely will instruct clinical decisions as to the
best treatment for any one particular patient with a RASopathy.

ADVANCING THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTIONS FROM
MOUSE MODELS TO THE CLINIC

What do we know about brain development and cognitive mech-
anisms from NF1 animal models, and how can we apply this
knowledge to clinical care and development of therapeutic inter-
ventions? Progress in animal models, and in the clinical under-
standing of NF1 cognitive defects, has begun to provide the basis for
an initial foray into identifying and testing targeted interventions
for NF1 learning disabilities. Tools from cognitive neuroscience
have been useful in translational research and in treatment develop-
ment for cognitive impairments in NF1. Behavioral and electro-
physiological studies showed that the working memory deﬁcits of

Nf1þ/  mice are probably caused by abnormally enhanced

activity-dependent GABA release in cortico-striatal inhibitory net-
works. Parallel fMRI studies in NF1 individuals showed that the
hypoactivation of dorsal lateral prefrontal circuits correlated with
their working memory deﬁcits [Shilyansky et al., 2010]. Together,
these integrative mouse and human studies suggest that one
function of neuroﬁbromin is to regulate the prefrontal and striatal
inhibitory networks critical for working memory performance.

ACOSTA ET AL.

2229

Recent studies using Nf1 genetically engineered mice have been
instructive for elucidating the cellular and molecular defects under-
lying the cognitive deﬁcits seen in children with NF1. Another Nf1
mouse model was engineered that used the Cre recombination
system and the germline Nf1 heterozygous null mutation to gen-
erate a Nf1þ/  mutant with a complete loss of the Nf1 gene in
GFAP expressing glial cells (Nf1 OPG mouse) [Brown et al., 2010b].
Unlike the Nf1þ/  mice, the Nf1 OPG mice developed optic

gliomas [Bajenaru et al., 2003; Zhu et al., 2005; Brown et al.,
2012], a common tumor seen in approximately 15% of children
with NF1 [Listernick et al., 1997]. The OPG mouse was used to
gain insight into the frequently encountered attention system
abnormalities seen in children with NF1. These studies reported
novel defects in non-selective and selective attention without an
accompanying hyperactivity phenotype. Speciﬁcally, the Nf1 OPG
mice exhibit reduced rearing in response to novel objects and
environmental stimuli [Brown et al., 2010a]. Similar to children
with NF1, the attention system dysfunction in these mice is reversed
by treatment with methylphenidate (MPH) suggesting a defect in
brain catecholamine homeostasis. Using several methods, includ-
ing positron emission tomography (PET), these studies demon-
strated that the attention system abnormalities in Nf1 OPG mice are
the consequence of reduced dopamine (DA) levels in the striatum,
which is normalized following either MPH or L-dopa administra-
tion [Brown et al., 2011]. Interestingly, previous studies demon-

strated that the attention deﬁcits observed in Nf1þ/  mice could be

reversed with a drug (lovastatin) that reverses the increased Ras
signaling and abnormally high GABA release deﬁcits described in
these mice. This demonstrates that two very different treatments,
likely working at different steps in the pathways affected, can be
used to treat attention deﬁcits in mice with NF1 mutations.
Similarly, multiple treatments will be useful in NF1 patients to
address potential heterogeneity caused by poorly understood
genetic and environmental factors: NF1 patients resilient to one
treatment may nevertheless beneﬁt from another.

Interestingly, recent studies showed that in addition to deﬁcits
in GABA release and LTP caused by hyperactivation of the Ras

signaling pathway, the Nf1þ/  mutation also results in a cell-

autonomous defect in neuron growth cones and neurite extension
that is caused by deregulation of cAMP signaling [Brown et al.,
2010b]. Collectively, these data suggest that CNS phenotypes in
NF1 may be treated by agents that normalize abnormalities in either
Ras signaling, cAMP signaling, or DA homeostasis.

Studies in mouse models have led to the ﬁrst targeted therapeutic
intervention trials in children with NF1. Studies of these mice
showed that abnormal Ras activation is associated with impaired
hippocampal-based learning that is reversible with lovastatin, a
commonly prescribed medication. The initial results of phase 1
studies, have demonstrated that two commonly used statins that
permeate the blood–brain barrier (simvastatin and lovastatin) can
be safely prescribed in the NF1 population [Krab et al., 2008b;
Acosta et al., 2011a]. In addition, these studies provided prelimi-
nary evidence that statin treatment may ameliorate speciﬁc
cognitive deﬁcits in children with NF1 [Acosta et al., 2011a]. An
initial small double-blind trial using simvastatin had limitations in
terms of selection sample and maybe in treatment duration time
[Krab et al., 2008b]. However, two additional large multicenter

double-blind placebo control clinical trials, targeting cognitive
deﬁcits in NF1, are currently on-going http://www.clinicaltrials.

gov/ct2/show/NCT00352599?term¼neuroﬁbromatosisþtypeþ1
&rank¼1 http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00853580?
term¼neuroﬁbromatosisþtypeþ1&rank¼7.

Recently, resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging
(rs-fMRI) approaches, which assess the brain’s intrinsic functional
architecture, have been successfully used to index human brain
function. The brain exhibits ultra-low frequency ﬂuctuations
(<0.1 Hz), which are easily observable during blood oxygenation
level-dependent (BOLD) fMRI runs of as little as 6 min. These
spontaneous ﬂuctuations show temporal coherence between ana-
tomically connected brain regions, and are functionally related
through co-activity in response to task demands [Bajenaru et al.,
2003; Zhu et al., 2005; Raichle, 2010; Brown et al., 2012]. The
patterns of positive and negative temporal correlation delineate the
entire complement of functional circuitry of any individual. These
synchronous patterns are both universal and individually speciﬁc in
their extent and strength. This methodology has the potential to
provide regionally speciﬁc information regarding single subjects at
baseline, and after potentially therapeutic interventions. A recent
small pilot study of seven children with NF1, scanned before and
after a 12-week treatment with lovastatin (open label), illustrated
the promise and potential of this powerful approach for under-
standing the neurocognitive underpinnings of the behavioral and
cognitive deﬁcits associated with NF1 [Chabernaud et al., 2012].
Other potential interventions that could be tested in the NF1
population include some already available stimulant medications
for ADHD. As mentioned above, a recent study with Nf1 OPG mice
suggest that abnormal DA homeostasis is a key contributor to the
attention deﬁcits associated with this condition, and that these
deﬁcits may be reversed with MPH. These results with the mutant
mice provide an incentive for pursuing comprehensive clinical
trials of stimulant medication in children with NF1. The availability
of preclinical Nf1 mouse models with attention system deﬁcits,
which can be rapidly assessed behaviorally and neurochemically
(PET imaging) [Brown et al., 2010a, 2011], provide new oppor-
tunities for understanding the genomic and environmental varia-
bles that could affect the clinical impact of MPH treatments.

Despite the justiﬁed optimism concerning the promise of
current animal model studies of NF1, a cautionary note is in order:
the road from animal model to human behavior is far from
straightforward. Several limitations exist, including the differences
between species, the complexity of the fundamental neurocognitive
mechanisms, our poor understanding of these conditions, and the
enormous variability of the clinical manifestations targeted by these
potential interventions.

POSSIBLE FUTURE INTERVENTION TRIALS FOR NF1
READING DISABILITIES

As mentioned above, approximately half of children with NF1 have
learning disabilities. Of the various types of learning disabilities,
reading disabilities are common in this population and often
the most debilitating, because of their importance for academic
and job success. Treatment of reading disabilities in the general
population with no identiﬁed genetic syndrome (i.e., idiopathic

2230

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

reading disability; IRD) has been well-researched with outcomes
described in terms of reading achievement, using standardized tests,
and neurobiological correlates of improved reading skill, using
neuroimaging. If those interventions were useful in children with
NF1, then reading disabilities could be an important clinical target
in this population [Cutting and Levine, 2010]. Previous studies
have shown that children with NF1 and reading disabilities
performed similarly to children with IRD in phonological,
rapid naming, and reading comprehension measurements, but
demonstrated more pronounced visual spatial deﬁcits [Cutting
and Levine, 2010]. In recent studies, ﬁndings suggest that children
with NF1 with reading difﬁculty respond to intervention techni-
ques known to work with IRD, and, furthermore, respond to
particular reading intervention approaches better than others.
Nevertheless, there is still need to gain a deeper understanding
of the cognitive characteristics associated with reading disabilities
in children with NF1, and how this treatment may interact with
drug therapy, as well as presence of ADHD. In addition,
it
is necessary to conﬁrm behavioral observations that treatment
with a reading intervention results in neurobiological changes
(measured using fMRI and DTI neuroimaging) in this population
as compared to children with IRD. Ultimately, improvement in the
quality of life (e.g., school performance) of children with NF1 may
depend on a complex combination of behavioral and drug therapy.
Drugs, such as statins and MPH, treat the abnormal biochemistry
and physiology of the condition, but they do not address the need to
bring these children up to par with their peers in a wide range of
social and cognitive skills. Extensive behavioral interventions,
in parallel with appropriate pharmacological treatments, may
be needed for treating the cognitive and behavioral phenotypes
associated with NF1.

THE LEADNET CONSORTIUM: A MODEL FOR
ADVANCING NF1 COGNITIVE UNDERSTANDING AND
THERAPEUTIC DEVELOPMENT

Cognitive deﬁcits have a long-term impact in the quality of life of
the NF1 population. These deﬁcits are complex and it is clear that an
organization like LeaDNet, where neuroscientists and clinicians
work together, is needed to accelerate and facilitate research and
develop effective treatments for these problems. LeaDNet is also
critical for clinical studies to test the efﬁcacy of treatments devel-
oped in animal models, since these trials need large numbers of
patients that are only possible in multicenter collaborative studies.
Additionally, the LeaDNet collaborative network will also have a
central role in developing simpler cognitive and behavioral meas-
urements that are easily comparable across clinical centers and that
facilitate the participation of clinical sites with different levels of
expertise. For example, the use of standard measurements that can
be obtained from interviews with parents, teachers, and caregivers
could be encouraged and promoted with the help of LeaDNet
investigators all over the world.

The LeaDNet structure will also be central to continue to tighten
the connections and communication between neuroscientists
working in animal models, cognitive neuroscientists and clinicians
participating in clinical trials, so that advances in the laboratory can

reach the clinic efﬁciently and effectively. LeaDNet’s involvement in
NF1 has been successful, particularly in this area, as the statin
cognitive trials indicate. It is possible that trials targeting indica-
tions, such as ASD and ADHD in the NF1 population will follow
closely behind; thus, observations in mouse models promise to
continue to inform and guide clinical trials for NF1 patients with
these conditions, and LeaDNet will have an important role in
catalyzing these collaborations. Beyond studies in animal models,
it is also important to introduce new technological innovations into
clinical studies. This includes new brain imaging techniques, novel
cognitive instruments, and biomarkers to track clinical progres-
sion, a process that is tremendously facilitated when neuroscientists
with different expertise collaborate with clinicians. The need for
biomarkers is especially critical, since improvements in certain
cognitive measures may take longer to be evident than the duration
of clinical trials. Very likely, improvements in speciﬁc cognitive
domains may require not only the reversal of underlying biochem-
ical deﬁcits (e.g., increased Ras/MAPK signaling), but also behav-
ioral and cognitive interventions that will need time to improve the
quality of life of NF1 patients. The common denominator in all of
these important future initiatives is the need for close collaborations
amongst clinicians and neuroscientists working in different uni-
versities and centers around the world. The complexity of these
challenges can only be met effectively within a collaborative frame-
work like the one provided by LeaDNet.

In summary, studies in NF1 have broken new ground in the
understanding and treatment of neurodevelopmental disorders,
and similar strategies in other genetic models have already shown
that the approaches developed for NF1 may be generally applicable.
Similarly, strategies and ﬁndings from studies of fragile X, ASD,
ADHD, HPE, schizophrenia, TSC, and reading disabilities can also
be applied in NF1. For example, cognitive neuroscience strategies
that have been widely used in autism and schizophrenia, and that
take advantage of a detailed dissection of the cognitive phenotypes
of these disorders, are much needed in NF1. We have reason for
hope: we are closer than ever to a targeted treatment for cognitive
deﬁcits associated with NF1. With LeaDNet we have in place a
collaborative network of a highly diverse group of neuroscientists
and clinicians that will be critical for translating advances in the
understanding of this condition into clinical interventions, and
hopefully, measureable improvements in the quality of life of the
patients we all serve.

REFERENCES

Acosta MT, Arcos-Burgos M, Muenke M. 2004. Attention deﬁcit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): Complex phenotype, simple genotype?
Genet Med 6:1–15.

Acosta MT, Gioia GA, Silva AJ. 2006. Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: New
insights into neurocognitive issues. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 6:136–143.

Acosta MT, Castellanos FX, Bolton KL, Balog JZ, Eagen P, Nee L, Jones J,
Palacio L, Sarampote C, Russell HF, Berg K, Arcos-Burgos M, Muenke M.
2008. Latent class subtyping of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder and
comorbid conditions. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 47:797–807.

Acosta MT, Kardel PG, Walsh KS, Rosenbaum KN, Gioia GA, Packer RJ.
2011a. Lovastatin as treatment for neurocognitive deﬁcits in neuro-
ﬁbromatosis type 1: Phase I study. Pediatr Neurol 45:241–245.

ACOSTA ET AL.

2231

Acosta MT, Velez JI, Bustamante ML, Arcos-Burgos M, Muenke M. 2011b.
A two-locus genetic interaction between LPHN3 and 11 q predicts
ADHD severity and long-term outcome. Transl Psychiatry 1:e17.DOI:
10.1038.14 Published online 5 July 2011.

Denayer E, Ahmed T, Brems H, Van WG, Borgesius NZ, Callaerts-Vegh Z,
Yoshimura A, Hartmann D, Elgersma Y, D’Hooge R, Legius E, Balschun
D. 2008. Spred1 is required for synaptic plasticity and hippocampus-
dependent learning. J Neurosci 28:14443–14449.

Arcos-Burgos M, Castellanos FX, Pineda D, Lopera F, Palacio JD, Palacio
LG, Rapoport JL, Berg K, Bailey-Wilson JE, Muenke M. 2004. Attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder in a population isolate: Linkage to loci at
4q13.2, 5q33.3, 11q22, and 17p11. Am J Hum Genet 75:998–1014.

Arcos-Burgos M, Jain M, Acosta MT, Shively S, Stanescu H, Wallis D,
Domene S, Velez JI, Karkera JD, Balog J, Berg K, Kleta R, Gahl WA,
Roessler E, Long R, Lie J, Pineda D, Londono AC, Palacio JD, Arbelaez A,
Lopera F, Elia J, Hakonarson H, Johansson S, Knappskog PM, Haavik J,
Ribases M, Cormand B, Bayes M, Casas M, Ramos-Quiroga JA, Hervas A,
Maher BS, Faraone SV, Seitz C, Freitag CM, Palmason H, Meyer J,
Romanos M, Walitza S, Hemminger U, Warnke A, Romanos J, Renner T,
Jacob C, Lesch KP, Swanson J, Vortmeyer A, Bailey-Wilson JE,
Castellanos FX, Muenke M. 2010. A common variant of the latrophilin
3 gene, LPHN3, confers susceptibility to ADHD and predicts effective-
ness of stimulant medication. Mol Psychiatry 15:1053–1066.

Auerbach BD, Osterweil EK, Bear MF. 2011. Mutations causing syndromic
autism deﬁne an axis of synaptic pathophysiology. Nature 480:63–68.

Bajenaru ML, Hernandez MR, Perry A, Zhu Y, Parada LF, Garbow JR,
Gutmann DH. 2003. Optic nerve glioma in mice requires astrocyte
Nf1 gene inactivation and Nf1 brain heterozygosity. Cancer Res
63:8573–8577.

Barton B, North K. 2004. Social skills of children with neuroﬁbromatosis

type 1. Dev Med Child Neurol 46:553–563.

Brown JA, Emnett RJ, White CR, Yuede CM, Conyers SB, O’Malley KL,
Wozniak DF, Gutmann DH. 2010a. Reduced striatal dopamine underlies
the attention system dysfunction in neuroﬁbromatosis-1 mutant mice.
Hum Mol Genet 19:4515–4528.

Brown JA, Gianino SM, Gutmann DH. 2010b. Defective cAMP generation
underlies the sensitivity of CNS neurons to neuroﬁbromatosis-1 hetero-
zygosity. J Neurosci 30:5579–5589.

Brown JA, Xu J, Diggs-Andrews KA, Wozniak DF, Mach RH, Gutmann
DH. 2011. PET imaging for attention deﬁcit preclinical drug testing in
neuroﬁbromatosis-1 mice. Exp Neurol 232:333–338.

Brown JA, Diggs-Andrews KA, Gianino SM, Gutmann DH. 2012.
Neuroﬁbromatosis-1 heterozygosity impairs CNS neuronal morphology
in a cAMP/PKA/ROCK-dependent manner. Mol Cell Neurosci 49:
13–22.

Chabernaud C, Mennes M, Kardel PG, Gaillard WD, Kalbﬂeisch ML,
VanMeter JW, Packer RJ, Milham MP, Castellanos FX, Acosta MT. 2012.
Lovastatin regulates brain spontaneous low-frequency brain activity in
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Neurosci Lett 515:28–33.

Costa RM, Yang T, Huynh DP, Pulst SM, Viskochil DH, Silva AJ, Brannan
CI. 2001. Learning deﬁcits, but normal development and tumor predis-
position, in mice lacking exon 23a of Nf1. Nat Genet 27:399–405.

Costa RM, Federov NB, Kogan JH, Murphy GG, Stern J, Ohno M,
Kucherlapati R, Jacks T, Silva AJ. 2002. Mechanism for the learning
deﬁcits in a mouse model of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Nature 415:
526–530.

Cui Y, Costa RM, Murphy GG, Elgersma Y, Zhu Y, Gutmann DH, Parada
LF, Mody I, Silva AJ. 2008. Neuroﬁbromin regulation of ERK signaling
modulates GABA release and learning. Cell 135:549–560.

Cutting LE, Levine TM. 2010. Cognitive proﬁle of children with neuro-
ﬁbromatosis and reading disabilities. Child Neuropsychol 16:417–432.

Descheemaeker MJ, Roelandts K, De RT, Brems H, Fryns JP, Legius E. 2004.
Intelligence in individuals with a neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 microdele-
tion. Am J Med Genet Part A 131A:325–326.

Edison RJ, Muenke M. 2004. Central nervous system and limb anomalies
in case reports of ﬁrst-trimester statin exposure. N Engl J Med 350:
1579–1582.
V, Silva AJ. 2008a. Reversal of learning deﬁcits in a Tsc2þ/  mouse
model of tuberous sclerosis. Nat Med 14:843–848.

Ehninger D, Han S, Shilyansky C, Zhou Y, Li W, Kwiatkowski DJ, Ramesh

Ehninger D, Li W, Fox K, Stryker MP, Silva AJ. 2008b. Reversing neuro-

developmental disorders in adults. Neuron 60:950–960.

Ehninger D, Sano Y, de Vries PJ, Dies K, Franz D, Geschwind DH, Kaur M,
Lee YS, Li W, Lowe JK, Nakagawa JA, Sahin M, Smith K, Whittemore V,
Silva AJ. 2012. Gestational immune activation and Tsc2 haploinsufﬁ-
ciency cooperate to disrupt fetal survival and may perturb social behavior
in adult mice. Mol Psychiatry 17:62–70.

Guo HF, Tong J, Hannan F, Luo L, Zhong Y. 2000. A neuroﬁbromatosis-1-
regulated pathway is required for learning in Drosophila. Nature 403:
895–898.

Gutmann DH, Geist RT, Rose K, Wright DE. 1995. Expression of two
new protein isoforms of the neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 gene product,
neuroﬁbromin, in muscle tissues. Dev Dyn 202:302–311.

Gutmann DH, Zhang Y, Hirbe A. 1999. Developmental regulation of a
neuron-speciﬁc neuroﬁbromatosis 1 isoform. Ann Neurol 46:777–782.

Ho IS, Hannan F, Guo HF, Hakker I, Zhong Y. 2007. Distinct functional
domains of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 regulate immediate versus long-
term memory formation. J Neurosci 27:6852–6857.

Hoeffer CA, Klann E. 2010. mTOR signaling: At the crossroads of plasticity,

memory and disease. Trends Neurosci 33:67–75.

Hyman SL, Shores A, North KN. 2005. The nature and frequency of
cognitive deﬁcits in children with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Neurology
65:1037–1044.

Hyman SL, Arthur SE, North KN. 2006. Learning disabilities in children
with neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1: Subtypes, cognitive proﬁle, and
attention-deﬁcit-hyperactivity disorder. Dev Med Child Neurol 48:
973–977.

Hyman SL, Gill DS, Shores EA, Steinberg A, North KN. 2007. T2
hyperintensities in children with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 and their
relationship to cognitive functioning. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
78:1088–1091.

Jain M, Velez JI, Acosta MT, Palacio LG, Balog J, Roessler E, Pineda D,
Londono AC, Palacio JD, Arbelaez A, Lopera F, Elia J, Hakonarson H,
Seitz C, Freitag CM, Palmason H, Meyer J, Romanos M, Walitza S,
Hemminger U, Warnke A, Romanos J, Renner T, Jacob C, Lesch KP,
Swanson J, Castellanos FX, Bailey-Wilson JE, Arcos-Burgos M, Muenke
M. 2011. A cooperative interaction between LPHN3 and 11q doubles the
risk for ADHD. Mol Psychiatry 1–7 [Epub ahead of print].

Johnson CY, Rasmussen SA. 2010. Non-genetic risk factors for holopro-

sencephaly. Am J Med Genet Part C 154C:73–85.

Krab LC, Aarsen FK, de Goede-Bolder A, Catsman-Berrevoets CE, Arts WF,
Moll HA, Elgersma Y. 2008a. Impact of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 on
school performance. J Child Neurol 23:1002–1010.

Dasgupta B, Dugan LL, Gutmann DH. 2003. The neuroﬁbromatosis 1 gene
product neuroﬁbromin regulates pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating
polypeptide-mediated signaling in astrocytes. J Neurosci 23:8949–8954.

Krab LC, de Goede-Bolder A, Aarsen FK, Pluijm SM, Bouman MJ, van der
Geest JN, Lequin M, Catsman CE, Arts WF, Kushner SA, Silva AJ, De
Zeeuw CI, Moll HA, Elgersma Y. 2008b. Effect of simvastatin on cognitive

2232

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS PART A

functioning in children with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: A randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 300:287–294.

Kwon CH, Luikart BW, Powell CM, Zhou J, Matheny SA, Zhang W, Li Y,
Baker SJ, Parada LF. 2006. Pten regulates neuronal arborization and
social interaction in mice. Neuron 50:377–388.

Lee YS, Silva AJ. 2009. The molecular and cellular biology of enhanced

cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:126–140.

Li W, Cui Y, Kushner SA, Brown RA, Jentsch JD, Frankland PW, Cannon
TD, Silva AJ. 2005. The HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor lovastatin reverses
the learning and attention deﬁcits in a mouse model of neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1. Curr Biol 15:1961–1967.

Li Y, Li Y, McKay RM, Riethmacher D, Parada LF. 2012. Neuroﬁbromin
modulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis and behavioral effects of
antidepressants. J Neurosci 32:3529–3539.

Listernick R, Louis DN, Packer RJ, Gutmann DH. 1997. Optic pathway
gliomas in children with neuroﬁbromatosis 1: Consensus statement from
the NF1 Optic Pathway Glioma Task Force. Ann Neurol 41:143–149.

Lorenzo J, Barton B, Acosta MT, North K. 2011. Mental, motor, and
language development of toddlers with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. J
Pediatr 158:660–665.

Medeiros R, Prediger RD, Passos GF, Pandolfo P, Duarte FS, Franco JL,
Dafre AL, Di GG, Figueiredo CP, Takahashi RN, Campos MM, Calixto
JB. 2007. Connecting TNF-alpha signaling pathways to iNOS expression
in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease: Relevance for the behavioral
and synaptic deﬁcits induced by amyloid beta protein. J Neurosci 27:
5394–5404.

Messiaen L, Yao S, Brems H, Callens T, Sathienkijkanchai A, Denayer E,
Spencer E, Arn P, Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Bay C, Bobele G, Cohen BH,
Escobar L, Eunpu D, Grebe T, Greenstein R, Hachen R, Irons M, Kronn
D, Lemire E, Leppig K, Lim C, McDonald M, Narayanan V, Pearn A,
Pedersen R, Powell B, Shapiro LR, Skidmore D, Tegay D, Thiese H,
Zackai EH, Vijzelaar R, Taniguchi K, Ayada T, Okamoto F, Yoshimura A,
Parret A, Korf B, Legius E. 2009. Clinical and mutational spectrum of
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1-like syndrome. JAMA 302:2111–2118.

Pride N, Payne JM, Webster R, Shores EA, Rae C, North KN. 2010. Corpus
callosum morphology and its relationship to cognitive function in
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. J Child Neurol 25:834–841.

Raichle ME. 2010. Two views of brain function. Trends Cogn Sci 14:

180–190.

Rauen KA, Schoyer L, McCormick F, Lin AE, Allanson JE, Stevenson DA,
Gripp KW, Neri G, Carey JC, Legius E, Tartaglia M, Schubbert S,
Roberts AE, Gelb BD, Shannon K, Gutmann DH, McMahon M, Guerra
C, Fagin JA, Yu B, Aoki Y, Neel BG, Balmain A, Drake RR, Nolan GP,
Zenker M, Bollag G, Sebolt-Leopold J, Gibbs JB, Silva AJ, Patton EE,
Viskochil DH, Kieran MW, Korf BR, Hagerman RJ, Packer RJ, Melese T.
2010. Proceedings from the 2009 genetic syndromes of the Ras/MAPK
pathway: From bedside to bench and back. Am J Med Genet Part A
152A:4–24.

Roessler E, Muenke M. 2010. The molecular genetics of holoprosencephaly.

Am J Med Genet Part C 154C:52–61.

Shilyansky C, Karlsgodt KH, Cummings DM, Sidiropoulou K, Hardt M,
James AS, Ehninger D, Bearden CE, Poirazi P, Jentsch JD, Cannon TD,
Levine MS, Silva AJ. 2010. Neuroﬁbromin regulates corticostriatal
inhibitory networks during working memory performance. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 107:13141–13146.

Silva AJ, Frankland PW, Marowitz Z, Friedman E, Laszlo GS, Ciofﬁ D,
Jacks T, Bourtchuladze R. 1997. A mouse model for the learning and
memory deﬁcits associated with neuroﬁbromatosis type I. Nat Genet
15:281–284.

Solomon BD, Lange E, Shubrook J, Service FJ, Herman G, Karne RJ,
Gorden P, Muenke M, Stratakis CA. 2010. Deletion of 8q24 in
an adult with mild dysmorphic features, developmental delay,
and ketotic hypoglycemia. Am J Med Genet Part A 152A:1545–
1549.

Williams JA, Su HS, Bernards A, Field J, Sehgal A. 2001. A circadian output
in Drosophila mediated by neuroﬁbromatosis-1 and Ras/MAPK. Science
293:2251–2256.

Zhao Y, Fung C, Shin D, Shin BC, Thamotharan S, Sankar R, Ehninger D,
Silva A, Devaskar SU. 2010. Neuronal glucose transporter isoform 3
deﬁcient mice demonstrate features of autism spectrum disorders. Mol
Psychiatry 15:286–299.

Zhou J, Blundell J, Ogawa S, Kwon CH, Zhang W, Sinton C, Powell CM,
Parada LF. 2009. Pharmacological inhibition of mTORC1 suppresses
anatomical, cellular, and behavioral abnormalities in neural-speciﬁc Pten
knock-out mice. J Neurosci 29:1773–1783.

Zhu Y, Harada T, Liu L, Lush ME, Guignard F, Harada C, Burns DK,
Bajenaru ML, Gutmann DH, Parada LF. 2005. Inactivation of NF1 in
CNS causes increased glial progenitor proliferation and optic glioma
formation. Development 132:5577–5588.

