Unusual association of diseases/symptoms

CASE REPORT
Cerebral multicystic lesions in a child with
neuroﬁbromatosis
Sedat İsikay, Kutluhan Yilmaz

Department of Pediatrics,
Gaziantep University,
Gaziantep, Turkey

Correspondence to
Dr Sedat İsikay,
dr.sedatisikay@mynet.com;
dr.sedatisikay@hotmail.com

To cite: İsikay S, Yilmaz K.
BMJ Case Reports Published
online: [please include Day
Month Year] doi:10.1136/
bcr-2012-007639

SUMMARY
Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF-1) is an autosomal
dominant neurocutaneous syndrome, with frequent
involvement of the central nervous system (CNS).
As well as abnormal cellular differentiation, disordered
cell migration during development is the most common
cause of the various brain lesions. Cystic lesions are
rarely observed in neurocutaneous diseases, and the
origin of the cysts is not known. This paper presents a
rare case, a child at the age of 3, who was diagnosed
as NF-1 and was observed to have asymptomatic cystic
lesions in right temporal lobe in radiological examination
of CNS. This study draws attention to the relationship
between these rare cystic lesions of unknown origin and
neurocutaneous diseases.

BACKGROUND
Radiological evaluation of
the central nervous
system (CNS) is important for both diagnosis of
neurocutaneous diseases and the follow-up of pos-
sibly developing pathologies. MRI of CNS in
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF-1) shows different
ﬁndings, varying from unidentiﬁed bright objects
(UBO) to astrocytoma and optic glioma.1 The lit-
erature includes studies reporting the presence of
multiple cerebral cystic lesions in cases diagnosed
as tuberous sclerosis and hypomelanosis,2 3 and a
sole case diagnosed as NF-1.4 Due to its rare inci-
dence, this study presents only the second NF-1
case having asymptomatic cerebral cystic lesions.

CASE PRESENTATION
A 3-year-old boy was referred to our clinic for the
evaluation of NF-1 due to the brown spots on his
body. The patient’s medical history indicated the
presence of these spots from birth by his family
(NF-1 diagnosis). The clinical diagnosis was based
on many cafe-au-lait spots and axillary-pubic freck-
ling and Lisch nodules in eyes. Neurological exam-
ination gave normal ﬁndings. Vital ﬁndings were
normal. The chromosome analysis was not per-
formed. The patient had one healthy female
sibling, and there was no family history of NF-1. In
addition to his motor and mental development, his
birth history and neonatal milestones were normal.

INVESTIGATIONS
At the age of 3 years, his cranial MRI identiﬁed
multiple cysts in the right temporal areas, isointense
to cerebrospinal ﬂuid in all sequences, with a
maximal diameter of 2–14 mm. Appearing corti-
cally and subcortically, the cysts were found to
cause a mass effect on the adjacent cortex;

however, no surrounding oedema was
found
(ﬁgures 1 and 2). Especially in the globus pallidus,
internal capsule, thalamus, cerebellum and brain
stem regions, basal ganglia were observed to have
few lesions that were hyperintense on T2-weighted
images. This
for unidentiﬁed
bright objects of NF-1 (ﬁgure 2). They are gener-
ally asymmetrical and diffused. The patient had
normal spinal MRI.

state was typical

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

▸ Genetic and metabolic disorders,

including
mucopolysaccharidoses, mannosidosis, Lowe
syndrome, megalencephaly and ectodermal
dysplasia.

▸ Neurocutaneous diseases

such as

tuberous

sclerosis complex and NF-1.

TREATMENT
Conservative treatment.

OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
In the 1-year follow-up, the patient showed no neu-
romotor deterioration and radiological progression.

DISCUSSION
The evaluation of basal cerebral and spinal MRI
during the diagnosis of neurocutaneous diseases is
necessary for the veriﬁcation of diagnosis and
determination and pursuit of developing patholo-
gies. The evaluation of CNS in NF-1 may help het-
erotopia, cortical dysplasia, cortical malformations
like pachygyria and polymicrogryia, UBOs, optic
glioma, encephalocele, Arnold-Chiari malforma-
tion, aqueductal stenosis and spinal meningocele.
Hyperintense lesions on T2-weighted brain MRI in
speciﬁc places are frequently observed and pathog-
nomonic of NF-1. Similar with the case of our
study, basal ganglia, cerebellum and brain-stem
regions are the places they are commonly seen. The
diagnosis of NF-1 can be supported by the pres-
ence of the lesions.1

Cohen et al4 reported the ﬁrst case to have mul-
tiple cysts and NF-1 diagnosis. Radiological ﬁnd-
ings of this case are similar to that of our case,
except for the localisation of lesions. The cysts of
both cases were asymptomatic, of different sizes,
multiple, cortical-located and subcortical-located,
with mass effect on adjacent structures, and with
no oedema presence around the cysts. The cause
and pathogenesis of these cystic lesions determined
in NF-1 are not known. However, these cysts are
thought to develop due to cystic degeneration of
dysplastic
focal

substances,

lesions

in white

İsikay S, et al. BMJ Case Reports 2013. doi:10.1136/bcr-2012-007639

1

Unusual association of diseases/symptoms

Figure 1 Axial (A) and sagittal (B) T1-weighted MRIs show a cluster of small cysts in the right temporal white matter near the lateral ventricle.
Axial (C) and coronal (D) T2-weighted MRIs. Multiple cortical and subcortical cysts are seen. Note pressure on, and distortion of, the adjacent
cortex, without any surrounding oedema (black arrows).

extension of perivascular areas or parenchymal neuroepithelial
cysts.4

Another rare radiological ﬁnding determined in neurocuta-
neous diseases is intracerebral cysts. Tassel et al2 determined
cerebral cysts, 44% of which were in different locations, in 18
patients with tuberculosis diagnosis. Rott et al5 described large

cyst-like brain lesions in the subcortical area of three patients,
and assumed the lesions to represent cellular degeneration of
cortical tuber. Jurkiewicz et al6 reported 17 patients having
cyst-like cortical
lesions after examining MRI scans of 73
patients with tuberous sclerosis complex. The cysts of this case
than the patients with
had different appearance on MRI

Figure 2 Axial ﬂuid-attenuated
inversion-recovery MRIs (A) and
(B) show that the cysts are isointense
with cerebrospinal ﬂuid (white arrows)
and unidentiﬁed bright objects (black
arrows).

2

İsikay S, et al. BMJ Case Reports 2013. doi:10.1136/bcr-2012-007639

Unusual association of diseases/symptoms

Competing interests None.
Patient consent Obtained.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

REFERENCES
1

DiMario FJ Jr, Ramsby G. Magnetic resonance imaging lesion analysis in
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. Arch Neurol 1998;55:500–5.
Van Tassel P, Curé JK, Holden KR. Cystlike white matter lesions in tuberous sclerosis.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1997;18:1367–73.

2

3 Williams DW, Elster AD. Cranial MR imaging in hypomelanosis of Ito. J Comput

4

5

6

7

Assist Tomogr 1990;14:981–3.
Cohen R, Kornreich L, Shuper A. Giant cystic lesion in neuroﬁbromatosis. Pediatr
Neurol 2009;41:445–7.
Rott H-D, Lemcke B, Zenker M, et al. Cystlike cerebral lesions in tuberous sclerosis.
Am J Med Genet 2002;111:435–9.
Jurkiewicz E, Jozwiak S, Bekiesinska-Figatowska M, et al. Cyst-like cortical tubers in
patients with tuberous sclerosis complex: MR imaging with the FLAIR sequence.
Pediatr Radiol 2006;36:498–501.
Ogawa T, Okudera T, Fukasawa H, et al. Unusual widening of Virchow-Robin spaces:
MR appearance. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1995;16:1238–42.

tuberous sclerosis complex. The constant existence of a periph-
eral hyperintense signal on T2-weighted images and on
ﬂuid-attenuated inversion-recovery sequences results from the
fact that the location of the cysts in tuberous sclerosis complex
are inside cortical tubers.6 The cystic spaces in the present case
are irrelevant to the unidentiﬁed bright objects of NF, since the
latter does not usually undergo cystic degeneration, and since
our patient’s cystic spaces are not located in the area where
unidentiﬁed bright objects are generally found.1

In conclusion, cerebral cystic lesions in neurocutaneous dis-
eases are rarely observed. These lesions with unknown causes
may be rarely observed in cases diagnosed as NF-1.

Learning points

▸ The nature of these cysts is unknown.
▸ These lesions must be differentiated from other cystic lesions

▸ The radiological assessment is the critical point in the

of the brain.

diagnosis.

▸ These lesions may be rarely observed in cases diagnosed as

neuroﬁbromatosis type 1.

Copyright 2013 BMJ Publishing Group. All rights reserved. For permission to reuse any of this content visit
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
BMJ Case Report Fellows may re-use this article for personal use and teaching without any further permission.

Become a Fellow of BMJ Case Reports today and you can:
▸ Submit as many cases as you like
▸ Enjoy fast sympathetic peer review and rapid publication of accepted articles
▸ Access all the published articles
▸ Re-use any of the published material for personal use and teaching without further permission

For information on Institutional Fellowships contact consortiasales@bmjgroup.com

Visit casereports.bmj.com for more articles like this and to become a Fellow

İsikay S, et al. BMJ Case Reports 2013. doi:10.1136/bcr-2012-007639

3

