158 

Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, 9, 158-172 

 

Current and Future Treatment Options in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis 

Hans-Peter Hauber* and Markus Blaukovitsch 

Medical Clinic, Research Center Borstel, Borstel, Germany 

Abstract: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic condition of unknown aetiology with deteriorating respiratory 
function leading to respiratory failure. Sequential acute lung injury leads to progressive fixed tissue fibrosis, architectural 
distortion and loss of function. An excess of profibrotic cytokines and/or a deficiency in antifibrotic cytokines have been 
implicated  in  the  pathological  process  as  has  excessive  oxidation.  At  present  no  specific  therapy  is  available. 
Corticosteroids  alone  or  in  combination  with  immunosuppressive  drugs  such  as  azathioprine,  colchicine,  and 
cyclophosphamide  have  been  used  with  limited  success.  Interferon-gamma-1b  showed  a  significant  improvement  in 
pulmonary function only in one study. Pirfenidone, cyclosporine and acetylcysteine may also prove to be of benefit but 
data  from  studies  are  limited.  Novel  drugs,  mainly  antifibrotic,  anticytokine  and  immunoregulatory,  are  currently  being 
investigated  in  various  trial  phases.  Most  recently,  endothelin  receptor  antagonists  (e.g.,  bosentan)  have  been  shown  to 
have  possible  beneficial  effects  in  early  stages  of  IPF.  After  a  short  overview  on  the  current  hypothesis  on 
pathophysiology in IPF this review will discuss the present and possible future therapeutic options in IPF. 

Keywords: Acetylcysteine, azathioprine, glucocorticosteroid, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, treatment. 

INTRODUCTION 

 
Idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis  (IPF)  is  one  of  the  most 
common  interstitial  lung  diseases  ranking  second  behind 
sarcoidosis.  Prevalence  ranges  from  15  to  250  per  100,000 
depending on the country, age, and gender [1-4]. The disease 
is  insidious and progressive.  Median survival  is 2  to 3 years 
after  diagnosis.  Although  consensus  statement  of 
the 
American  Thoracic  Society  and  the  European  Respiratory 
Society  has  defined  diagnostic  criteria  the  diagnosis  of  IPF 
remains  problematic  [5].  Often  diagnosis  is  made  by  an 
interactive  approach  of  different  specialists 
including 
clinicians,  radiologists,  and  pathologists.  The  consensus 
statement  aims  at  defining  IPF.  This  is  an  important  step  to 
compare  treatment  regiments.  Studies  in  the  past  have  often 
included  mixed  groups  of  patients  with  IPF  and  NSIP  (non 
specific  interstitial  pneumonia).  This  is  important  because  it 
is now clear that NSIP has a much better prognosis than IPF. 
In  addition,  NSIP  shows  a  good  response  to  corticosteroids 
while  IPF  does  not  [6].  At  present  there  is  no  therapy 
the  course  of  IPF. 
available 
However,  with  ongoing  research  deeper 
into 
pathogenesis of IPF has  evolved. Hopefully,  this knowledge 
will  eventually  lead  to  the  development  of  efficacious 
therapies  for  IPF.  After  a  short  overview  on  the  current 
concepts  of  IPF  pathogenesis  this  review  will  summarize 
present and future treatment options for IPF. 

to  effectively 

influence 

insight 

DIAGNOSIS  AND  DIFFERENTIAL  DIAGNOSIS  OF 
IPF 

 
IPF  belongs  to  the  group  of  idiopathic  interstitial 
pneumonias (IIP). IIP are a subgroup of diffuse parenchymal 
lung diseases (DPLD) or diffuse interstitial lung diseases [7].  
 

 

*Address  correspondence  to  this  author  at  the  Medical  Clinic,  Research 
Center Borstel, Parkallee 35, D-23845 Borstel, Germany; Tel: +49 (0)4537 
188 364; Fax: +49 (0)4537 188 313; E-mail: hphauber@fz-borstel.de 

IPF  is  defined  as  a  specific  form  of  chronic  fibrosing 
interstitial pneumonia limited to the lung and associated with 
the  histologic  appearance  of  usual  interstitial  pneumonia 
(UIP)  on  surgical  (thoracoscopic  or  open)  lung  biopsy  [5]. 
The  definite  diagnosis  of  IPF  in  the  presence  of  a  surgical 
biopsy  showing  UIP  includes  several  criteria  that  are  listed 
in Table 1. In the  absence of a  surgical biopsy the diagnosis 
of  IPF  can  be  made  by  using  ATS/ERS  criteria  which  are 
listed  in  Table  2.  The  differential  diagnoses  of  IPF  include 
the other IIP and DLPD (Table 3). 

Table 1.  Diagnostic  Criteria  of  IPF  in  the  Presence  of 

Surgical Biopsy Showing UIP 

 

 

Exclusion of other known causes of interstitial lung disease 

Abnormal  pulmonary  function  studies  including  evidence  of  restriction 
and/or impaired gas exchange 

Abnormalities on chest X rays and/or HRCT 

Table 2.  ATS/ERS Diagnostic Criteria of IPF  in the Absence 

of Surgical Biopsy 

 

Major Criteria 

Minor Criteria 

Exclusion of other known causes of 

interstitial lung diseases 

Age > 50 years 

Restriction and/or impaired gas 

exchange on pulmonary function studies 

Insidious onset of otherwise 

unexplained dyspnea on 

exertio 

Bibasilar reticular abnormalities with 

minimal ground glass opacities on 

HRCT scans 

Transbronchial lung biopsy or 

bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) showing 

no features to support an alternative 

diagnosis 

Duration of illness 

(cid:1) 3 months 

Bibasilar, inspiratory 

crackles (dry or "Velcro" 

type in quality) 

The  presence  of  all  major  criteria  and  at  least  three  minor  criteria  increases  the 
likelihood of an IPF. 
 

 
 

1871-5281/10 $55.00+.00 

© 2010 Bentham Science Publishers Ltd. 

Current and Future Treatment Options in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis 

Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3     159 

Table 3.  Differential Diagnosis of IPF 
 

DPLD of known causes (e.g., drugs or association e.g., collagen 

vascular disease) 

IIP other than IPF (e.g. NSIP) 

Granulomatous DPLD (e.g. sarcoidosis) 

Other forms of DPLD (e.g. histiocytosis X) 

PATHOGENESIS 

  Our  understanding  of  the  pathogenesis  of  IPF  has 
evolved  during  the  last  years.  More  than  30  years  ago  an 
initial  hypothesis  on  the  development  of  IPF  was  proposed. 
That  model  suggested  that  chronic  inflammation  (alveolitis) 
led  to  fibrosis  [8,  9].  However,  this  concept  was  questioned 
by  the  finding  that  the  degree  of  tissue  inflammation 
correlated  poorly  with  fibrosis  or  outcome.  Moreover, 
immunosuppressive  anti-inflammatory  treatment  has  no 
significant  effect  [10].  This  led  to  an  alternative  hypothesis 
that is summarized in Fig. (1). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (1). Current concept IPF pathogenesis. For details refer to text. 
EMT: epithelial-to-mesenchymal transformation. 

  At present IPF is believed to develop as a consequence of 
epithelial  injury  with  abnormal  wound  healing  (Fig.  2). 
Inflammation  is  not  necessary  for  fibrosis  [11].  Several 
mechanisms have been implicated in this concept. 

  The  loss  of  the  alveolar-capillary  barrier  basement 
membrane (BM) integrity represents the “point of no return” 
in  the  development  of  pathologic  fibrosis.  This  barrier 
consists  of  the  type  I  alveolar  epithelial  cell,  the  endothelial 
cell, and their respective BMs. In a normal lung the alveolar-
capillary barrier is repaired after acute lung injury and tissue 
integrity  and  function  is  rapidly  restorated.  Early  after  an 
injury haemorrhage and plasma extravasation is observed  as 
well  as  coagulation  and  release  of  inflammatory  mediators 
[12,  13].  Inflammatory  cells,  fibroblasts,  myofibroblasts, 
endothelial  cells,  and  epithelial  cells  are  activated  by  these 
mediators.  Deposition  of  extracellular  matrix  (ECM)  after 
acute  inflammation  is  an  essential  event.  If  the  BM  is  intact 

and 

reepithelialization 

remodelled/reabsorped 

and the injurious stimulus is removed the deposition of ECM 
is 
and 
reendothelialization  occurs  [12,  13].  In  contrast,  in  patients 
with IPF loss of type I epithelial cells and endothelial cells is 
observed.  Alveolar  structures  and  collapse  and  fusion  of 
BMs  is  present  because  of  the  loss  of  alveolar-capillary 
barrier. Type II alveolar epithelial cells and endothelial cells 
proliferate  without  structured  matrix.  In  addition,  fibroblast 
and  myofibroblast  recruitment  and  proliferation  lead  to  end 
stage fibrosis [14-19] (Fig. 3). 

[23]. 

PDGF 

production 

Several  cytokines  such  as  transforming  growth  factor 
 
(TGF)-(cid:1),  connective  tissue  growth  factor  (CTGF),  platelet 
derived  growth  factor  (PDGF),  and  interleukin(IL)-13  as 
well as chemokines are important players in the pathogenesis 
of  IPF.  TGF-(cid:1)  is  strongly  associated  with  progressive 
fibrosis  in  IPF  [20,  21].  It  can  drive  EMT  (epithelial 
mesenchymal 
transition)  and  fibroblast-to-myofibroblast 
differentiation  [22].  In  addition,  TGF-(cid:1)  is  the  most  potent 
inducer of ECM production known to date. CTGF stimulates 
fibroblast  matrix 
and  myofibroblast 
differentiation 
and 
chemoattractive  effects  on  mesenchymal  cells  including 
fibroblasts  [24].  The  Th2  type  cytokine  IL-13  stimulates 
fibroblast collagen production. It is not totally clear whether 
this occurs independently of TGF-(cid:1) [25, 26]. In IPF there as 
a predomination of Th2 type cytokines. Moreover, IL-13 can 
stimulate production of FIZZ (found in inflammatory zone)-
1.  The  biological  function  of  FIZZ-1  is  unknown  but  it  can 
stimulate  myofibroblast  differentiation  in  vitro  [27,  28].  All 
of  these  cytokines  provide  potential  therapeutic  targets.  In 
addition  to  cytokines  chemokines  are  abundantly  expressed 
in 
(monocyte 
chemoattractant  protein-1)  for  example  can  induce  TGF-(cid:1)1 
and  procollagen  gene  expression  [30].  Moreover,  levels  of 
CCL2 are increased in IPF [31]. 

has  mitogenic 

pulmonary 

fibrosis 

[29]. 

CCL2 

  Data from the literature also suggest that pathogenesis of 
IPF is related to a persistent presentation of an “antigen” that 
leads  to  chronic  inflammation  and  destruction  of  lung 
parenchyma resulting eventually in lung fibrosis [32-35]. 

  Given the importance of myofibroblasts and fibrocytes in 
the  pathogenesis  of  IPF  interest  has  been  focussed  on  these 
cells.  The  classic  concept  states  that  tissue  injury  induces 
resident fibroblasts to proliferate and express constituents of 
ECM. A more recent theory implies that expression of TGF-
(cid:1) in case of tissue injury induces transition of epithelial cells 
to  a  mesenchymal  phenotype,  the  fibroblast/myofibroblast 
[22,  36-37].  There  is  also  evidence  in  the  literature  that 
circulating  fibrocytes  are  mesenchymal  progenitor  cells  that 
home and extravasate into site of lung injury [18] (Fig. 3). 

  Most  recently,  severe  endoplasmatic  reticulum  stress  of 
alveolar  type  II  cells  has  been  shown  to  play  an  important 
role in induction of apoptosis of these cells [38]. 

THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS 

  Therapeutic options in IPF are limited. At present there is 
no  treatment  available  that  could  effectively  reduce  fibrosis. 
Most  treatment  regimens  used  today  aim  at  suppressing 
inflammation  to  inhibit  destruction  of  lung  parenchyma  and 
fibrosis.  A  still  unresolved  problem  is  established  fibrosis. 
Fibrotic  tissue  cannot  be  removed  or  replaced  by  healthy 

160     Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3 

Hauber and Blaukovitsch 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (2). Lung injury leads to death of type I pneumocytes, influx of neutrophils, oedema, and thrombosis. 

lung tissue. Advances in our understanding of the underlying 
pathogenetic mechanisms will hopefully lead to development 
of  effective  and  efficacious  agents.  Table  4  summarizes  the 
different treatment approaches. 

  Another  point  of  concern  is  how  to  treat  stable  IPF  and 
exacerbations. Facing no real alternative options exacerbations 
are  most  often  treated  with  high  dose  corticosteroids  or 
cyclophosphamide. However, there is no convincing evidence 
that those therapies improve outcome [39]. 

CURRENT TREATMENT OPTIONS 

  As  mentioned  above  present  medical  therapy  for  IPF  is 
limited. Best supportive care including rehabilitation, oxygen 
therapy, pulmonary rehabilitation, opiates, antireflux therapy 
is  strongly  advised.  Lung  transplantation  is  an  option  in 
selected  patients.  No  drug  therapy  to  date  has  proven  any 
substantial surviving benefit or modification of the course of 
disease. A combination therapy of prednisone (tapering from 
0.5  mg  kg/day  to  10-20  mg/day),  azathioprine  (2  mg/kg, 
maximum  200  mg/day)  and  N-acetlycysteine  (600  mg  three 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (3). The loss of the alveolar-capillary barrier prevents recovery. Fibrocytes from different sources become myofibroblasts that produce 
collagen and extracellular matrix. TGF(cid:1): Transforming growth factor-(cid:1). 

Current and Future Treatment Options in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis 

Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3     161 

times  a  day)  has  been  shown  to  have  significant  better 
treatment  effect  than  prednisolone  and  azathioprine  alone. 
Therefore  combination  therapy  is  recommended  [40].  At 
present  the  PANTHER-IPF  (Evaluating  the  effectiveness 
prednisone, azathioprin, and N-acetlycysteine in people with 
idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis)  is  comparing  the  effect  of  a 
combination  therapy,  N-acetlycysteine  alone  and  placebo 
(NCT00650091).  This  trial  will  investigate  patients  with 
mild  to  moderate  IPF.  Primary  end-point  will  be  change  in 
VC after 60 weeks. 

Table 4.  Therapeutic Approaches to Treat IPF 
 

Mode of Action 

Examples 

Antiinflammatory/ 
immunosuppressive 

antifibrotic 

Glucocorticosteroids, azathioprine, 

cyclophosphamide, pirefenidone, IFN-
(cid:1), N-acetylcysteine, thalidomide, Anti-
TNF(cid:1) antibodies, BIBF-1120, zileutin, 

imatinib 

MS80, endothelin receptor antagonists, 

anti-TGF(cid:2) antibodies, FG-3019, 

imatinib 

Anticoagulation 

Heparine, phenprocoumon 

Blockade of circulating 

fibrocytes 

Anti-CXL12 antibodies 

IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE TREATMENT IN IPF 

Glucocorticosteroids 

test 

their 

to 
In 

inflammation 

fibrosis 
[41]. 

  Glucocorticosteroids  have  a  broad  spectrum  of  anti-
inflammatory  and  immunosuppressive  effects.  Based  on  the 
former  hypothesis  of  chronic 
leading 
eventually  to  fibrosis  the  use  of  steroids  seemed  logical. 
Phan  and  colleagues  used  an  animal  model  of  bleomycin-
the  effect  of 
induced  pulmonary 
glucocorticosteroids 
experiments 
methylprednisolone  prevented  the  increase  in  bleomycin-
induced  lung  collagen  deposition  and  partially  suppressed 
total lung collagen synthesis, without affecting the net rate of 
lung  collagen  synthesis  expressed  per  mg  of  DNA.  Several 
clinical trials  assessed the effect of steroid treatment on IPF. 
A  recent  meta-analysis  by  Richeldi  and  co-workers  has 
evaluated  the  efficacy  of  steroid  therapy  in  adult  patients 
with  familial  and  sporadic  IPF  [42].  The  authors  identified 
seventeen  articles  including  a  total  of  726  patients  with 
treatment  duration  of  2  weeks  to  36  months  as  potential 
eligible 
those  were  not 
randomized  controlled  trials  or  controlled  clinical  trials. 
Therefore  the  authors  excluded  all  and  concluded  that  at 
present there is no evidence for steroid treatment in IPF [42]. 
At  present  corticosteroids  are  not 
recommended  as 
monotherapy for IPF. 

for  meta-analysis.  However, 

Azathioprine 

  Azathioprine  is  a  purine  analog  inhibiting  adenine 
deaminase  which  itself  impairs  the  proliferation  of  cells, 
especially  leukocytes  and  lymphocytes.  Azathioprine  has 
been  used  as  therapy  for  IPF  primarily  in  patients  failing  or 
experiencing adverse effects from corticosteroids. Anecdotal 
responses  were  noted  in  uncontrolled  studies  [43].  The 

combination  of  azathioprine  plus  corticosteroids  was 
associated  with  modest  improvement  and  enhanced  survival 
in some patients [44]. Until now most studies had limitations 
in  design  and  interpretation  of  results  (e.g.  uncontrolled, 
small numbers of subjects, lack of adequate details to assess 
response,  or  inclusion  of  patients  with  conditions  other  than 
IPF  [43,  45-46].  Raghu  and  co-workers  enrolled  27  patients 
in  a  prospective,  double-blind, 
randomized,  placebo-
controlled  study  to  compare  the  therapeutic  effect  of 
combined  prednisone/  azathioprine  with  prednisone  plus 
placebo  [44].  In  these  cases  no  further  classification  of  the 
IPF subtypes were done. At a one year follow up the authors 
could  not  show  any  significant  difference  in  clinical 
measures  or  mortality.  A  more  recent  study  of  Hoyles  and 
co-workers  also  did  not  show  any  advantage  in  clinical 
outcome 
prednisone, 
cyclophosphamide  and  addition  of  oral  azathioprine  or 
placebo  [46].  Patients  though  enrolled  in  this  study  suffered 
from  scleroderma  associated  lung  fibrosis  but  not  from 
idiopathic  interstitial  pneumonia.  45  patients  were  enrolled 
in  this  multicenter,  prospective,  double-blind,  randomized, 
placebo-controlled study. The primary endpoints of this trial 
were changes in FVC of predicted and the changes in DLCO. 
There was no statistically significant improvement in the end 
points  between  the  treatment  group  and  the  placebo  group 
[47].  Serious  side  effects  like  myelosuppression,  liver 
toxicity,  nausea,  joint  pain  and  an  increased  risk  for 
malignancies does not  justify the routine use of azathioprine 
as a monotherapy in the management of IPF due to a lack of 
statistical significant studies. 

patients  with 

treating 

after 

Cyclophosphamide 

liver  enzymes 

  This alkylating agent is in most instances orally absorbed 
and  activated  by 
to  several  cytotoxic 
compounds  suppressing  the  function  of  immunomodulatory 
cells like leukocytes and lymphocytes. There is some data on 
small nonrandomized  trials  and case reports in the treatment 
of  idiopathic  interstitial  pneumonia  showing  little  benefit. 
Statistically  not  convincing  data  exist  to  show  a  superiority 
of  cyclophosphamide  over  other  cytotoxic  agents  in  treating 
studies  have  directly  compared 
IPF.  However,  no 
cyclophosphamide  with  other 
immunosuppressive  or 
cytotoxic agents [48-52]. 

  High-dose  intravenous  cyclophosphamide  administered 
over  a  maximum  of  4  weeks  (dose  range  from  500mg  up  to 
1800 mg) has been tried  in open trials of refractory IPF [50, 
53].  Results  are  generally  unimpressive.  The  poor  response 
to  pulsed  cyclophosphamide  therapy  may  likely  reflect  late 
course disease when treatment was initiated. In a prospective 
trial  Johnson  and  colleagues  [48]  showed  that  there  was  no 
benefit of high dose prednisone vs low dose prednisone plus 
cyclophosphamide.  Among  this  heterogeneous  group  of  IPF 
no  statistically  significant  markers  could  be  obtained 
regarding  clinical  course  of  the  disease  or  mortality.  In 
addition,  a  large  retrospective  analysis  from  Collar  and  co-
workers 
therapy  of 
corticosteroid  and  cyclophosphamide  patients  who  meet  the 
definition of IPF. Patients were identified retrospectively and 
treatment addressed on  an intention-to-treat basis. A total of 
164  patients  were  included  and  half  of  them  where  treated, 
whereas  half  did  not  receive  any  immunosuppressive  or 

[54]  compared  a  combination 

162     Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3 

Hauber and Blaukovitsch 

immunomodulatory 
therapy.  There  was  no  significant 
difference in survival between treated and untreated patients. 
The  lack  of  treatment  persisted  even  in  the  group  with 
histologic  proven  diagnosis  of  IPF  (n  =  24).  Those  data 
clearly 
and 
cyclophosphamide  therapy  had  no  impact  on  survival  in 
patients with IPF. No valid studies have compared oral with 
pulsed cyclophosphamide for IPF yet. 

corticosteroid 

combined 

showed 

that 

risk  of 

increased 

  Toxicity  associated  with  cyclophosphamide  remains  a 
major impediment to the routine use of this agent. Especially 
the 
infections,  myelosuppression, 
hepatotoxicity and not to forget hemorrhagic cystitis and the 
increased  risk  for  several  malignancies  reinforces  the 
importance  of  careful  consideration  of  this  cytotoxic  agent. 
As  with  azathioprine,  there  is  no  evidence  to  justify  the 
routine  use  of  cyclophosphamide  alone  or  in  combination 
with steroids for the management of IPF. 

Methotrexate 

 
In a systemic review of the  PUBMED database no study 
or data could be found about methotrexate in the treatment of 
IPF.  In  contrast,  several  trials  propose  that  the  use  of 
methotrexate  e.g.  in  the  treatment  of  rheumatoid  arthritis 
induces  the  development  of  interstitial  lung  disease  [55-57]. 
However,  some  favourable  use  of  methotrexate  was 
published  for 
lung  disease  combined  with 
scleroderma and polymyositis-induced lung fibrosis [58, 59]. 
Again,  it  has  to  be  emphasized  that  the  routine  use  of 
methotrexate  for  the  therapy  of  IPF  is  definitely  not 
recommended. 

interstitial 

Colchicine 

regimens  did  not 

  Colchicine  inhibits  collagen  formation  from  fibroblasts 
and  suppresses  the  release  of  alveolar-macrophage-derived 
growth factor and fibronectin by alveolar macrophages from 
patients  with  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Based  on  animal  and  in 
vitro studies colchicine may be able to attenuate fibrosis [60, 
61].  However,  several  clinical  trials  failed  to  demonstrate  a 
positive  effect of  colchicines on lung function or survival  in 
IPF  [62-66].  In  the  study  by  Douglas  and  co-workers  26 
patients  with  IPF  were  randomized  to  receive  either  high-
dose prednisone (n = 12) or colchicine (n = 14) [62]. Patients 
with high-dose steroid therapy showed a trend to more rapid 
decline in lung function and shorter survival. However, both 
treatment 
in  an  objective 
improvement. The authors discussed colchicine as a potential 
alternative  to  high-dose  steroids.  Selman  and  colleagues 
compared  the  effect  of  colchicine  and/or  D-penicillamine 
with  prednisone,  in  comparison  to  prednisone  alone  [63]. 
Fifty-six  IPF  patients  were  included  in  this  study.  Patients 
received  either  colchicine/prednisone  (n=19),  D-penicill-
amine/prednisone  (n=11),  D-penicillamine/colchicine/pred-
nisone  (n=11),  or  prednisone  alone  (n=15).  Response  to 
therapy was assessed by changes in lung function test results 
as measured by total  and vital lung  capacities, arterial blood 
gas  analysis  at  rest  breathing  room  air,  and  survival.  No 
significant  differences  either  in  lung  function  tests  or  in 
arterial  gases  were  found  in  any  group  relative  to  the 
baseline  measurement.  Survival  was  not  significantly 
improved  in  any  of  the  groups.  A  retrospective  analysis 

result 

reviewed  the  clinical  records  of  487  patients  seen  at  Mayo 
Clinic  Rochester  [64].  Surgical  open  lung  biopsy  was 
performed  in  20.3%  to  obtain  the  diagnosis.  167  patients 
received  colchicine  alone,  71  patients  were  treated  with  a 
combination  of  colchicine  and  prednisolone.  No  significant 
effect  on  survival  was  observed  with  colchicine.  Peters  and 
colleagues  retrospectively  analysed  the  outcome  of  23 
patients  being  treated  with  colchicine  [65].  Clinical  and 
pulmonary function parameters improved in five patients (22 
percent)  following  colchicine,  nine  (39  percent)  remained 
stable,  and  nine  (39  percent)  worsened.  Another  study 
compared 22 patients with IPF being treated with colchicine 
as  first  line  therapy  to  22  historical  patients  with  IPF  who 
received prednisone as  initial  single-drug treatment [66]. No 
significant  differences  were  noted  between  both  groups. 
However,  a  trend  towards  a  more  rapid  decline  in  lung 
function  in  the  prednisone-treated  group  was  observed.  The 
most  important  side  effect  of  colchicines  in  all  studies  was 
diarrhoea.  In  summary,  the  present  data  are  insufficient  to 
recommend colchicine as treatment option for IPF. 

ANTIOXIDATIVE TREATMENT 

N-Acetylcysteine 

levels 

in 

(NAC) 

to  show 

that  glutathione 

  Oxidative  stress  and  oxidant-antioxidant  imbalance  has 
been suggested to play an important role in the pathogenesis 
and progression of IPF [67-74]. Oral N-acetylcsteine (NAC) 
reduced  collagen  deposition  in  the  lungs  of  bleomycin-
induced  lung  fibrosis  in  mice  [75].  Meyer  and  co-workers 
were  able 
the 
bronchoalveolar  lavage  fluid  of  IPF  patients  could  be  oral 
administration  of  N-acetylcysteine 
[70].  The 
IFIGENIA  (Idiopathic  Pulmonary  Fibrosis  International 
Group  Exploring  N-Acetylcysteine  I  Annual)  trial  looked  at 
the  effect  of  high  dose  NAC  (600  mg  tid)  in  patients  with 
IPF  [76].  This  was  a  double-blind,  randomized,  placebo-
controlled  multicenter  study.  182  patients  received  either 
NAC  (92)  or  placebo  (90).  This  therapy  was  given  in 
addition  to  standard  treatment  including  prednisone  plus 
azathioprine.  Therapy  was  NAC  attenuated  the  decrease  in 
vital capacity and DLCO after 12 months which were defined 
as  primary  endpoints.  However,  no  significant  difference  in 
mortality  was  observed  between  both  groups  (9%  in  the 
NAC  group,  11%  in  the  placebo  group).  No  significant 
difference  in  adverse  effects  was  observed  between  both 
groups.  Interestingly,  patients  in  the  NAC  group  had  a 
significantly  lower  rate  of  myelotoxic  effects.  This  may  be 
due to a protective effect of NAC against myelotoxic effects 
of immunosuppressive therapy [76]. NAC may preserve vital 
capacity and DLCO in IPF patients when added to prednisone 
and azathioprine better than standard therapy alone. Whether 
this  effect  lasts  longer  than  12  months  has  to  be  further 
evaluated.  However,  since  NAC  is  not  expensive  and  has 
demonstrated  a  favourable  effect  it  should  be  given  to 
patients  with  IPF.  Most  recently,  Behr  and  colleagues 
performed  additional  analysis  with  the  data  from  the 
IFIGENIA trial [77]. They  confirmed  that vital capacity and 
DLCO  did  not  significantly  change  in  trial  completers  on 
NAC  whereas  in  non-completers  the  indices  worsened  but 
less  pronounced  than  in  the  placebo  group.  Interestingly 
baseline  DLCO, 
lung  capacity,  and  PaO2  was 
to 
significantly 

in  non-completers  compared 

lower 

total 

Current and Future Treatment Options in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis 

Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3     163 

completers  implicating  that  disease  might  have  been  much 
worse  in  that  group.  This  notion  is  also  supported  by  the 
finding  that  the  composite  physiology  index  (CPI)  was 
significantly  lower  in  the  completer  group.  The  CPI 
represents  the  degree  of  disease  [78].  A  CPI  of  less  than  50 
points  means  less  severe  disease.  It  is  not  surprising  that 
patients  with  less  severe  disease  had  a  better  prognosis. 
However,  the  authors  speculate  that  patients  with  less 
pronounced  IPF  may  have  a  more  favourable  outcome  with 
triple  therapy.  This  remains  to  be  investigated  in  future 
studies. 

patients  had  no  PH.  Since  similar  pathogenetic  mechanisms 
can be found in IPF and pulmonary arterial hypertension it is 
tempting  to  speculate  that  those  agents  may  also  have  a 
beneficial  effect  on  IPF.  Data  from  ongoing  trials  will 
hopefully  answer  these  questions.  At  present  PH  in  IPF 
should  be  treated  by  treating  the  underlying  disorder. 
Oxygen,  diuretics,  and  anticoagulants  may  be  helpful  in 
treating  right  heart  failure.  Lung  and  combined  heart  lung 
transplantation remains the ultimate therapy (see below). 

EXPERIMENTAL  AND  FUTURE  TREATMENT 
OPTIONS 

TREATMENT OF ACUTE EXACERBATION OF IPF 

Interferon-(cid:1) 

  Acute  exacerbations  of  IPF  (AE-IPF)  are  defined  by  an 
acute onset of dyspnea (< 1 month) with worsening hypoxia 
and progressive infiltrates seen in the absence of heart failure 
or infection [39]. Pathologic studies revealed diffuse alveolar 
damage  (DAD)  on  the  underlying  fibrotic  pattern  of  UIP  in 
nearly  all  case  of  AE-IPF  [80,  81].  No  specific  aetiology  of 
AE-IPF  has  been  identified  yet.  Infections  are  supposed  in 
some  patients.  Several 
treatment  strategies  have  been 
employed in AE-IPF. High-dose pulse corticosteroid therapy 
has  been  tried  similar  to  idiopathic  ARDS.  Kondoh  and 
colleagues  treated  three  patients  with  AE-IPF  with  high 
doses  of  corticosteroids  and  were  able  to  shown  an 
improvement  in  oxygenation  [80].  In  a  study  by  Akira  and 
co-workers  patients  with  AE-IPF  were  classified  according 
to  CT  scans  into  three  groups  with  peripheral  parenchymal 
opacification  (n  =  6),  multifocal  parenchymal  opacification 
(n  =  6),  and  diffuse  parenchymal  opacification  (n  =  5)  [82]. 
50% of patients with  multifocal pattern responded to  steroid 
therapy  whereas  all  patients  with  peripheral  pattern  showed 
some degree of improvement. Cyclosporin ahs been tested in 
small, 
conjunction  with 
glucocorticosteroids.  Four  of  seven  patients  showed  a 
response  and  three  patients  had  a  prolonged  survival  [83]. 
Data  on 
lacking.  Although 
pirfenidone  lowered  the  rate  of  AE-IPF  (placebo  group, 
13.9%;  pirfenidone  group,  0%)  in  one  study  (see  below)  its 
efficacy  in  AE-IPF  remains  unclear.  Anticoagulant  therapy 
may be beneficial in AE-IPF. However, this has to be further 
evaluated.  In  conclusion,  at  present  there  is  no  effective 
therapy  of  AE-IPF  available.  The  prognosis  of  AE-IPF 
remains  poor.  A  recent  systematic  review  found  that  a  1-
month  and  3-month  mortality  of  AE-IPF  around  60%  and 
67%, respectively [84]. 

cyclophosphamide 

uncontrolled 

are 

series 

in 

TREATMENT OF PULMONARY HYPERTENSION IN 
IPF 

 
Pulmonary  hypertension  (PH)  is  more  and  more  often 
found  in  IPF.  Based  on  data  from  the  literature  the 
prevalence  of  PH  in  IPF  may  be  up  to  84%  [85].  This 
number  may  overestimate  the  rate  in  real  life  but  it 
emphasizes  that  IPF  is  often  associated  with  PH  (group  3 
according  to  Dana  Point  classification).  Although  a  number 
of  powerful  drugs  have  been  introduced  in  the  treatment  of 
pulmonary arterial hypertension  in the  last few years almost 
no  data  are  available  on  their  effects  on  PH  in  IPF. 
Endothelin  receptor  antagonists  have  been  investigated  as 
anti-fibrotic agents in clinical trials (see below) but those IPF 

 
Interferon-(cid:1) (IFN-(cid:1)) has been described as a key mediator 
in  antagonizing  TGF-(cid:1)  expression  and  activity  thus  limiting 
fibroblast  proliferation,  differentiation  and  collagen  synthe-
sis.  In  a  murine  model  of  bleomycin-induced  pulmonary 
fibrosis  daily 
reduced  mRNA 
expression  of  TGF-(cid:1),  collagen  I,  and  collagen  III.  In 
addition,  IFN-(cid:1)  attenuated  the  increase  in  lung  collagen 
levels [86]. 

treatment  with 

IFN-(cid:1) 

  Ziesche  and  co-workers  treated  18  patients  with  pulmo-
nary  fibrosis  who  had  been  unresponsive  to  corticosteroids 
or  other  immunosuppressants  with  prednisolone  alone  (N  = 
9) or prednisolone plus IFN-(cid:1) 1(cid:1) (N = 9) [87]. In that study 
combination therapy of prednisolone plus IFN-(cid:1) 1(cid:1) increased 
TLC  and  PaO2.  In  contrast,  in  group  with  prednisolone 
monotherapy  lung  function  deteriorated.  There  are  some 
limitations  of  the  study.  The  major  point  is  that  most  of  the 
patients  had  not  IPF  but  other  pulmonary  fibrotic  diseases 
such  as  NSIP.  Therefore  results  from  that  study  cannot  be 
easily transferred on IPF patients. 

  Two large clinical trials have evaluated the effect of IFN-
(cid:1) 1(cid:1) treatment in IPF. Raghu and co-workers investigated the 
effect  of  subcutaneous  IFN-(cid:1)  1(cid:1)  in  IPF  patients  that  were 
unresponsive  to  corticosteroid  therapy  (GIPF-001  study) 
[88].  In  this  multinational,  multicenter,  placebo-controlled 
trial 330 patients were included. Patients were treated over a 
median of 58 weeks. IFN-(cid:1) 1(cid:1) did not significantly  improve 
progression-free  survival  as  well  as  lung  function,  gas 
exchange  or  quality  of  life.  A  trend  towards  longer  survival 
was  observed  in  the  IFN-(cid:1)  1(cid:1)  group  (10%  of  the  patients 
died  compared  to  17%  in  the  placebo  group).  Post  hoc 
analysis  revealed  an  increased  survival  in  patients  with  a 
baseline FVC  > 62% of predicted.  Treatment with IFN-(cid:1) 1(cid:1) 
was  associated  with  more  adverse  side  effects  but  treatment 
discontinuation rates were similar in both groups. 

  The  INSPIRE  study  was  a  multicenter,  randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial [89]. A total of 826 patients with IPF 
were  randomized  to  receive  either  IFN-(cid:1)  1(cid:1)  (N  =  551;  200 
mg  s.c.  three  times  per  week)  or  placebo  (N  =  275).  This 
study was prematurely stopped at the second interim analysis 
because  IFN-(cid:1)  1(cid:1)  treatment  did  not  show  a  minimum 
beneficial  effect  on  survival  (the  primary  endpoint).  15%  of 
patients  in  the  treatment  group  and  13%  of  patients  in  the 
placebo group had died. More patients in the IFN-(cid:1) 1(cid:1) group 
reported flu-like illness. 

  A  smaller  study  by  Antoniou  and  colleagues  compared 
the effect of IFN-(cid:1) 1(cid:1) and colchicine in IFP over a period of 

164     Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3 

Hauber and Blaukovitsch 

two years [90]. That study included 50 IPF patients (31 IFN-
(cid:1) 1(cid:2), 18 colchicine). Lung function was moderately impaired 
(mean  FVC  71.8%  of  predicted  and  70.7%  of  predicted, 
respectively). After a median follow-up period of 25 months 
15.6%  in  the  IFN-(cid:1)  1(cid:2)  group  and  38.8%  in  the  colchicines 
group  had  died  (P  =  0.028).  The  survival  benefit  was  only 
apparent in patients with a baseline FVC > 71% of predicted. 
In  that  subgroup  only  patients  in  the  colchicine  group  died. 
Thus  it  is  not  clear  whether  IFN-(cid:1)  1(cid:2)  improved  survival  by 
stabilizing  IPF  or  whether  colchicine  treatment  itself  was 
associated  with  higher  mortality.  Treatment  with  IFN-(cid:1)  1(cid:2) 
significantly 
to  colchicine 
treatment  only  after  24  months.  Other  lung  function 
parameters  and  PaO2  showed  no  significant  difference 
between  both  groups.  The  authors  speculated  that  IFN-(cid:1)  1(cid:2) 
may  be  most  effective  in  mild-to-moderate  IPF.  However, 
based  on  the  data  from  the  above  mentioned  larger  clinical 
trials this hypothesis cannot be supported. 

improved  FVC  compared 

  Based  on  the  present  data  from  the  literature  the  use  of 
IFN-(cid:1) 1(cid:2) as therapy for IPF cannot be recommended. 

Anticoagulation 

  Vascular  injury  in  the  presence  of  inflammation  in  IPF 
has been reported by several authors [91-93]. Microvascular 
injury  has  been  suggested  as  an  important  step  in  the 
evolution  of  IPF  [93].  Microvascular  injury  leads 
to 
exposition of neointimal tissue factor. This factor is a strong 
prothrombotic  stimulus  leading  to  rapid  coagulation.  Cella 
and colleagues found increased plasma levels of tissue factor 
pathway  inhibitor  (TFPI)  in  IPF  patients  [94].  This  may  be 
due to extensive release from mesenchymal cells. 

 
Pulmonary  embolism  has  been  documented  as  cause  of 
death in IPF. However, it is rarely observed as cause of acute 
exacerbation.  In  a  review  by  Panos  and  colleagues 
pulmonary  embolism  was  the  cause  of  death  in  only  3.4% 
[95]. A more recent study including 86 IPF patients reported 
pulmonary  embolism  in  7  patients  (8.1%)  and  deep  venous 
thrombosis in one patient (1.1%) [96]. It has to be taken into 
account  that  those  patients  were  severely  impaired  and 
referred  for  lung  transplantation.  Pulmonary  hypertension  is 
another  important  vascular  problem  in  IPF  that  is  discussed 
at another site in this article. 

  Kubo  and  co-workers  investigated  the  effect  of  an 
anticoagulant therapy in patients with IPF [97]. In that study 
56  patients  were  randomized  to  receive  prednisolone  alone 
or prednisolone and anticoagulant therapy with warfarin. Re-
hospitalized patients in  the anticoagulant group were  treated 
with  low-molecular-weight  heparin.  The  survival  in  the 
anticoagulant  group  was  significantly  increased.  Improved 
survival  was  associated  with  reduced  exacerbation  rate. 
However,  no  significant  difference  was  observed  for 
hospitalization-free days between the two groups. This study 
had some limitations. It was not blinded. 6 out of 31 patients 
declined anticoagulant therapy (19.4% drop out). Pulmonary 
embolism  was  not  excluded  as  cause  for  acute  exacerbation 
by  CT 
radiological  methods.  No 
information is given on probable pulmonary hypertension in 
those  patients.  It  has  also  to  be  taken  into  account  that  the 
patients in that study were not severely affected by their IPF 
(mean  FVC  71%  and  69%  of  predicted,  mean  PaO2  71 

imaging  or  other 

In 

addition, 

single 

[97]. 

mmHg  and  69  mmHg,  mean  DLCO  63%  and  59%  of 
predicted) 
therapy  with 
corticosteroids  is  not  considered  the  therapy  of  choice  for 
IPF.  Despite  these  limitations  the  study  of  Kubo  and 
colleagues  provides  interesting  data  on  the  possible  use  of 
anticoagulant therapy in IPF. Larger clinical trials are needed 
to  address  this  issue.  This  has  led  to  the  initiation  of  the 
ACE-IPF 
idiopathic 
pulmonary  fibrosis)  study.  This  phase  III  clinical  trial  will 
compare the effect of warfarin and placebo on survival time, 
bleeding  complication,  and  decline  in  VC  (NCT00957242). 
This study will end in November 2011. 

(Anticoagulant 

effectiveness 

in 

Pirfenidone 

activity 

[102,  103], 

[89,  90].  Animal 

Pirfenidone is a derivate of pyridone (5-methyl-1-phenyl-
 
2-[1H]-pyridone)  with  anti-inflammatory,  antioxidant  and 
antifibrotic 
experiments 
demonstrated  antifibrotic  effects  of  this  drug  [100,  101]. 
Pirfenidon  reduces  expression  of  profibrotic  cytokines  (e.g. 
PDGF,  TGF-(cid:2)) 
inhibits  expression  of 
proinflammatory  cytokines  (e.g.  TNF-(cid:1),  IL-6)  as  well  as 
influx  of  inflammatory  cells  [104-107]  and  leads  to  down-
regulation  of  procollagen  gene  expression  [103].  Kakugawa 
and  co-workers  showed  that  pirfenidon  reduced  heat  shock 
protein  (HSP)  47-positive  cells  and  myofibroblasts  in  a 
murine model of bleomycin-induced fibrosis [108]. HSP47 is 
a  collagen-specific  molecular  chaperone  that  is  involved  in 
collagen processing and/or secretion. 

  Based  on  these  promising  results  from  animal  and  cell 
culture  experiments  pirfenidone  has  been  tested  as  an 
antifbrotic  agent  in  IPF  patients.  Two  open-label  studies 
investigated  the  effect  of  prifenidone  (40  mg/kg  body 
weight)  in  a  total  of  54  patients  [109,  110].  In  the  study  by 
Raghu  and  colleagues  mean  age  was  62  years  and  most 
patients  received  combination  treatment  of  prednisone  with 
immunosuppressants  and  oxygen  supplementation  prior  to 
pirfenidone.  Lung  function  was  moderately  impaired  and 
diffusion  capacity  was  severely  reduced  (mean  FVC  58.8%, 
mean  DLCO  34.3%).  However,  the  ranges  of  FVC  (26%  to 
108%  of  predicted)  and  DLCO  (8%  to  104%  of  predicted) 
were  wide.  One-  and  2-year  survival  was  78%  and  63% 
[109].  Compared  to  survival  rates  of  the  natural  history  of 
IPF  these  results  are  encouraging.  At  one-year  follow  up 
48%  of  the  patients  were  in  stable  condition  and  23%  had 
even  improved  regarding  FVC.  Patients  were  deteriorating 
lung  function  prior  to  treatment  had  a  stabilization  with 
prifenidone.  The  study  be  Nagai  and  co-workers  included  8 
males with IPF (n = 6) and systemic sclerosis associated UIP 
(n  =  2).  Mean  age  was  61  years.  Lung  function  was 
moderately  impaired  (mean  FVC  54%,  range  37.1%  to 
83.6%  of  predicted).  Diffusion  capacity  was  severely 
decreased  (mean  DLCO  33%,  range  23.8%  to  60.6%  of 
predicted). In that study pirfendione had no significant effect 
on survival after 2 years. No significant deterioration of lung 
function  parameters  and  oxygen  saturation  was  observed 
[110].  In  both  studies  adverse  side  effects  of  pirfenidone 
were  described  as  mild.  Adverse  effects 
to 
discontinuation of pirfenidone occurred in 11% and included 
rash and photosensitivity, nausea and emesis [109]. 

leading 

  Azuma  and  co-workers  performed  a  placebo-controlled 
trial  of  pirfenidone  in  IPF  [111].  In  that  study  107  patients 

Current and Future Treatment Options in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis 

Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3     165 

for 

IPF  were  evaluated 

with 
treatment  with  either 
pirfenidone  (n  =  72)  or  placebo  (n  =  35).  However,  27 
patients  were  not  able  to  perform  a  6  minute  exercise  test 
(6MET) on the treadmill. Since change in the lowest oxygen 
saturation  during  6MET  was  the  primary  endpoint  of  the 
study  an  amendment  was  made  not  to  negatively  influence 
study results. Only patients being able to complete the 6MET 
(n  =  80;  pirfenidone:  55,  placebo:  25)  were  included  into 
analysis. The primary endpoint of the study was not reached. 
There  was  no  significant  difference  in  the  change  in  the 
lowest  oxygen  saturation  at  6  and  9  months  between  the 
pirfenidone  and  the  placebo  group.  The  decline  in  VC  was 
significantly  reduced  in  the  pirfenidone  group  compared  to 
placebo.  However,  no  significant  differences  were  observed 
for TLC, DLCO and resting PaO2 between both groups. In the 
placebo  group 
rate  of  acute  exacerbations  was 
significantly  increased  (5/35  vs  0/72;  P  =  0.0031).  Adverse 
effects  were  common  in  both  groups  (pirfenidone:  98.6%; 
placbo:  88.9%).  Photosensitivity  occurred  in  almost  44%, 
stomach discomfort  in 30%,  anorexia in 32%, and nausea  in 
22%  of  patients  in  the  pirfenidone  group.  The  study  was 
terminated  before  the  one-year  period  due  to  exacerbation 
rate  in the placebo arm [111]. Therefore all results from that 
study have to be interpreted with care. 

the 

model of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis the dual ET 
(ETA  and  ETB)  receptor  antagonist  bosentan  decreased 
collagen deposition in the lungs [118]. 

  The  BUILD  (Bosentan  use  in  interstitial  lung  disease)-1 
trial  investigated  the  effect  of  bosentan  in  74  patients  with 
IPF and compared it to placebo (n = 84) for 12 months [119]. 
Although bosentan failed to improve the walking distance in 
the  6  minute  walking  test  (6MWT,  defined  as  primary 
endpoint)  a  positive  trend  towards  the  second  endpoints 
(time  to death,  time  to disease progression) was observed  in 
the treatment group. Interestingly this effect was statistically 
significant  in  the  group  of  patients  that  had  undergone 
surgical biopsy to prove the diagnosis of IPF. Those patients 
may  probably  be  treated  in  the  beginning  of  the  disease  and 
inhibition  of  ETR  may  be  most  effective  in  the  early  course 
of  IPF.  However,  these  results  have  to  be  interpreted  with 
care  since  this  group  was  small  (49  on  bosentan,  50  on 
placebo)  and  statistical  analysis  for  performed  as  post  hoc 
analysis. Based on these data the BUILD-3 trial was initiated 
to  test  whether  selected  IPF  patients  (<  5%  honeycombing 
on  HRCT  and  histologically  proven  diagnosis)  may  benefit 
from  treatment  with  bosentan  (NCT00391443).  Bosentan 
also had no significant effect on health-related quality of life 
(HRQL) or dyspnoea in the whole group [120]. However, as 
for  the  other  parameters  mentioned  above  patients  who 
underwent surgical biopsy for diagnosis treatment effects on 
HRQL and dyspnoea could be observed. 

  Data  on  the  effect  of  the  selective  ETRA  antagonsists 
sitaxentan  and  ambrisentan  have  not  been  published  yet. 
However,  the  ARTEMIS  trial  is  currently  investigating  the 
effect of ambrisentan in IPF (NCT00768300). A new, tissue-
targeting  dual  endothelin  receptor  antagonist,  macitentan,  is 
currently  investigated  in  a  phase  II  trail  in  idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis (NCT00903331). 

  At  present  ETR  antagonists  cannot  be  recommended  as 
treatment for IPF apart from clinical studies. Data from large 
studies on the effect of these agents in patients with IPF and 
pulmonary  hypertension  are  not  available  at  the  moment. 
The BUILD-3 trial and other trials with ETR antagonists will 
hopefully  help  to  define  which  group  of  IPF  patients  will 
benefit from this therapy. 

Anti-TNF(cid:1) Treatment 

  Tumor  necrosis  factor  (TNF)(cid:1)  is  an  important  mediator 
of  growth  and  collagen  secretion  of  interstitial  cells  [121]. 
Piguet  and  Vesin  treated  bleomaycin-  and  silica-induced 
lung fibrosis in mice with a human recombinant soluble TNF 
receptor  rsTNF-(cid:2)  [122].  They  were  able  to  demonstrate  that 
rsTNF-(cid:2)  reduced  lung  collagen  content.  In  a  more  recent 
paper  Fujita  and  colleagues  described  a  protective  effect  of 
TNF(cid:1)  on  bleomycin-induced  lung  fibrosis  in  mice  [123]. 
However,  TNF(cid:1)  levels  are  elevated  in  patients  with  IPF 
[124,  125].  Raghu  and  co-workers  conducted  a  multicenter, 
randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled 
to 
investigate the efficacy and safety of the recombinant soluble 
TNF  receptor  etanercept  in  IPF  [126].  In  that  study  88  IPF 
patients  received  either  etanercept  (25  mg  twice  a  week)  or 
placebo. Mean FVC was 63.9% of predicted. After 48 weeks 
of treatment no  significant difference in  change of  FVC and 
DLCO  was  observed  between  both  groups.  However,  a  non-

trial 

  Most  recently,  a  multi-centre,  double-blind,  placebo-
controlled, randomised phase III clinical trial was conducted 
in  Japanese  patients  with  well-defined  IPF  [112].  275 
patients were randomized to receive high-dose (1800 mg per 
day) or low-dose (1200 mg per day) pirfenidone or placebo. 
The  primary  end-point  was  change  in  VC  after  52  weeks. 
Secondary end-points included progression-free survival and 
lowest  oxygen  saturation  during  a  6MET.  There  was  a 
significant  difference  in  decline  of  VC  between  the  high-
dose  group  and  the  placebo  group  (-90  ml  vs  -160  ml;  P  = 
0.0416).  A  significant  difference  between  the  two  groups 
was  also  observed  for  progression-free  survival.  However, 
no clear information was given about survival in the groups. 
63% of patients in the high-dose group completed the study. 
73%  of  the  patients  completed  the  study  in  the  low-dose 
group  and  70%  in  the  placebo  group.  No  major  cause  of 
withdrawal could be identified in the groups. Adverse effects 
were  most  common  in  the  high-dose  group  including 
photosensitivity,  anorexia,  dizziness,  upper  respiratory  tract 
infections, and (cid:1) -GT elevation. 

 
Pirfenidone  has  been  approved  for  treatment  of  IPF  in 
Japan.  However,  at  present  data  are  limited  to  animal  and 
cell  culture  experiments  and  four  studies  (two  open  label, 
two  placebo-controlled).  Further  clinical  trials  are  needed  to 
better  define  the  effect  of  pirfendione  and  to  evaluate  its 
safety profile (eg. photosensitivity). At present one trial with 
750  patients  evaluates 
these  aspects  of  pirfenidone 
(NCT0062038). This trial will end May 2011. 

Endothelin Receptor Antagonists 

  Endothelin (ET)-1 is a potent vasoconstrictor and leads to 
proliferation  of  smooth  muscle  cells,  inflammation,  fibrosis 
and  endothelial  dysfunction 
the  pathogenesis  of 
pulmonary  arterial  hypertension  [113-116].  ET-1  has  also 
profibrotic  activities.  It  promotes  fibroblast  synthesis  of 
collagen  types  I  and  III  [115].  Moreover,  ET-1  expression 
has  been  described  in  fibrosing  alveolitis  [117].  In  a  rat 

in 

166     Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3 

Hauber and Blaukovitsch 

that 

significant  attenuation  of  disease  progression  was  observed 
with  etanercept.  The  authors  concluded 
further 
evaluation  of  etanercept  is  warranted.  However,  there  were 
four  deaths  in  the  etanercept  group  and  two  deaths  in  the 
placebo group. Although this difference was not statistically 
significant  it  reminds  us  that  inhibition  of  TNF(cid:1)  can  cause 
serious  side  effects  and  can  support  infections.  No  case  of 
tuberculosis  was  observed 
that  study.  At  present 
etanercept  must  be  regarded  as  an  experimental  treatment 
approach. 

in 

MS80 

  MS80  is  a  sulphated  oligosaccharide  that  has  been 
extracted from seaweed. MS80 can bind to TGF-(cid:2)1 and may 
thus have anti-fibrotic effects. Jiang and Guang showed  that 
MS80  inhibited  TGF-(cid:2)1-mediated  fibroblast  proliferation 
and  collagen  deposition  in  vitro  [127].  In  addition,  these 
authors  were  able  to  demonstrate  anti-fibrotic  activity  of 
MS80  in  a  rat  model  of  bleomycin-induced  pulmonary 
fibrosis. No studies with humans have been published yet. 

ACE Inhibitors and Statins 

In  addition  to  their  blood  pressure  lowering  effect 
 
angiotensin  converting  enzyme  (ACE)  inhibitors  have  been 
shown  to  block  murine  models  of  lung  fibrosis  [128-131]. 
Statins 
inhibit  3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl  coenzyme-A 
reductase  and  are  used  as  lipid  lowering  agents.  However, 
several  studies  have  indicated  that  statins  also  exert  anti-
inflammatory  effects  [132,  133].  Simvastatin  blocks  CTGF 
expression  in  fibroblasts  [134].  One  study  by  Nadrous  and 
colleagues  retrospectively  analyzed  the  effect  of  ACE 
inhibitors  and  statins  on  IPF  in  478  patients  [135].  These 
findings  have  to  be  interpreted  with  care  because  that  study 
was  a  retrospective  analysis  and  a  single  centre  study.  No 
prospective studies have been published so far. 

Zileuton 

application 

fibrosis  LTs  are 

  Leukotrienes  (LT)  have  been  suggested  to  play  an 
important  role  in  the  pathogenesis  of  pulmonary  fibrosis. 
Expression  of  LTB4  and  LTC4  is  increased  in  the  lungs  of 
patients  with  IPF  [136].  In  the  mouse  model  of  bleomycin-
increased  after 
induced  pulmonary 
bleomycin.  Conversely, 
intratracheal 
lipoxygenase-5  knock  out  mice  are  protected 
from 
Inhibition  of  5-
bleomycin-induced 
lipoxygenase  with  zileuton  or  using  MK-571,  a  cys-
leukotriene  receptor  antagonist  reduced  inflammation  and 
lung  damage  in  mice  treated  with  bleomycin  [138].  One 
open  label  trial  compared  the  efficacy  of  zileuton  to 
prednisone/azathioprin  (NCT00262405).  That  study  started 
in January 2001. No results are available so far. 

fibrosis 

of 

[137]. 

Thalidomide 

  Thalidomide  is  a  derivative  of  glutamic  acid.  It  was 
originally  synthesised  as  a  sedative  and  anti-emetic. 
However,  it  is  had  to  be  withdrawn  because  of  teratogenic 
effects.  Thalidomide  has  also  anti-inflammatory  and 
immunomodulatory  effects  [139-142].  In  addition  it  inhibits 

angiogenesis  [143].  Ye  and  co-workers  showed 
that 
thalidomide  reduced  lipopolysaccharide-stimulated  release 
of IL-18, IL-8, and TNF(cid:1) from alveolar macrophages of IPF 
patients  [144].  In  the  mouse  model  thalidomide  ameliorated 
histological  changes  in  bleomycin-induced  lung  fibrosis  and 
decreased expression of TGF-(cid:2) [145]. Horton and colleagues 
reported a positive effect of thalidomide on intractable cough 
in  11  patients  with  IPF  [146].  However,  no  data  are  given 
concerning  lung  function.  One  clinical  phase  II  study  has 
investigated  the safety, feasibility  and efficacy of 400 mg of 
thalidomide  administered  daily  for  one  year  in  patients  with 
IPF who have failed or are not candidates for treatment with 
corticosteroids  and/or  cytotoxic  drugs  (NCT00162760).  No 
study results have been published yet. 

Antagonizing Transforming Growth Factor-(cid:1) 

  As  mentioned  above  TGF-(cid:2)  plays  an  important  role  in 
the  pathogensis  and  is  considered  as  a  central  mediator  of 
fibrosis. Therefore  inhibition of  TGF-(cid:2)  may be a reasonable 
approach  to  treat  IPF.  A  Monoclonal  antibody  (GC  1008) 
that  neutralizes  TGF-(cid:2)1,  TGF-(cid:2)2,  and  TGF-(cid:2)3  has  been 
tested  in  a  phase  I  study  (NCT00125385).  However,  results 
have  not  been  published  so  far  according  to  MEDLINE.  An 
alternative  approach 
integrin  with 
antagonists or antibodies. Latent  TGF-(cid:2)  is  activated by av(cid:2)6 
integrin  [147].  Therefore  inhibition  of  av(cid:2)6  integrin  may 
suppress  TGF-(cid:2)  activation.  Based  on  data  from  animal 
models  an  ALK-5  kinase  inhibitor,  SD-208,  or  decorin  may 
also offer therapeutic approaches to  antagonize TGF-(cid:2) [148, 
149]. 

to  block  av(cid:2)6 

is 

Blockade of Connective Tissue Growth Factor 

  CTGF  is  considered  to  be  a  downstream  mediator  of 
TGF-(cid:2)  (see  above).  An  anti-CTGF  antibody,  FG-3019,  has 
been evaluated in a phase I trial (NCT00074698). In this yet 
unpublished  study  FG-3019  was  well  tolerated  and  safe 
(FibroGen, San Francisco, USA). 

Imatinib 

 
Imatinib  mesylate  is  a  tyrosine  kinase  inhibitor  that 
blocks  botch  the  PDGF  receptor  and  c-Abl.  Animal  studies 
demonstrated  inhibition  of  mesenchymal  cell  proliferation 
[150,  151].  This  led  to  a  phase  II/III  study.  Daniels  and 
colleagues  performed  a  placebo  controlled  double  blind 
study  with  119  IPF  patients  over  96  weeks  [152].  In  that 
study imatinib had no significant effect on change of FVC or 
DLCO  compared  to  placebo.  There  was  also  no  significant 
difference in survival between both groups. 

BIBF-1120 

  BIPF-1120 is an indolinone derivative that blocks VEGF 
receptor  (VEGFR),  PDGFR  and  FGFR  kinase  activity  in 
enzymatic  assays.  In  vitro  it  also  inhibits  mitogen-activated 
protein  kinase  and  Akt  signaling  pathways  in  different  cell 
types  contributing 
to  angiogenesis,  endothelial  cells, 
pericytes,  and  smooth  muscle  cells.  Cell  proliferation  is 
inhibited and apoptosis is induced [153]. This may also be an 
attractive  therapeutic  approach  to  IPF.  A  phase  II  study  is 

Current and Future Treatment Options in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis 

Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3     167 

currently  investigating  the  effect  of  BIBF-1120  in  IPF 
(NCT00514683). 

All Trans Retinoic Acid 

  All  trans  retinoic  acid  (ATRA)  has  been  shown  to 
prevent  lung  fibrosis  in  animal  models  [154].  This  may 
provide the rationale for a potential use in IPF. However, no 
study is currently registered. 

Blockade of Circulating Fibroblast Precursor Cells 

 
Phillips  and  co-workers  showed  that  CD45(+)  collagen 
I(+)  CXCR4(+)  (CD45(+)Col  I(+)CXCR4(+))  cells  are 
termed  circulating  fibrocytes  that  are  recruited  to  the  lungs 
after instillation of bleomycin in an animal model [155]. This 
effect  is  mainly  mediated  via  CXCL12  and  in  that  study 
antagonizing  CXCL12  with  an  antibody  attenuated 
pulmonary fibrosis. Therefore blocking CXCL12 may offer a 
potential treatment  target. However,  at present it is not clear 
whether  circulating  fibrocytes  actually  can  differ 
into 
myofibroblasts. 

invasive  ventilation  before  mechanical  ventilation,  and  four 
received only non-invasive ventilation. 16 ventilated patients 
died.  Another  6  died  in  the  hospital  and  only  two  patients 
were  discharged.  Median  survival  was  16  days  from  ICU 
admission.  Another  retrospective  study  investigated  34  IPF 
patients  with  acute  respiratory  failure  [161].  15  patients 
underwent mechanical ventilation (MV) whereas 19 subjects 
were  treated  with  non-invasive  ventilation  (NIV).  Both 
ventilatory strategies temporarily increased oxygen supply as 
measured by an increased PaO2/FiO2. Overall mortality rate 
was 85% with 100% for invasive MV and 74% for NIV. MV 
does not seem to be beneficial in end-stage IFP patients. NIV 
may  provide  relief  from  dyspnoea  and  avoid  aggressive 
approaches. 

  Apart from end-stage disease NIV may probably increase 
exercise  tolerance  and  decrease  dyspnoea.  Moderno  and 
colleagues  investigated  the  effect  of  proportional  assist 
ventilation 
IPF  during 
cardiopulmonary  exercise  testing  [162].  In  that  study  PAV 
led  to  a  lower  heart  rate  during  sub-maximal  exercise 
compared  to  no  support  or  only  continous  positive  airway 
pressure (CPAP). 

in  10  patients  with 

(PAV) 

NON PHARMACOLOGIC TREATMENT OF IPF 

Lung Transplantation 

Oxygen Therapy 

  Dyspnoea  has  an  important  impact  on  quality  of  life. 
Oxygen  therapy  is  advised 
in  patients  with  hypoxia. 
However,  there  is  no  evidence  that  oxygen  supplementation 
influences the quality of life and survival in patients with IPF 
or  other  ILD  [156].  Polonski  and  co-workers  compared  10 
IPF  patients  with  oxygen  and  8  patients  without  oxygen 
[157].  In  that  study  oxygen  had  a  lowering  effect  on 
pulmonary artery pressure. At present oxygen therapy in IPF 
should be considered  in patients with persisting hypoxaemia 
with  a  pO2  below  7.3  kPa  or  below  8  kPa  with  clinical 
evidence of pulmonary hypertension. 

Rehabilitation 

  Although  rehabilitation  and  physical  exercise  have  been 
proven useful in several diseases information on its effects in 
ILD  is  sparse.  Holland  and  Hill  performed  a  meta  analysis 
that  included two studies with a total of 85 patients (43 with 
training and 42 as control group) [158]. Physical training had 
no  adverse  effects.  Improvement  in  6  minute  walking 
distance and in quality of life was seen  in IPF patients. One 
study  showed  no  significant  effects  of  physical  training  on 
clinical variables or survival  at  six  months [159]. At present 
physical  training  can  be  regarded  as  safe  for  patients  with 
IPF.  Short  term  improvement  can  be  observed  in  functional 
exercise  capacity  and  quality  of  life.  However,  longer-term 
effects are less clear. 

Non Invasive Ventilation 

  Respiratory  failure  in  IPF  may  require  mechanical 
ventilation.  However,  the  outcome  of  patients  with  IPF 
receiving  invasive mechanical ventilation is poor.  Rangappa 
and  Moran  retrospectively  analyzed  the  outcome  of  24 
patients with IPF admitted to the ICU [160]. 19 patients were 
mechanically  ventilated.  13  of  these  19  patients  had  non-

  Currently,  the  best  treatment  option  for  IPF  is  lung 
transplantation.  IPF  represents  the  largest  proportion  of  ILF 
in  patients  listed  for  lung  transplantation  in  North  America 
(almost  20%)  [163].  The  1-year  and  5-year  survival  rates 
following  lung  transplantation  for  IPF  are  74-79%  and  40-
54%,  respectively  [164].  There  is  no  significant  difference 
between 
transplants.  The 
introduction of the lung allocation score in the United States 
in  2005  has  reduced  1  year  waiting-list  mortality  from  21% 
to  11%  [165].  However,  the  optimal  timing  for  lung 
transplantation  in  IPF  patients  remains  uncertain.  TLCO 
seems  to  be  a  feasible  parameter  for  prediction  of  survival. 
IPF  patients  with  a  TLCO  below  39%  predicted  should  be 
considered for transplantation [166]. 

single  and  bilateral 

lung 

CONCLUSION 

increasing 

about 

knowledge 

underlying 
  Despite 
pathophysiologic  mechanisms  in  IPF  medical  treatment  is 
still  unsatisfactory.  However,  with  recent  advances  in  our 
understanding  of  this  disease  new  treatment  targets  have 
been  discovered  and  will  hopefully  provide  new  therapeutic 
approaches to this fatal disease. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

Maple, D. W.; Hunt, W. C.; Utton, R.; Baumgartner, K. B.; Samet, 
J.  M.;  Coultas,  D.  B.  Idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis:  survival  in 
population based and hospital based cohorts. Thorax, 1998, 53(6), 
469-476. 
Hubbard,  R.;  Venn,  A.;  Lewis,  S.;  Britton,  J.  Lung  cancer  and 
cryptogenic  fibrosing  alveolitis.  A  population-based  cohort  study. 
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 2000, 161(1), 5-8. 
Demedts, M.; Well, A. U.; Antó, J. M.; Costabel, U.; Hubbard, R.; 
Cullinan, P.; Slabbynck, H.; Rizzato, G.; Poletti, V.; Verbeken, E. 
K.;  Thomeer,  M.  J.;  Kokkarinen,  J.;  Dalphin,  J.  C.;  Taylor,  A.  N. 
Interstitial lung diseases: an epidemiological overview. Eur. Respir. 
J., 2001, 18, 2s-16s. 

168     Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3 

Hauber and Blaukovitsch 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

treatment. 

Idiopathic  pulmonary 

Raghu, G.; Weycker, D.; Edelsberg, J.; Bradford, W. Z.; Oster, G. 
Incidence  and  prevalence  of  idiopathic pulmonary  fibrosis.  Am.  J. 
Respir. Crit. Care Med., 2006, 174(7), 810-6. 
fibrosis: 
American  Thoracic  Society. 
diagnosis  and 
International  consensus  statement. 
American  Thoracic  Society  (ATS)  and  the  European  Respiratory 
Society (ERS). Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 2000, 161(2), 646-
64. 
Flaherty,  K.  R.;  Martinez,  F.  J.;  Travis,  W.;  Lynch,  J.  P.  3rd. 
Nonspecific  interstitial  pneumonia  (NSIP).  Semin.  Respir.  Crit. 
Care Med., 2001, 22(4), 423-34. 
American  Thoracic  Society/European  Respiratory  Society. 
American  Thoracic  Society/European  Respiratory  Society 
international  multidisciplinary  consensus  classification  of  the 
idiopathic  interstitial  pneumonias.  Am.  J.  Respir.  Crit.  Care  Med., 
2002, 165(2), 277-304. 
Crystal, R. G.; Fulmer, J. D.; Roberts, W. C.; Moss, M. L.; Line, B. 
R.;  Reynolds,  H.  Y.  Idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Clinical, 
histologic,  radiographic,  physiologic,  scintigraphic,  cytologic,  and 
biochemical aspects. Ann. Intern. Med., 1976, 85(6), 769-88. 
Keogh, B. A.; Crystal, R. G. Alveolitis: the key to interstitial lung 
disorders. Thorax, 1982, 37(1), 1-10. 
Selman,  M.;  King,  T.  E.;  Pardo,  A;  American  Thoracic  Society; 
European  Respiratory  Society;  American  College  of  Chest 
Physicians. Idiopahtic pulmonary fibrosis: prevailing and evolving 
hypotheses  about  its  pathogenesis  and  implications  for  therapy. 
Ann. Intern. Med., 2001, 134(2), 136-51. 
Strieter,  R.  M.;  Mehrad,  B.  New  mechanisms  of  pulmonary 
fibrosis. Chest, 2009, 136(5), 1364-70. 
Clark,  R.  A.  Basis  of  cutaneous  wound  repair.  J.  Dermatol.  Surg. 
Oncol., 1993, 19(8), 693-706. 
Keane,  M.  P.;  Belperio,  J.  A.;  Henson,  P.  M.  In  Textbook  of 
respiratory  medicine  4th  ed.;  Mason,  R.  J.;  Broaddus,  V.  C.; 
Murray, J. F., Eds.; Elsevier Saunders: Philadelphia, PA, 2005, pp. 
449–90. 

[15] 

[14]  Wallace, W. A. H.; Fitch, P. M.;  Simpson, J. A.; Howie, S. E. M. 
Inflammation-associated  remodelling  and  fibrosis  in  the  lung  –  a 
process and an end point. Int. J. Exp. Pathol., 2007, 88(2), 103-10. 
Corrin, B.; Dewar, A.; Rodriguez-Roisin, R.; Turner-Warwick, M. 
Fine  structural  changes  in  cryptogenic  alveolitis  and  asbestosis.  J. 
Pathol., 1985, 147(2), 107-19. 
Kuhn,  C.  3rd;  Boldt,  J.;  King,  T.  E.  Jr;  Crouch,  E.;  Vartio,  T.; 
McDonald,  J.  A.  An  immunohistochemical  study  of  architectural 
remodelling and connective tissue synthesis in pulmonary fibrosis. 
Am. Rev. Respir. Dis.,1989, 140(6), 1693-703. 

[16] 

[17]  McDonald,  J.  A.  Idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  A  paradigm  for 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

[21] 

lung injury and repair. Chest, 1991, 99(Suppl 3), 87S-93S. 
Strieter,  R.  M.;  Gomperts,  B.  N.;  Keane,  M.  P.  The  role  of  CXC 
chemokines  in  pulmonary  fibrosis.  J.  Clin.  Invest.,  2007,  117(3), 
549-56. 
Strieter, R. M. Pathogenesis and natural history of usual interstitial 
pneumonia:  the  whole  story  or  the  last  chapter  of  a  long  novel. 
Chest, 2005, 128(Suppl 5), 526S-532S. 
Sime,  P.  J.;  Xing,  Z.;  Graham,  F.  L.;  Csaky,  K.  G.;  Gauldie,  J. 
Adenovector-mediated gene transfer of active transforming growth 
factor-beta1  induces  prolonged  severe  fibrosis  in  rat  lung.  J.  Clin. 
Invest., 1997, 100(4), 768-76. 
Lee,  C.  G.;  Cho,  S.  J.;  Kang,  M.  J.;  Chapoval,  S.  P.;  Lee,  P.  J.; 
Noble, P.  W:; Yehualaeshet, T.; Lu, B.; Flavell, R. A.;  Milbrandt, 
J.;  Homer,  R.  J.;  Elias,  J.  A.  Early  growth  response  gene  1-
mediated  apoptosis  is  essential  for  transforming  growth  factor 
beta1-induced pulmonary fibrosis. J. Exp. Med., 2004, 200(3), 377-
89. 

[23] 

[22]  Willis,  B.  C.;  Liebler,  J.  M. ;  Luby-Phelps,  K.;  Nicolson,  A.  G.; 
Crandall, E. D.; du Bois, R. M.; Borok, Z. Induction of epithelial-
mesenchymal transition in alveolar epithelial cells by transforming 
growth factor-beta1: potential role in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. 
Am. J. Pathol., 2005, 166(5), 1321-32. 
Leask,  A.;  Abraham,  D.  J.  The  role  of  connective  tissue  growth 
factor, a multifunctional matricellular protein, in fibroblast biology. 
Biochem. Cell Biol., 2003, 81(6), 355-63. 
Bonner,  J.  C.  Regulation  of  PDGF  and  its  receptors  in  fibrotic 
diseases. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev., 2004, 15(4), 255-73. 
Kolodsick,  J.  E.;  Toews,  G.  B.;  Jakubzick,  C.;  Hogaboam,  C.; 
Moore,  T.  A.;  McKenzie,  A.;  Wilke,  C.  A.;  Chrisman,  C.  J.; 
Moore,  B.  B.  Protection  from  fluorescein  isothiocyanate-induced 

[24] 

[25] 

[26] 

[27] 

[28] 

[29] 

[30] 

[31] 

[32] 

in  bleomycin-induced 

fibrosis in IL-13-deficient, but not IL-4-deficient, mice results from 
impaired collagen synthesis. J. Immunol., 2004, 172(7), 4068-76. 
Fichtner-Feigl, S.; Strober, W.; Kawakami, K.; Puri, R. K.; Kitani, 
A. IL-13 signaling through the IL-13alpha2 receptor is involved in 
induction  of  TGF-beta1  production  and  fibrosis.  Nat.  Med.,  2006, 
12(1), 99-106. 
Liu, T.; Jin, H.; Ullenbruch, M.; Hu, B.; Hashimoto, N.; Moore, B.; 
McKenzie, A.; Lukacs, N. W.; Phan, S. H. Regulation of found in 
inflammatory  zone  1  expression 
lung 
fibrosis:  role  of  IL-4/IL-13  and  mediation  via  STAT-6.  J. 
Immunol., 2004, 173(5), 3425-31. 
Liu,  T.;  Dhanasekaran,  S.  M.;  Jin,  H.;  Hu,  B.;  Tomlins,  S.  A.; 
Chinnaiyan, A. M.; Phan, S. H. FIZZ1 stimulation of myofibroblast 
differentiation. Am. J. Pathol., 2004, 164(4), 1315-26. 
Agostini,  C.;  Gurrieri,  C.  Chemokine/cytokine  cocktail 
in 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Proc. Am. Thorac. Soc., 2006, 3(4), 
357-63. 
Gharaee-Kermani, M.; Denholm, E. M.; Phan, S. H. Costimulation 
of  fibroblast  collagen  and  transforming  growth  factor  beta1  gene 
expression  by  monocyte  chemoattractant  protein-1  via  specific 
receptors. J. Biol. Chem., 1996, 271(30), 17779-84. 
Suga,  M.;  Iyonaga,  K.;  Ichiyasu,  H.;  Saita,  N.;  Yamasaki,  H.; 
Ando,  M.  Clinical  significance  of  MCP-1  levels  in  BALF  and 
serum  of  patients  with  interstitial  lung  diseases.  Eur.  Respir.  J., 
1999, 14(2), 376-82. 
Zuo, F.; Kaminski, N.; Eugui, E.; Allard, J.; Yahkini, Z.; Ben-Dor, 
A,;  Lollini,  L.;  Morris,  D.;  Kim,  Y.;  DeLustro,  B.;  Sheppard,  D.; 
Pardo,  A.;  Selman,  M.;  Heller,  R.  A.  Gene  expression  analysis 
reveals matrilysin as a key regulator of pulmonary fibrosis in mice 
and humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2002, 99(9), 6292-7. 

[34] 

[35] 

[33]  Marchal-Sommé,  J.;  Uzunhan,  Y.;  Marchand-Adam,  S.;  Valeyre, 
D.;  Soumelis,  V.;  Crestani,  B.;  Soler,  P.  Cutting  edge: 
nonproliferating  mature  immune  cells  from  a  novel  type  of 
organized  lymphoid  structure  in  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  J. 
Immunol., 2006, 176(10), 5735-9. 
Attili,  A.  K.;  Kazerooni,  E.  A.;  Gross,  B.  H.;  Flaherty,  K.  R.; 
Martinez,  F.  J.  Thoracic  lymph  node  enlargement  in  usual 
interstitial  pneumonitis  and  nonspecific-interstitial  pneumonitis: 
prevalence,  correlation  with  disease  activity  and 
temporal 
evolution. J. Thorac. Imaging, 2006, 21(4), 288-92. 
Hunninghake,  G.  W.;  Lynch,  D.  A.;  Galvin,  J.  R.;  Gross,  B.  H.; 
Müller,  N.;  Schwartz,  D.  A.;  King,  T.  E.  Jr;  Lynch,  J.  P.  3rd; 
Hegele,  R.;  Waldron,  J.;  Colby,  T.  V.;  Hogg,  J.  C.  Radiologic 
findings are strongly associated with pathologic diagnosis of usual 
interstitial pneumonia. Chest, 2003, 124(4), 1215-23. 
Kasai,  H.;  Allen,  J.  T.;  Mason,  R.  M.;  Kamimura,  T.;  Zhang,  Z. 
TGF-beta1 induces human alveolar epithelial to mesenchymal cell 
transition (EMT). Respir. Res., 2005, 6, 56. 
Yao,  H.  W.;  Xie,  Q.  M.;  Chen,  J.  Q.;  Deng,  Y.  M.;  Tang,  H.  F. 
TGF-(cid:1)1  induces  alveolar  epithelial  to  mesenchymal  transition  in 
vitro. Life Sci., 2004, 76(1), 29-37. 
Korfei,  M.;  Ruppert,  C.;  Mahavadi,  P.;  Henneke,  I.;  Markart,  P.; 
Koch, M.; Lang, G.;  Fink, L.; Bohle, R.  M.; Seeger,  W.; Weaver, 
T.  E.;  Guenther,  A.  Epithelial  endoplasmatic  reticulum  stress  and 
apoptosis in sporadic idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am. J. Respir. 
Crit. Care Med., 2008, 178(8), 838-46. 
Hyzy,  R.;  Huang,  S.;  Myers,  J.;  Flaherty,  K.;  Martinez,  F.  Acute 
exacerbation of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Chest, 2007, 132(5), 
1652-8. 

[38] 

[36] 

[37] 

[39] 

[41] 

[42] 

[40]  Wells, A. U.; Hirani, N.; on behalf of the British Thoracic Society 
Interstitial Lung Disease Guideline Group. Interstitial lung disease 
guideline:  the  British  Thoracic  Society  in  collaboration  with  the 
Thoracic  Society  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand  and  the  Irish 
Thoracic Society. Thorax, 2008, 63(Suppl 5), v1-v58. 
Phan,  S.  H.;  Thrall,  R.  S.;  Williams,  C.  Bleomycin-induced 
pulmonary fibrosis. Effects of steroid on collagen metabolism. Am. 
Rev. Respir. Res., 1981, 124(4), 438-4. 
Richeldi,  L.;  Davies,  H.  R.  H.  R.;  Spagnolo,  P.;  Luppi,  F. 
Corticosteroids  for 
idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Cochrane 
Database Syst. Rev., 2003, 3, CD002880. 
Cegla,  U.  H.  Treatment  of 
idiopathic  fibrosing  alveolitis. 
Therapeutic  experiences  with  azathioprine-prednisolone  and  D-
penicllamine-prednisolone  combination  therapy  Schweiz.  Med. 
Wochenschr., 1977, 107(6), 184-7. 
Raghu, G.; Depaso, W. J.; Cain, K.; Hammar, S. P.; Wetzel, C. E.; 
Dreis,  D.  F.;  Hutchinson,  J.;  Pardee,  N.  E.;  Winterbauer,  R.  H. 

[43] 

[44] 

Current and Future Treatment Options in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis 

Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3     169 

Azathioprine  combined  with  prednisone  in  the  treatment  of 
idiopathic  pulmonary 
fibrosis:  a  prospective  double-blind, 
randomized,  placebo-controlled  trial.  Am.  Rev.  Respir.  Dis.,  1991, 
144(2), 29l-6. 
Cegla, U. H.; Kroidl, R. F.; Meier-Sydow, J.; Thiel, C.; Czarnecki, 
G.  V.  Therapy  of  idiopathic  fibrosis  of  the  lung.  Pneumonologie, 
1975, 152(1-3), 75-92. 

[45] 

[52] 

[53] 

for 

the 

[51] 

[50] 

[49] 

[48] 

[47] 

fibrosis 

[46]  Winterbauer,  R.  H.;  Hammar,  S.  P.;  Hallman,  K.  O.;  Hays,  J.  E.; 
Pardee,  N.  E.;  Morgan,  E.  H.;  Allen,  J.  D.;  Moores,  K.  D.;  Bush, 
W.; Walker, J. H. Diffuse interstitial pneumonitis. Clincopathologic 
correlations  in  20  patients  treated  with  prednisone/azathioprine. 
Am. J. Med., 1978, 65(4), 661-72. 
Hoyles, R. K.; Ellis, R. W.; Wellsbury, J.; Lees, B.; Newlands, P.; 
Goh, N. S.; Roberts, C.; Desai, S.; Herrick, A. L.; McHugh, N. J.; 
Foley,  N.  M.;  Pearson,  S.  B.;  Emery,  P.;  Veale,  D.  J.;  Denton,  C. 
P.;  Wells,  A.  U.;  Black,  C.  M.;  du  Bois,  R.  M.  A  multicenter, 
prospective,  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  trial  of 
corticosteroids and intravenous cyclophosphamide followed by oral 
azathioprine 
treatment  of  pulmonary 
in 
scleroderma. Arthritis Rheum., 2006, 54(12), 3962-70. 
Johnson, M. A.; Kwan, S.; Snell, N. J. C.; Nunn, A. I.; Darbyshire, 
J. H.; Turner-Warwick, M. Randomized controlled trial comparing 
prednisolone  alone  with  cyclophosphamide  and 
low  dose 
prednisolone  in  combination  in  cryptogenic  fibrosing  alveolitis. 
Thorax, 1989, 44(4), 280-8. 
Zisman,  D.;  Lynch,  J.  3rd;  Toews,  G.;  Kazerooni,  E.;  Flint,  A.; 
Martinze,  F.  J.  Cyclophosphamide  in  the  treatment  of  idiopathic 
pulmonary  fibrosis:  a  prospective  study  in  patients  who  failed  to 
respond to corticosteroids. Chest, 2000, 117(6), 1619-26. 
Baughman,  R.  P.;  Lower,  E.  E.  Use  of  intermittent,  intravenous 
cyclophosphamide  for  idiopathic  fibrosis.  Chest,  1992,  102(4), 
1090-4. 
Gay, S. E.; Kazerooni, E. A.; Toews, G. B.; Lynch, J. P. 3rd; Gross, 
B.  H.;  Cascade,  P.  N.;  Spizarny,  D.  L.;  Flint,  A.;  Schork,  M.  A.; 
Whyte,  R.  I.;  Popovich,  J.;  Hyzy,  R.;  Martinez,  F.  J.  Idiopathic 
pulmonary  fibrosis:  predicting  response  to  therapy  and  survival. 
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 1998, 157(4), 1063-72. 
Eliasson,  O.;  Cole,  S.  R.;  Degraff,  A.  C.  Jr.  Adverse  effects  of 
cyclophosphamide  in  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Conn.  Med., 
1985, 49(5), 286-9. 
Dayton,  C.  S.;  Schwartz,  D.  A.;  Helmers,  R.  A.;  Pueringer,  R.  J.; 
Gilbert,  S.  R.;  Merchant,  R.  K.;  Hunninghake,  G.  W.  Outcome  of 
subjects with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis who fail corticosteroid 
therapy.  Implications  for  further  studies.  Chest,  1993,  103(1),  69-
73. 
Collard,  H.  R.;  Ryu,  J.  H.;  Douglas,  W.  W.;  Schwarz,  M.  I.; 
Curran-Everett,  D.;  King,  T.  E.  Jr;  Brown,  K.  K.  Combined 
corticosteroid  and  cyclophosphamide 
therapy  does  not  alter 
survival  in  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Chest,  2004,  125(6), 
2169-74. 
Gochuico, B. R.; Avila, N. A.; Chow, C. K.; Novero, L. J.; Wu, H. 
P.;  Ren,  P.;  MacDonald,  S.  D.;  Travis,  W.  D.;  Stylianou,  M.  P.; 
Rosas,  I.  O.  Progressive  preclinical  interstitial  lung  disease  in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Arch. Intern. Med., 2008, 168(2), 159-66. 
Kim,  D.  S.  Interstitial  lung  disease  in  rheumatoid  arthritis:  recent 
advances. Curr. Opin. Pulm. Med., 2006, 12(5), 346-53. 
Camus,  P.;  Fanton,  A.;  Bonniaud,  P.;  Camus,  C.;  Foucher,  P. 
Interstitial 
radiation. 
Respiration, 2004, 71(4), 301-26. 
Hoyos, N.; Casanova, A.; Sánchez, S.; Valenzuela, C.; García, A.; 
Girón,  R.  M.  Polymyositis  and  interstitial  lung  disease  with  a 
favourable  response  to  corticosteroids  and  methotrexate.  Arch. 
Bronconeumol., 2007, 43(11), 636-9. 
Bournia,  V.  K.;  Vlachoyiannopoulos,  P.  G.;  Selmi,  C.; 
Moutsopoulos,  H.  M.;  Gershwin,  M.  E.  Recent  advances  in  the 
treatment of systemic sclerosis. Clin. Rev. Allergy Immunol., 2009, 
36(2-3), 176-200. 
Zhang, L.; Zhu, Y.; Luo, W. The protective effect of colchicine on 
bleomycin-induced  pulmonary  fibrosis  in  rats.  Chin.  Med.  Sci.  J., 
1992, 7(1), 58-60. 
Rennard, S. I.; Bitterman, P. B.; Ozaki, T.; Rom, W. N.; Crystal, R. 
G.  Colchicine  suppresses  the  release  of  fibroblast  growth  factors 
from  alveolar  macrophages  in  vitro.  The  basis  of  possible 
therapeutic  approach  to  the  fibrotic  disorders.  Am.  Rev.  Respir. 
Dis., 1988, 137(1), 181-5. 

induced  by  drugs  and 

lung  disease 

[56] 

[57] 

[55] 

[58] 

[54] 

[59] 

[60] 

[61] 

[62] 

[63] 

[64] 

[65] 

[66] 

[67] 

[68] 

[69] 

Douglas,  W.  W.;  Ryu,  J.  H.;  Swensen,  S.  J.;  Offord,  K.  P.; 
Schroeder, D. R.; Caron, G. M.; DeRemee, R. A. Cochicine versus 
prednisone  in  the  treatment  of  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  A 
randomized prospective study. Members of the Lung Study Group. 
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 1998, 158(1), 220-5. 
Selman,  M.;  Carrillo,  G.;  Salas,  J.;  Padilla,  R.  P.;  Pérez-Chavira, 
R.;  Sansores,  R.;  Chapela,  R.  Cochicine,  D-penicllamine,  and 
prednisone  in  the  treatment  of  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis:  a 
controlled clinical trial. Chest, 1998, 114(2), 507-12. 
Douglas, W. W.; Ryu, J. H.; Schroeder, D. R. Idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis: Impact of oxygen and cochicine, prednisone, or no therapy 
on survival. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 2000, 161(4), 1172-8. 
Peters,  S.  G.;  McDougall,  J.  C.;  Douglas,  W.  W.;  Coles,  D.  T.; 
DeRemee, R. A. Colchicine in the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis. 
Chest, 1993, 103(1), 101-4. 
Douglas,  W.  W.;  Ryu,  H.  J.;  Bjoraker,  J.  A.;  Schroeder,  D.  R.; 
Myers,  J.  L.;  Tazelaar,  H.  D.;  Swensen,  S.  J.;  Scanlon,  P.  D.; 
Peters,  S.  G.;  DeRemee,  R.  A.  Colchicine  versus  prednisone  as 
treatment  of usual  interstitial  pneumonia.  Mayo  Clin.  Proc.,  1997, 
72(3), 201-9. 
Cantin, A. M.; North, S.  L.;  Fells, G. A.; Hubbard, R. C.; Crystal, 
R.  G.  Oxidant-mediated  epithelial  cell 
idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis. J. Clin. Invest., 1987, 79(6), 1665-73. 
Rahman,  I.;  MacNee,  W.  Role  of 
inflammatory lung diseases. Thorax, 1998, 53(7), 601-12. 
Cantin,  A.  M.;  Hubbard,  R.  C.;  Crystal,  R.  G.  Glutathione 
deficiency in the epithelial lining fluid of the lower respiratory tract 
in  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Am.  Rev.  Respir.  Dis.,  1989, 
139(2), 370-2. 

transcription  factors 

injury 

in 

in 

[70]  Meyer,  A.;  Buhl,  R.;  Magnussen,  H.  The  effect  of  oral  N-
acetlycysteine  on  lung  glutathione  levels  in  idiopathic  pulmonary 
fibrosis. Eur. Respir. J., 1994, 7(3), 431-6. 

[75] 

[74] 

[73] 

[72] 

therapy 

alveolitis.  Adjunctive 

[71]  Meyer,  A.;  Buhl,  R.;  Kampf,  S.;  Magnussen,  H.  Intravenous  N-
acetylcysteine  and  lung  glutathione  of  patients  with  pulmonary 
fibrosis and normals. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 1995, 152(3), 
1055-60. 
Behr, J.; Maier, K.; Degenkolb, B.; Krombach, F.; Vogelmeier, C. 
Antioxidative and clinical effects of high-dose N-acetylcysteine in 
fibrosing 
to  maintance 
immunosuppression. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 1997, 156(6), 
1897-901. 
Behr,  J.;  Degenkolb,  B.;  Krombach,  F.;  Vogelmeier,  C. 
Intracellular  glutathione  and  bronchoalveolar  cells  in  fibrosing 
alveolitis: effects of N-acetylcysteine. Eur. Respir. J., 2002, 19(5), 
906-11. 
Liu,  R.  M.;  Liu,  Y.;  Forman,  H.  J.;  Olman,  M.;  Tarpey,  M.  M. 
Glutathione  regulates  transforming  growth  factor-beta-stimulated 
collagen production in fibroblasts. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. Mol. 
Physiol., 2004, 286(1), L121-L128. 
Shahzeidi,  S.;  Sarnstrand,  B.;  Jeffery,  P.  K.;  McAnulty,  R.  J.; 
Laurent,  G.  Oral  N-acetylcysteine  reduces  bleomycin-induced 
collagen deposition  in  the  lungs  of  mice.  J.  Eur.  Respir.  J.,  1991, 
4(7), 845-52. 
Demedts,  M.;  Behr,  J.;  Buhl,  R.;  Costabel,  U.;  Dekhuijzen,  R.; 
Jansen,  H.  M.;  MacNee,  W.;  Thomeer,  M.;  Wallaert,  B.;  Laurent, 
F.; Nicholson, A. G.; Verbeken, E. K.; Verschakelen, J.; Flower, C. 
D.; Capron, F.; Petruzzelli, S.; De Vuyst, P.; van den Bosch, J. M.; 
Rodriguez-Becerra,  E.;  Corvasce,  G.;  Lankhorst,  I.;  Sardina,  M.; 
Montanari, M. ; IFIGENIA Study Group. High-dose acetylcysteine 
in  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  N.  Engl.  J.  Med.,  2005,  353(21), 
2229-42. 
Behr,  J.;  Demedts,  M.;  Buhl,  R.;  Costabel,  U.;  Dekhuijzen,  R.; 
Jansen,  H.  M.;  MacNee,  W.;  Thomeer,  M.;  Wallaert,  B.;  Laurent, 
F.; Nicholson, A. G.; Verbeken, E. K.; Verschakelen, J.; Flower, C. 
D.; Capron, F.; Petruzzelli, S.; De Vuyst, P.; van den Bosch, J. M.; 
Rodriguez-Becerra,  E.;  Corvasce,  G.;  Lankhorst,  I.;  Sardina,  M.; 
in 
Montanari,  M.;  IFIGENIA  Study  Group.  Lung  function 
idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis  –  extended  analyses  of 
the 
IFIGENIA trial. Resp. Res., 2009, 10, 101. 

[77] 

[76] 

[78]  Wells,  A.  U.;  Desai,  S.  R.;  Rubens,  M.  B.;  Goh,  N.;  Cramer,  D.; 
Nicholson,  A.;  Colby,  T.;  du  Bois,  R.;  Hansell,  D.  Idiopathic 
pulmonary  fibrosis:  a  composite  physiologic  index  derived  from 
disease  extent  observed  by  computed  tomography.  Am.  J.  Respir. 
Crit. Care Med., 2003, 167(7), 962-9. 
Kim, D. S.;  Park, J. H.;  Park, B. K.;  Lee, J. S.; Nicholson, A. G.; 
Colby,  T.  Acute  exacerbation  of  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis: 

[79] 

170     Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3 

Hauber and Blaukovitsch 

[80] 

[81] 

[82] 

[83] 

[84] 

[85] 

[86] 

[87] 

[88] 

[89] 

[90] 

frequency  and  clinical  features.  Eur.  Respir.  J.,  2006,  27(1),  143-
50. 
Kondoh,  Y.;  Taniguchi,  H.;  Kawabata,  Y.;  Yokoi,  T.;  Suzuki,  K.; 
Takag,  K.  Acute  exacerbation  in  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis. 
Analysis  of  clinical  and  pathologic  findings  in  three  cases.  Chest, 
1993, 103(6), 1808-12. 
Parambil, J. G. ; Myers, J. L. ; Ryu, J. H. Histopathologic features 
and  outcome  of  patients  with  acute  exacerbation  of  idiopathic 
pulmonary  fibrosis  undergoing  surgical  lung  biopsy.  Chest,  2005, 
128(5), 3310-5. 
Akira, M.; Hamada, H.; Sakatani, M.; Kobayashi, C.; Nishioka, M.; 
Yamamoto,  S.  CT 
findings  during  phase  of  accelerated 
deterioration in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am. J. 
Roentgenol., 1997, 168(1), 79-83. 
Inase,  N.;  Sawada,  M.;  Ohtani,  Y.;  Isogai,  S.;  Sakashita,  H.; 
Miyazaki,  Y.;  Yoshizawa,  Y.  Cyclosporin  A  followed  by  the 
treatment  of  acute  exacerbation  of  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis 
with corticosteroid. Intern. Med., 2003, 42(7), 565-70. 
Agarwal,  R.;  Jindal,  S.  K.  Acute  exacerbation  of  idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis: a systematic review. Eur. J. Intern. Med., 2008, 
19(4), 227-35. 
Nadrous,  H.  F.;  Pellikka,  P.  A.;  Krowka,  M.  J.;  Swanson,  K.  L.; 
Chaowalit, N.; Decker, P. A.; Ryu, J. H. Pulmonary hypertension in 
patients  with  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Chest,  2005,  128(4), 
2392-9. 
Gurujeyalakshmi,  G.;  Giri,  S.  N.  Molecular  mechanisms  of 
antifibrotic effect of interferon gamma in bleomycin-mouse model 
of lung fibrosis: downregulation of TGF-beta and procollagen I and 
III gene expression. Exp. Lung Res., 1995, 21(5), 791-808. 
Ziesche, R.; Hofbauer, E.; Wittmann, K.; Petkov, V.; Block, L. H. 
A preliminary study of long-term treatment with interferon gamma-
1b  and 
idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis. N. Engl. J. Med., 1999, 314(17), 1264-9. 
Raghu,  G.;  Brown,  K.  K.;  Bradford,  W.  Z.;  Starko,  K.;  Noble,  P. 
W.; Schwartz, D. A.; King, T. E. Jr; Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis 
Study Group. A placebo-controlled trial of interferon gamma-1b in 
patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. N. Engl. J. Med., 2004, 
350(2), 125-33. 
King, T.  E. Jr; Albera, C.; Bradford, W. C.;  Costabel, U.; Homer, 
P.;  Lancster,  L.;  Noble,  P.  W.;  Sahn,  S.  A.;  Szwarcberg,  J.; 
Thomeer,  M.;  Valeyre,  D.;  du  Bois,  R.;  INSPIRE  Study  Group. 
Effect  of  interferon  gamma-1b  on  survival  in  patients  with 
idiopathic  pulmonary 
a  multicentre, 
randomized,  placebo-controlled  trial.  Lancet,  2009,  374(9685), 
222-8. 
Antoniou,  K.  M.;  Nicholson,  A.  G.;  Dimadi,  M.;  Malagari,  K.; 
Latsi, P.; Rapti, A.; Tzanakis, N.; Trigidou, R.; Polychronopoulos, 
V.;  Bouros,  D.  Long-term  clinical  effects  of  interferon  gamma-1b 
and  colchicines  in  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Eur.  Respir.  J., 
2006, 28(3), 496-504. 

low-dose  prednisolone 

in  patients  with 

(INSPIRE): 

fibrosis 

[91]  Ward, P. A.; Hunninghake, G. W. Lung inflammation and fibrosis. 

[92] 

Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 1998, 157(4), S123-S129. 
Kamp,  D.  W.  Idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis:  the  inflammation 
hypothesis revisited. Chest, 2003, 124(4), 1187-90. 

[94] 

[93]  Magro, C. M.; Allen, J.; Pope-Harman, A.; Waldman, W. J.; Moh, 
P.;  Rothrauff,  S.;  Ross,  P.  Jr.  The  role  of  micorvascular  injury  in 
the evolution of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am. J. Clin. Pathol., 
2003, 119(4), 556-67. 
Cella,  G.;  Cipriani,  A.;  Tommasini,  A.;  Rampin,  E.;  Sbarai,  A.; 
Rocconi,  R.;  Mazzaro,  G.;  Luzzatto,  G.  Tissue  factor  pathway 
inhibitor  (TFPI)  antigen  plasma  level  in  patients  with  interstitial 
lung  disease  before  and  after  heparin  administration.  Semin. 
Thromb. Hemost., 1997, 23(1), 45-9. 
Panos,  R.  J.;  Mortenson,  R.  L.;  Niccoli,  S.  A.;  King,  T.  E.  Jr. 
Clinical  deterioration 
idiopathic  pulmonary 
fibrosis: causes and assessment. Am. J. Med., 1990, 88(4), 396-404. 
Reed,  A.;  Snell,  G.  I.;  McLean,  C.;  Williams,  T.  J.  Outcomes  of 
patients  with  interstitial  lung  disease  referred  for  lung  transplant 
assessment. Intern. Med. J., 2006, 36(7), 423-30. 
Kubo,  H.;  Nakayama,  K.;  Yanai,  M.;  Suzuki,  T.;  Yamaya,  M.; 
Watanabe,  M.;  Sasaki,  H.  Anticoagulant  therapy  for  idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis. Chest, 2005, 128(3), 1475-82. 

in  patients  with 

[95] 

[96] 

[97] 

[98]  Misra, H. P.; Rabideau, C. Pirfenidone inhibits NADPH-dependent 
microsomal  lipid  peroxidation  and  scavenges  hydroxyl  radicals. 
Mol. Cell Biochem., 2000, 204(1-2), 119-26. 

[99]  Margolin, S. B.; Lefkowitz, S. Pirfenidone: a novel pharmacologic 
agent  for  prevention  and  resolution  (removal)  of  lung  fibrosis. 
FASEB J., 1994, 8(4), A117. 

[100]  Kehrer, 

J.  B.;  Margolin,  S.  B.  Pirfenidone  diminishes 
cyclophosphamide-induced  lung  fibrosis  in  mice.  Toxicol.  Lett., 
1997, 90(2-3), 125-32. 
Schelegle,  E.  S.;  Mansoor,  J.  K.;  Giri,  S.  Pirfenidone  attenuates 
bleomycin-induced  changes  in  pulmonary  function  in  hamsters. 
Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 1997, 216(3), 392-7. 

[101] 

[103] 

transforming  growth  factor–beta  gene  expression  at 

[102]  Gurujeyalakshmi,  G.;  Hollinger,  M.  A.;  Giri,  S.  N.  Pirfenidone 
inhibits  PDGF  isoforms  in  bleomycin  hamster  model  of  lung 
fibrosis  at  the  translational  level.  Am.  J.  Physiol.,  1999,  276(2), 
L311-L318. 
Iyer, S. N.; Gurujeyalakshmi, G.; Giri, S. N. Effects of pirfenidone 
on 
the 
transcriptional  level  in  bleomycin  hamster  model  of  lung  fibrosis. 
J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther., 1999, 291(1), 367-73. 
Spond,  J.;  Case,  N.;  Chapman,  R.  W.;  Crawley,  Y.;  Egan,  R.  W.; 
Fine, J.; Hey, J. A.; Kreutner, W.; Kung, T.; Wang, P.; Minnicozzi, 
M.  Inhibition  of  experimental  acute  pulmonary  inflammation  by 
pirfenidone. Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther., 2003, 16(4), 207-14. 
Iyer,  S.  N.;  Hyde,  D.  M.;  Giri,  S.  N.  Anti-inflammatory  effect  of 
pirfenidone in the bleomycin-hamster model of lung inflammation. 
Inflammation, 2000, 24(5), 477-91. 

[104] 

[105] 

[106]  Nakazato,  H.;  Oku,  H.;  Yamane,  S.;  Tsuruta,  Y.;  Suzuki,  R.  A 
novel  anti-fibrotic  agent  pirfenidone  suppresses  tumor  necrosis 
factor-alpha  at  the  translational  level.  Eur.  J.  Pharmacol.,  2002, 
446(1-3), 177-85. 

[107]  Oku,  H.;  Nakazato,  H.;  Horikawa,  T.;  Tsuruta,  Y.;  Suzuki,  R. 
Pirfenidone  suppresses  tumor  necrosis  factor-alpha,  enhances 
interleukin-10  and  protects  mice  from  endotoxic  shock.  Eur.  J. 
Pharmacol., 2002, 446(1-3), 167-76. 

[108]  Kakugawa, T.; Mukae, H.; Hayashi, T.; Ishii, H.; Abe, K.; Fujii, T.; 
Oku,  H.;  Miyazaki,  M.;  Kadota,  J.;  Kohno,  S.  Pirfenidone 
attenuates  expression  of  HSP47  in  murine  bleomycin-induced 
pulmonary fibrosis. Eur. Respir. J., 2004, 24(1), 57-65. 

[109]  Raghu, G.; Johnson, W. C.; Lockhart, D.; Mageto, Y. Treatment of 
idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis  with  a  new  antifibrotic  agent, 
pirfenidone: results of a prospective, open-label Phase II study. Am. 
J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 1999, 159(4), 1061-9. 

[110]  Nagai, S.; Hamada, K.; Shigematsu, M.; Taniyama, M.; Yamauchi, 
S.;  Izumi,  T.  Open-label  compassionate  use  one  year-treatment 
with  pirfenidone  to  patients  with  chronic  pulmonary  fibrosis. 
Intern. Med., 2002, 41(12), 1118-23. 

[111]  Azuma, A.; Nukiwa, T.; Tsuboi, E.; Suga, M.; Abe, S.; Nakata, K.; 
Taguchi,  Y.;  Nagai,  S.;  Itoh,  H.;  Ohi,  M.;  Sato,  A.;  Kudoh,  S. 
Double-blind,  placebo-controlled  trial  of  pirfenidone  in  patients 
with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 
2005, 171(9), 1040-7. 

[112]  Taniguchi,  H.;  Ebina,  M.;  Kondoh,  Y.;  Ogura,  T.;  Azuma,  A.; 
Suga,  M.;  Taguchi,  Y.;  Takahashi,  H.;  Nakata.  K.;  Sato,  A.; 
Takeuchi,  M.;  Raghu,  G.;  Kudoh,  S.;  Nukiwa,  T.;  Pirfenidone 
Clinical Study Group in Japan. Pirfenidone in idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis. Eur. Respir. J., 2010, 35(4), 821-9. 

[113]  Chen, S. J.;  Chen, Y.  F.; Meng, Q. C.; Durand, J.; Dicarlo, V. S.; 
Oparil,  S.  Endothelin-receptor  antagonist  bosentan  prevents  and 
reverses hypoxic pulmonary hypertension in rats. J. Appl. Physiol., 
1995, 79(6), 2122-31. 

[114]  Helset,  E.;  Lindal,  S.;  Olsen,  R.;  Myklebust,  R.;  Jorgensen,  L. 
Endothelin-1 causes sequential trapping of platelets and neutrophils 
in  pulmonary  microcirculation  in  rats.  Am.  J.  Physiol.,  1996, 
271(4), L538-L546. 
Shi-Wen,  X.;  Denton,  C.  P.;  Dashwood,  M.  R.;  Holmes,  A.  M.; 
Bou-Gharios,  G.;  Pearson,  J.  D.;  Black,  C.  M.;  Abraham,  D.  J. 
Fibroblast  matrix  gene  expression  and  connective 
tissue 
remodelling:  role  of  endothelin-1.  J.  Invest.  Dermatol.,  2001, 
116(3), 417-25. 

[115] 

[116]  Clozel,  M.  Effects  of  bosentan  on  cellular  processes  involved  in 
pulmonary  arterial  hypertension:  do  they  explain  the  long-term 
benefit? Ann. Med., 2003, 35(8), 605-13. 

[117]  Giaid, A.;  Michel, R. P.;  Stewart,  D. J.; Sheppard, M.;  Corrin, B.; 
Hamid, Q. Expression of endothelin-1 in the lungs of patients with 
cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis. Lancet, 1993, 341(8860), 1550-4. 
Park,  S.  H.;  Saleh,  D.;  Giaid,  A.;  Michel,  R.  P.  Increased 
endothelin-1  in  bleomycin-induced  pulmonary  fibrosis  and  the 

[118] 

Current and Future Treatment Options in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis 

Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3     171 

effect  of  an  endothelin  receptor  antagonist.  Am.  J.  Respir.  Crit. 
Care Med., 1997, 156(2), 600-8. 

[137] 

[119]  King, T. E. Jr; Behr, J.; Brown, K. K.; du Bois, R.  M.; Lancaster, 
L.; de Andrade, J. A.; Stähler, G.; Leconte, I.; Roux, S.; Raghu, G. 
BUILD-1:  a  randomized  placebo-controlled  trial  of  bosentan  in 
idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Am.  J.  Respir.  Crit.  Care  Med., 
2008, 177(1), 75-81. 

[138] 

[120]  Raghu, G.; King, T. E. Jr; Behr, J.; Brown, K. K.; du Bois, R. M.; 
Leconte,  I.;  Roux,  S.;  Swigris,  J.  Quality  of  life  and  dyspnoea  in 
patients  treated  with  bosentan  for  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis 
(BUILD-1). Eur. Respir. J., 2010, 35(1), 118-23. 
Piguet,  P.  F.  Cytokines  involved  in  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Int.  Rev. 
Exp. Pathol., 1993, 34(B), 173-81. 
Piguet,  P.  F.;  Vesin,  C.  Treatment  by  human  recombinant  soluble 
TNF receptor of pulmonary fibrosis induced by bleomycin or silica 
in mice. Eur. Respir. J., 1994, 7(3), 515-8. 
Fujita,  M. ;  Shannon,  J.  M.;  Morikawa,  O.;  Gauldi,  J.;  Hara,  N.; 
Mason,  R.  J.  Overexpression  of  tumor  necrosis  factor-alpha 
diminishes  pulmonary 
induced  by  bleomycin  or 
transforming  growth  factor-beta.  Am.  J.  Respir.  Cell.  Mol.  Biol., 
2003, 29(6), 669-76. 
Piguet,  P.  F.;  Ribaux,  C.;  Karpuz,  V.;  Grau,  G.  E.;  Kapanci,  Y. 
Expression  and  localization  of  tumor  necrosis  factor-alpha  and  its 
mRNA  in  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Am.  J.  Pathol.,  1993, 
143(3), 651-5. 

fibrosis 

[123] 

[121] 

[122] 

[124] 

[125]  Kapanci, Y.; Desmouliere, A.; Pache, J. C.; Redard, M.; Gabbiani, 
G.  Cytoskeletal  protein  modulation 
in  pulmonary  alveolar 
myofibroblasts during  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Possible  role 
of transforming growth factor beta and tumor necrosis factor alpha. 
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 1995, 152(6), 2163-9. 

[126]  Raghu, G.; Brown, K. K.; Costabel, U.; Cottin, V.; du Bois, R. M.; 
Lasky,  J.  A.;  Thomeer,  M.;  Utz,  J.  P.;  Khandker,  R.  K.; 
McDermott,  L.;  Fatenejad,  S.  Treatment  of  idiopathic  pulmonary 
fibrosis  with  etanercept:  an  exploratory,  placebo-controlled  trial. 
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 2008, 178(9), 948-55. 
Jiang,  H.  D.;  Guang,  H.  S.  MS80,  a  novel  sulphated 
oligosaccharide, inhibits pulmonary fibrosis by targeting TGF-beta 
1both in vitro and in vivo. Acta Pharmacol. Sin., 2009, 30(7), 973-
9. 

[127] 

[128]  Wang,  R.;  Ibarra-Sunga,  O.;  Verlinski,  L.;  Pick,  R.;  Uhal,  B.  D. 
Abrogation  of  bleomycin-induced  epithelial  apoptosis  and  lung 
fibrosis  by  captopril  or by  caspase  inhibitor.  Am.  J.  Physiol.  Lung 
Cell Mol. Physiol., 2000, 279(1), L143-L151. 

[129]  Molteni, A.; Ward, W. F.; Ts’ao, C. H.; Solliday, N. H.; Dunne, M. 
Monocrotaline-induced pulmonary fibrosis in rats: amelioration by 
captopril  and  penicillamine.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  Med.,  1985, 
180(1), 112-20. 

[130]  Molteni, A.; Moulder, J. E.; Cohen, E. F.; Ward, W. F.; Fish, B. L.; 
Taylor, J. M.; Wolfe, L. F.; Brizio-Molteni, L.; Veno, P. Control of 
radiation-induced  pneumopathy  and  lung  fibrosis  by  angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors and an angiotensin II type 1 receptor 
blocker. Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 2000, 76(4), 523-32. 

[131]  Uhal, B. D.; Wang, R.; Laukka, J.; Zhuang, J.; Soledad-Conrad, V.; 
Filippatos,  G.  Inhibition  of  amiodarone-induced  lung  fibrosis  but 
not  alveolitis  by  angiotensin  system  antagonists.  Pharmacol. 
Toxicol., 2003, 92(2), 81-7. 

[132]  Blanco-Colio,  L.  M.;  Tunon,  J.;  Martin-Ventura,  J.  L.;  Egido,  J. 
Anti-inflammatory  and  immunomodulatory  effects  of  statins. 
Kidney Int., 2003, 63(1), 12-23. 

[133]  Hilgendorff,  A.;  Muth,  H.;  Parviz,  B.;  Staubitz,  A.;  Haberbosch, 
W.; Tillmanns, H.; Holschermann, H. Statins differ in their ability 
to  block  NF-kappaB  activation  in  human blood  monocytes.  Int.  J. 
Clin. Pharmacol. Ther., 2003, 41(9), 397-401. 

[134]  Watts,  K.  L.;  Sampson,  E.  M.;  Schultz,  G.  S.;  Spiteri,  M.  A. 
Simvastatin  inhibits  growth  factor  expression  and  modulates 
profibrogenic markers in lung fibroblasts. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. 
Biol., 2005, 32(4), 290-300. 

[135]  Nadrous, H. F.; Ryu, J. H.; Douglas, W. W.; Decker, P. A.; Olson, 
E.  J.  Impact  of  angiotensin-converting  enzyme  inhibitors  and 
statins  on  survival  in  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Chest,  2004, 
126(2), 438-46. 

[136]  Wilborn,  J.;  Bailie,  M.;  Coffey,  M.;  Burdick,  M.;  Strieter,  R.; 
Peters-Golden, M. Cultured lung fibroblasts isolated from patients 
with  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis  have  diminished  capacity  to 
synthesize  prostagladin  E2  and  to  express  cyclooxygenase-2.  J. 
Clin. Invest., 1996, 95(4), 1861-8. 

Peters-Golden, M.; Bailie, M.; Marshall, T.; Wilke, C.; Phan, S. H.; 
Toews, G. B.; Moore, B. B. Protection from pulmonary fibrosis in 
leukotriene-deficient  mice.  Am.  J.  Respir.  Crit.  Care  Med.,  2002, 
165(2), 229-35. 
Failla,  M.;  Genovese,  T.;  Mazzon,  E.;  Gili,  E.;  Muià,  C.;  Sortino, 
M.;  Crimi,  N.;  Caputi,  A.  P.;  Cuzzocrea,  S.;  Vancheri,  C. 
Pharmacological  inhibition  of  leukotrienes  in  an  animal  model  of 
bleomycin-induced acute lung injury. Respir. Res., 2006, 7, 137. 

[139]  Koch,  H.  P.  Thalidomide  and  congeners  as  anti-inflammatory 

[140] 

agents. Prog. Med. Chem., 1985, 22, 165-242. 
Sampaio, E. P.; Sarno, E. N.; Galilly, R.; Cohn, Z. A.; Kaplan, G. 
Thalidomide  selectively  inhibits  tumor  necrosis  factor  alpha 
production  by  stimulated  human  monocytes.  J.  Exp.  Med.,  1991, 
173(3), 699-703. 

[141]  Haslett, P. A. J.; Corral, L. G.; Albert, M.; Kaplan, G. Thalidomide 
costimulates  primary  human  T 
lymphocytes,  preferentially 
inducing  proliferation,  cytokine  production,  and  cytotoxic 
responses in the CD8+ subset. J. Exp. Med., 1998, 187(11), 1885-
92. 

[142]  Corral,  L.  G.;  Haslett,  P.  A.;  Muller,  G.  W.;  Chen,  R.;  Wong,  L. 
M.;  Ocampo,  C.  J.;  Patterson,  R.  T.;  Stirling,  D.  I.;  Kaplan,  G. 
Differential  cytokine  modulation  and  T  cell  activation  by  two 
distinct  classes  of  thalidomide  analogues  that are  potent  inhibitors 
of TNF-alpha. J. Immunol., 1999, 163(1), 380-6. 

[143]  D’Amato,  R.  J.;  Loughnan,  M.  S.;  Flynn,  E.;  Folkman,  J. 
Thalidomide is an inhibitor of angiogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA, 1994, 91(9), 4082-5. 

[144]  Ye, Q.; Chen, B.; Tong, Z.; Nakamura, S.; Sarria, R.; Costabel, U.; 
Guzman,  J.  Thalidomide  reduces  IL-18,  IL-8  and  TNF-alpha 
release from alveolar macrophages in interstitial lung disease. Eur. 
Respir. J., 2006, 28(4), 824-31. 

[145]  Tabata,  C.;  Tabata,  R.;  Kadokawa,  Y.;  Hisamori,  S.;  Takahashi, 
M.;  Mishima,  M.;  Nakano,  T.;  Kubo,  H.  Thalidomide  prevents 
bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice. J. Immunol., 2007, 
179(1), 708-14. 

[147] 

[146]  Horton, M. R.; Danoff, S. K.; Lechtzin, N. Thalidomide inhibits the 
intractable  cough  of  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Thorax,  2008, 
63(8), 749. 
Jenkins, R. G.; Su, X.; Su, G.; Scotton, C. J.; Camerer, E.; Laurent, 
G. J.; Davis, G. E.; Chamber, R. C.; Matthay, M. A.; Sheppard, D. 
Ligation  of  protease-activated  receptor  1  enhances  alpha(v)beta6 
integrin-dependent  TGF-beta  activation  and  promotes  lung  injury. 
J. Clin. Invest., 2006, 116(6), 1606-14. 

[148]  Bonniaud, P.; Margetts, P. J.; Kolb, M.; Schroeder, J. A.; Kapoun, 
A.  M.;  Damm,  D.;  Murphy,  A.;  Chakravarty,  S.;  Dugar,  S.; 
Higgins,  L.;  Protter,  A.  A.;  Gauldie,  J.  Progressive  transforming 
growth  factor  beta1-induced  lung  fibrosis  is  blocked  by  an  orally 
active  ALK5  kinase  inhibitor.  Am.  J.  Respir.  Crit.  Care  Med., 
2005, 171(8), 889-98. 

[149]  Kolb,  M.;  Margetts,  P.  J.;  Sime,  P.  J.;  Gauldie,  J.  Proteogylcans 
decorin  and  biglycan  differentially  modulate  TGF-beta-mediated 
fibrotic  response  to  bleomycin.  Am.  J.  Physiol.  Lung  Cell  Mol. 
Physiol., 2001, 280(6), L1327-L1334. 

[150]  Daniels, C.  E.; Wilkes, M. C.; Edens,  M.; Kottom, T. J.;  Murphy, 
S.  J.;  Limper,  A.  H.;  Leof,  E.  B.  Imatinib  mesylate  inhibits  the 
profibrogenic  activity  of  TGF-beta  and  prevents  bleomycin-
mediated lung fibrosis. J. Clin. Invest., 2004, 114(9), 1308-16. 

[151]  Aono, Y.; Nishioka, Y.; Inayama, M.; Ugai, M.; Kishi, J.; Uehara, 
H.;  Izumi,  K.;  Sone,  S.  Imatinib  as  a  novel  antifibrotic  agent  in 
bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice. Am. J. Respir. Crit. 
Care Med., 2005, 171(11), 1279-85. 

[152]  Daniels, C. E.; Lasky, J. A.; Limper, A. H.; Mieras, K.; Gabor, E.; 
Schoreder,  D.  R.;  Imatinib-IpF  Study  Investigators.  Imatinib 
treatment  for  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis:  randomized  placebo-
controlled  trial  results.  Am.  J.  Respir.  Crit.  Care  Med.,  2009, 
181(6), 604-10. 

[153]  Hilberg,  F.;  Roth,  G.  J.;  Krssak,  M.;  Kautschitsch,  S.; 
Sommergruber, W.; Tontsch-Grunt, U.; Garin-Chesa, P.; Bader, G.; 
Zoephel, A.; Quant, J.; Heckel, A.; Rettig, W. J. BIBF 1120: triple 
angiokinase  inhibitor  with  sustained  receptor  blockade  and  good 
antitumor efficacy. Cancer Res., 2008, 68(12), 4774-82. 

[154]  Tabata, C.; Kadowaka, Y.; Tabata, R.; Takahashi, M.; Okoshi, K.; 
Sakai,  Y.;  Mishima,  M.;  Kubo,  H.  All-trans-retinoic  acid prevents 
radiation- or bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Am. J. Respir. 
Crit. Care Med., 2006, 174(12), 1352-60. 

172     Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets, 2010, Vol. 9, No. 3 

Hauber and Blaukovitsch 

[155] 

Phillips, R. J.;  Burdick, M. D.; Hong, L.;  Lutz,  M. A.; Murray, L. 
A.;  Xue,  Y.  Y.;  Belperio,  J.  A.;  Keane,  M.  P.;  Strieter,  R.  M. 
Circulating  fibrocytes  traffic  to  the  lungs  in  response  to  CXCL12 
and mediate fibrosis. J. Clin. Invest., 2004, 114(3), 438-46. 

[157] 

[156]  Crockett, A. J.; Cranston, J. M.; Antic, N. Domiciliary oxygen for 
interstitial  lung  disease.  Cochrane  Database  Syst.  Rev.,  2001, 
CD002883. 
Polonski,  L.;  Krzywiecki,  A.;  Tendera,  M.;  Cwiertka,  P.;  Oklek, 
K.;  Wodniecki,  J.  Effects  of  long  term oxygen  therapy  in  patients 
with  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  I.  Effect  on  the  course  of  the 
primary  disease  and  on  pulmonary  circulation.  Pol.  Arch.  Med. 
Wewn., 1995, 94(4), 331-6. 

[158]  Holland, A.; Hill, C. Physical  training for interstitial  lung disease. 

Cochrane Database Syst. Rev., 2008, CD006322. 

[159]  Holland, A. E.;  Hill, C. J.; Conron,  M.; Munro,  P.; McDonald, C. 
F.  Short  term  improvement  in  exercise  capacity  and  symptoms 
following  exercise  training  in  interstitial  lung  disease.  Thorax, 
2008, 63(6), 549-54. 

[160]  Rangappa,  P.;  Moran,  J.  L.  Outcomes  of  patients  admitted  to  the 
intensive  care  unit  with  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Crit.  Care 
Resusc., 2009, 11(2), 102-9. 

[161]  Mollica,  C.;  Paone,  G.;  Conti,  V.;  Ceccarelli,  D.;  Schmid,  D.; 
Mattia,  P.; Perrone, N.;  Petroianni, A.; Sebastiani, A.; Cechini, L.; 

 

 

Orsetti,  R.;  Terzano,  C.  Mechanical  ventilation  in  patients  with 
end-stage  idiopathic  pulmonary  fibrosis.  Respiration,  2010,  79(3), 
209-15. 

[162]  Moderno, E. V.; Yamaguti, W. P.; Schettino, G. P.; Kairalla, R. A.; 
Martins,  M.  A.;  Carvalho,  C.  R.;  Carvalho,  C.  R.  Effect  of 
proportional  assisted  ventilation  on  exercise  performance  in 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Respir. Med., 2010, 104(1), 134-41. 
[163]  Orens,  J.  B.;  Shearon,  T.  H.;  Freudenberger,  R.  S.;  Conte,  J.  V.; 
Bhorade, S. M.; Ardehali, A. Thoracic organ transplantation in the 
United States, 1995-2004. Am. J. Transplant., 2006, 6(5), 1188-97. 
[164]  Meyers, B. F.; Lynch, J. P.; Trulock, E. P.; Guthrie, T.; Cooper, J. 
D.; Patterson, G. A. Perioperative complications after living donor 
lobectomy. J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg., 2000, 120(5), 909-15. 

[165]  O´Beirne, S.; Counihan, I. P.; Keane, M. P. Interstitial lung disease 
and  lung  transplantation.  Semin.  Respir.  Crit.  Care  Med.,  2010, 
31(2), 139-46. 

[166]  Mogulkoc,  N.;  Brutsche,  M.  H.;  Bishop,  P.  W.;  Greaves,  S.  M.; 
Horrocks,  A.  W.;  Egan,  J.  J.;  Greater  Manchester  Pulmonary 
Fibrosis  Consortium.  Pulmonary  function  in  idiopathic  pulmonary 
fibrosis  and  referral  for  lung  transplantation.  Am.  J.  Respir.  Crit. 
Care Med., 2001, 164(1), 103-8. 

Received: January 10, 2010 

Revised: April 26, 2010 

Accepted: April 30, 2010 

Copyright of Inflammation & Allergy - Drug Targets is the property of Bentham Science Publishers Ltd. and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

