Drugs 2008; 68 Suppl.  1:1-2
C1012.66(i7/08/0001-0001/S53.45/0

© 2008 Adis  Data  Information  BV. Aii fights reserved.

The Evolution  of  Immunosuppressant
Therapy in Renal  Transplantation

For  patients  with  end-stage  renal  disease  (ESRD), kidney  transplanta-
tion  offers  the  greatest  chance  for  survival  and  improved  quality  of  life.
However, with the limited  supply of kidneys available for  transplantation,
and a growing  number of patients with ESRD, the importance of optimiz-
ing  each  transplant  has  never  been  greater.  Recent  studies  have  shown
significant  reductions  in  the  incidence  of  acute  rejection  following  trans-
plantation,  probably  related  to  the  availability  of  newer  immunosuppres-
sive  therapies.  However,  these  short-term  gains  have  not  been  translated
into  a significant  increase  in  long-term  graft  survival.  Indeed,  the  rate of
graft  loss  after  the  first  year  has  not  really  changed.  Since  the  greatest
reasons for graft loss after  1  year are patient death and progressive  allograft
fibrosis  (chronic  allograft  nephropathy/interstitial  fibrosis/tubular  atrophy
not  otherwise  specified),  many  approaches  have  focused  on  potential
strategies for  reducing  these  complications.

Many  of  the  immunosuppressive  agents  that  form  the  mainstay  of
treatment following  renal transplantation  have been associated with toxici-
ties and  chronic  allograft  nephropathy. The calcineurin  inhibitors  (CNIs),
which  have  been  responsible  for  major  improvements  in  early  rejection,
also have the potential to cause renal toxicity. Thus CNI-sparing  immuno-
suppressive  protocols, often  utilizing  sirolimus, have become the focus  of
growing interest. This supplement to Drugs provides Canadian  experience
on  the  potential  ways that  sirolimus  might  be  used  to improve  transplant
outcomes.

Over  the  past  decade,  the  renal  transplantation  community  has  wit-
nessed  a multitude of changes. The growing  shortage in donor organs has
resulted  in  increased  wait  times  for  transplantation.  Donor  characteristics
and  the quality  of  available  organs  have  also changed.  Dr  Gregory  Knoll
provides an overview of the evolving renal transplant landscape in Canada
and  the  US  and  discusses  how  these  changes  have  impacted  clinical
practice.

With changing donor characteristics and the growing  shortage in organ
supply,  renal  transplant  practitioners  have  increasingly  utilized  expanded
criteria  donor  kidneys.  Despite  the  poorer  outcomes  associated  with  ex-
panded  criteria  donor  kidneys, the  trade-off  may  be  acceptable  if  overall
patient  survival  is  improved  by  reduced  wait  times.  However,  these  kid-
neys may be more likely to suffer  from calcineurin nephrotoxicity. Accord-
ingly, Dr Andrew House and his colleagues discuss the encouraging  initial
results of their pilot study suggesting that a CNI-free  drug regimen  in renal

Cole

transplant  patients  with  expanded  criteria  donor  kidneys  might  yield  im-
proved results.

Unfortunately,  biochemical  parameters  of  renal  function  are  relatively
insensitive markers of progressive renal scarring and do not help elucidate
the aetiology  in individual  patients. Drs Serdar Yilmaz and Aylin  Sar have
written  an interesting  article discussing  the important  role of renal  patho-
logy and protocol  biopsies  in assessment  and management  of this compli-
cation.

Patient  death  from  malignancy  after  transplantation  is  an  increasing
problem.  This  issue  is highlighted  in  the  article by  Dr  Anil  Kapoor,  who
also discusses  the potential  beneficial  role of sirolimus and other target of
rapamycin  (TOR)  inhibitors  in  reducing  post-transplantation  malignancy.
As  sirolimus  use  is  increasing,  the  problem  of  proteinuria  in  association
with the use of this agent has become apparent. While the pathogenesis is
unclear,  Dr  Azemi  Barama  provides  an  update  on  the  aetiology  and
potential  treatment  approaches  based  on  animal  experiments.

What is considered the  'optimal'  immunosuppression  regimen for renal
transplant recipients  is continuously  evolving. Efforts  to maximize  patient
and  graft  survival  with  minimal  adverse  effects  have  given  rise  to  a
multitude  of  approaches,  with  promising  results.  Although  prevention  of
acute  rejection  remains  a  primary  goal  of  treatment,  agents  that  do  not
compromise  long-term  renal  function  are  needed.  Whether  this  will  ulti-
mately  be  accomplished  through  the  use  of  sirolimus  in  CNI-sparing
regimens  is not yet known. This  supplement  consolidates  the  experiences
of  some  of  Canada's  transplant  specialists,  providing  the  reader  with  an
enhanced  understanding  of  some  newer  aspects  of  this  novel  approach  to
the optimal  management  of  renal  transplant  recipients.

Edward Cole
University  of Toronto, Toronto  General
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

©  2008 Adis  Data  Information  BV. All rigtits reserved. 

Drugs 2008; 68 Suppl. 1

