See the corresponding article in this issue, 109–117.

J Neurosurg 117:107–108, 2012

Editorial

Natural history of neurofibromatosis 
Type 2 tumors

RobeRto C. HeRos, M.D.

Department of Neurosurgery, University of Miami, Florida

intracranial tumors, both schwannomas and meningiomas, 
seem to be less sensitive to stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) 
than their sporadic counterparts. All 7 VSs treated with 
SRS displayed continuous radiographic progression over 
the follow-up period, and 4 of these lesions required re-
section for progressive symptomatology. The 2 meningio-
mas treated with radiosurgery also displayed progressive 
growth within 4 years, but they did not require surgery 
since  they  did  not  result  in  progressive  symptomatology. 
As  discussed  by  the  authors,  several  radiosurgical  series 
in the literature have suggested better results, but the fol-
low-up time was shorter. This relative unresponsiveness to 
SRS is disappointing, because obviously in these patients 
with multiple intracranial tumors, that treatment modality 
would appear ideal for small tumors if it were effective.
Some new, previously unsuspected concepts emerged 
from the current study. The first is that NF2-associated 
nonvestibular CN schwannomas seem to behave a bit bet-
ter than their vestibular counterparts. Whereas all VSs in 
this series grew over the follow-up period, only 9 of the 
11 nonvestibular CN schwannomas grew, and they grew 
at a rate slower than their vestibular counterparts (0.2 vs 
0.6 cm3/year for vestibular tumors). Perhaps the most im-
portant new finding from this study is that the majority of 
these NF2 intracranial tumors grew in a “saltatory” pat-
tern, with periods of growth alternating with quiescent pe-
riods (60.9% of meningiomas, 46.7% of VSs, and 55.6% of 
nonvestibular CN schwannomas in this study exhibited a 
saltatory pattern of growth). It is interesting that this salta-
tory growth pattern is also typical of hemangioblastomas 
associated with Von Hippel-Lindau disease, as has been re-
ported by the NIH group in the past.1 The clinical implica-
tions of this finding are clear. One must exercise caution in 
interpreting the response rate to therapies such as SRS or 
external beam radiotherapy over a short period of time since 
the lack of growth for as long as several years can simply 
be a part of the natural history of these tumors. Even more 
importantly, these tumors should not be surgically treated 
simply because they exist, because they may not grow for 
considerable periods of time. In a disease characterized by 
the presence of multiple intracranial tumors, the advice of 
these authors—to operate only on tumors that are progres-
sively symptomatic—seems particularly appropriate. The 
authors go further in warning that tumor progression alone, 
without the development of progressive symptoms, should 
not be used as an indication for surgery. They calculated 
that  if  each  tumor  that  had  shown  growth  in  their  study 
had been surgically treated, there would have been an ad-
ditional 9 unnecessary resections for each patient over the 
study period.

I have been asked to write a short editorial on the ex-
cellent paper on the natural history of intracranial tumors 
associated with neurofibromatosis Type 2 (NF2) in this is-
sue of the  Journal of Neurosurgery.2 Although the study 
is based on only 17 patients, the duration (mean 9.5 years, 
range 4–20.7 years) and quality of the follow-up (all pa-
tients were followed up with sequential MRIs either done 
or reviewed at the Clinical Center of the National Institutes 
of Health [NIH]) make up for the relatively small sample. 
In addition, as expected, these 17 patients harbored a large 
number of intracranial tumors, making it possible to sepa-
rately analyze the rate of growth and the growth pattern of 
18 vestibular schwannomas (VSs), 11 nonvestibular cranial 
nerve (CN) schwannomas, and 135 intracranial meningio-
mas. From this group’s careful analysis, we obtained solid 
confirmation of some previously suspected concepts, and 
some new concepts have emerged as well.
The study confirms the previously suspected notion 
that VSs associated with NF2 behave more aggressively 
than their sporadic counterparts. While we know that spo-
radic VSs frequently do not grow over extended periods 
of follow-up, particularly when they are small,4 all VSs in 
the present series grew over the follow-up, and their overall 
growth rate (0.6 cm3/year) appears to be at the upper limit 
of  what  has  been  previously  reported  for  sporadic  VSs. 
Neurofibromatosis Type 2–associated intracranial menin-
giomas also appear to behave more aggressively than their 
sporadic counterparts. While we know from several previ-
ous series in the literature that some meningiomas, perhaps 
as many as 37%, do not grow,3 essentially all intracranial 
meningiomas in the present study grew during the follow-
up period. Overall, they do grow at approximately the same 
rate as their sporadic counterparts. Moreover, the authors’ 
study confirms that, as suspected, female sex and young-
er age are associated with a more rapid rate of growth in 
NF2-associated meningiomas. They also confirm that the 
growth of new intracranial tumors, both meningiomas and 
schwannomas, occurs in most patients with NF2 followed 
up for a significant period of time; new intracranial tumors, 
mostly  meningiomas,  developed  during  the  follow-up  in 
64.7% of the patients in their study.
One of the most important previously suspected con-
cepts that this study corroborates is that NF2-associated 
J Neurosurg / Volume 117 / July 2012                                                                                                                     

107
107

Finally, this excellent and important study should rein-
force the value of careful, disease-specific, NIH-sponsored 
studies such as this one, in which patients with devastating 
hereditary conditions, such as Von Hippel-Lindau disease 
and  NF2,  are  followed  prospectively  and  systematically 
for long periods of time at the Clinical Center of the NIH. 
The volume of data obtained by the neurosurgical group 
at the NIH on Von Hippel-Lindau disease in the past and 
now on NF2 has contributed greatly to our understanding 
of these diseases and our ability to provide better care for 
our patients.
(http://thejns.org/doi/abs/10.3171/2012.1.JNS112304)

Disclosure

The author reports no conflict of interest.

References

  1.  Ammerman JM, Lonser RR, Dambrosia J, Butman JA, Old-
field  EH:  Long-term  natural  history  of  hemangioblastomas 
in patients with von Hippel-Lindau disease: implications for 
treatment. J Neurosurg 105:248–255, 2006
  2.  Dirks MS, Butman JA, Kim HJ, Wu T, Morgan K, Tran AP, 
et  al:  Long-term  natural  history  of  neurofibromatosis  Type 
2–associated  intracranial  tumors.  Clinical  article.  J  Neu-
rosurg [epub ahead of print April 13, 2012. DOI: 10.3171/ 
2012.3.JNS111649]
  3.  Hashiba T, Hashimoto N, Izumoto S, Suzuki T, Kagawa N, 
Maruno M, et al: Serial volumetric assessment of the natural 
history and growth pattern of incidentally discovered menin-
giomas. Clinical article. J Neurosurg 110:675–684, 2009
  4.  Stangerup SE, Caye-Thomasen P, Tos M, Thomsen J: The nat-
ural  history  of  vestibular  schwannomas.  Otol  Neurotol  27: 
547–552, 2006

Response

MiCHael s. DiRks, M.D.,1,2 JoHn a. butMan, M.D., PH.D.,3
H. JeffRey kiM, M.D.,4 tianxia Wu, PH.D.,5
keaton MoRgan, b.s.,1 anne P. tRan, b.s.,1
Russell R. lonseR, M.D.,1 anD asHok R. astHagiRi, M.D.1

1Surgical  Neurology  Branch  and  5Clinical  Neurosciences 
Pro gram,  National  Institute  of  Neurological  Disorders  and 
Stroke;  3Diagnostic  Radiology  Department,  Clinical  Center  of 
the  National  Institutes  of  Health;  4Head  and  Neck  Surgery 

Editorial

Branch, National Institute on Deaf ness and Other Communication 
Disorders, Na tional Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; and 
2Department of Neurological Sur gery, Walter Reed Army Medical 
Center, Wash ington, DC

We appreciate Dr. Heros’ insightful comments regard-
ing our study in which we analyzed the long-term natural 
history of NF2-associated intracranial tumors in a consec-
utive series of patients. Dr. Heros’ editorial highlights the 
critical biological features of NF2-associated neoplasms 
found in this patient population, as well as the cardinal dif-
ferences  in  managing  these  tumor  types  in  patients  with 
NF2 as compared with treating patients with histologically 
similar sporadic tumors.  
Most patients with NF2 will harbor multiple tumors 
of various histological types and locations; therefore, a de-
fined understanding of their spectrum of clinical behavior 
is requisite to optimizing a management paradigm. A criti-
cal feature that impacts the timing of intervention and the 
assessment  of  treatment  outcome  is  the  saltatory  growth 
pattern associated with most NF2-associated tumors.  
Because MRI only illustrates the antecedent growth 
rate and/or growth pattern of NF2-associated tumors and 
does not predict future tumor behavior, the need for treat-
ment cannot be substantiated by the identification of a grow-
ing tumor alone. Based on our findings, cautious expectant 
management and resection when early symptoms appear 
currently constitute the optimal management paradigm for 
NF2-associated tumors. Prophylactic resection of growing 
but asymptomatic tumors will lead to additional unneces-
sary surgeries over a finite period of time. Additionally, the 
use of radiosurgery to avoid potential cumulative surgical 
morbidity must be tempered by the facts that this treatment 
modality appears to be less effective for NF2-related tu-
mors and that many tumors can remain asymptomatic over 
a patient’s lifetime despite radiographic progression.  
Because of NF2-related tumor growth characteristics 
(frequent saltatory pattern of growth characterized by long 
periods of growth quiescence), outcomes for nonsurgical 
interventions (chemotherapy or radiosurgery) may need to 
exceed simple cessation of tumor growth to be considered 
successful. Further, these therapies will only be best evalu-
ated after long-term follow-up (> 5 years), as extended pe-
riods  of  tumor  growth  cessation  are  a  hallmark  of  these 
tumors.

Please  include  this  information  when  citing  this  paper:  pub-

lished online April 13, 2012; DOI: 10.3171/2012.1.JNS112304.

108                                                                                                                      

J Neurosurg / Volume 117 / July 2012

