BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE

REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 24 November 2011
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2011.00079

Ras–ERK signaling in behavior: old questions and new
perspectives

Stefania Fasano1 and Riccardo Brambilla1,2*

1 Institute of Experimental Neurology, Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute and University, Milano, Italy
2 School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK

Edited by:
Gilberto Fisone, Karolinska Institutet,
Sweden
Reviewed by:
Rosario Moratalla, Cajal Institute,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientíﬁcas, Spain
Michael R. Bruchas, Washington
University in St. Louis, USA
*Correspondence:
Riccardo Brambilla, San Raffaele
Scientiﬁc Institute and Vita-Salute San
Raffaele University, Via Olgettina 58,
20132 Milano, Italy.
e-mail: brambilla.riccardo@hsr.it

The role of Ras–ERK signaling in behavioral plasticity is well established. Inhibition stud-
ies using the blood–brain barrier permeable drug SL327 have conclusively demonstrated
that this neuronal cell signaling cascade is a crucial component of the synaptic machinery
implicated in the formation of various forms of long-term memory, from spatial learning
to fear and operant conditioning. However, abnormal Ras–ERK signaling has also been
linked to a number of neuropsychiatric conditions, including mental retardation syndromes
(“RASopathies”), drug addiction, and L-DOPA induced dyskinesia (LID). The work recently
done on these brain disorders has pointed to previously underappreciated roles of Ras–
ERK in speciﬁc subsets of neurons, like GABAergic interneurons of the hippocampus or
the cortex, as well as in the medium spiny neurons of the striatum. Here we will highlight
the open questions related to Ras–ERK signaling in these behavioral manifestations and
propose crucial experiments for the future.

Keywords: Ras, ERK, neuroﬁbromin, ERK1, drug addiction, L-DOPA induced dyskinesia, RASopathies, Ras-GRF1

Since the discovery, 15 years ago, of the role of Ras–ERK signaling
in long-term potentiation ﬁrst (English and Sweatt, 1996, 1997)
and then in memory formation (Brambilla et al., 1997; Silva et al.,
1997; Atkins et al., 1998), a considerable experimental evidence
has been accumulated to support the idea that this signal trans-
duction pathway is crucial for strengthening synaptic connections
in a variety of behavioral processes. The scope of this work is not
to provide an extensive review of the available data but rather to
highlight the aspects which still need to be clariﬁed in order to gain
a comprehensive description of the molecular processes involving
Ras–ERK in behavior. For a detailed analysis of the published evi-
dence, we refer to a few excellent review articles appeared in the
last 4–5 years (Davis and Laroche, 2006; Girault et al., 2007; Santini
et al., 2008; Samuels et al., 2009).

THE RAS–ERK PARADOX: BALANCING SYNAPTIC
EXCITATION AND INHIBITION
Early on, when the ﬁrst two publications on genetically altered
mice in the Ras–ERK pathway became simultaneously available,
what we call here the Ras–ERK paradox appeared immediately
clear: any manipulation of this pathway either causing an enhance-
ment or a partial inhibition of cell signaling, would lead to learning
and memory deﬁcits (Brambilla et al., 1997; Silva et al., 1997).
In fact, not only the ablation from the mouse of Ras-GRF1, a
CNS speciﬁc neuronal activator of Ras proteins, results in mem-
ory deﬁcits but also the gene disruption of the neuroﬁbromatosis
type 1 (NF1) gene, the locus responsible for the expression of
the Ras-speciﬁc negative regulator neuroﬁbromin, a GTPase acti-
vating protein, causes signiﬁcant learning impairments. Although
these early studies did not provide any biochemical evidence sup-
porting the expected contrasting cell signaling effect of the two
mutations (Ras-GRF1 loss would attenuate Ras activity while

neuroﬁbromin should enhance it), these genetic results initially
suggested that any bidirectional alteration from the “physiologi-
cal” neuronal ERK activity would negatively impact on the brain’s
ability to correctly process information. There are many exam-
ple in which biological responses follow an “inverted U” shape,
for instance the effect on memory mediated by corticosteroids,
but the Ras–ERK paradox is a unique case in which the modu-
lation of an intracellular signal transduction pathway results in
such a clear detrimental effect on cognitive functions. This obser-
vation was clearly underappreciated at that time, but in retrospect
it was and it is still a formidable obstacle to the development
of cognitive enhancers which, either directly or indirectly, would
impact on ERK signaling. One of the reasons why this question was
not promptly investigated is that immediately after the Ras-GRF1
and NF1 KO publications, SL327 became available. This small
chemical inhibitor of MEK1/2, the kinases upstream of ERK1/2,
has been extremely useful in dissecting the effect of ERK inhibi-
tion on behavior since it rapidly passes the brain–blood barrier.
Later on, other similar drugs started to be used, e.g., PD184161,
with similar effects. Predictably, ERK inhibition does block long-
term experience- and drug-dependent behavioral plasticity (see
the above articles for review). In addition, this pharmacological
approach has also been instrumental in demonstrating a central
role of the ERK pathway in psychiatric conditions less dependent
on memory functions such as chronic stress and depression (see
for instance Duman et al., 2007). However, this plethora of inhibi-
tion studies, generated in the last decade, has not helped us much
in resolving the ERK paradox but has simply conﬁrmed that this
pathway is a necessary (“permissive”) condition to cause long-
term changes behavior. Once again, the use of genetically altered
animals has instead signiﬁcantly contributed to deﬁne a much
more complex role of Ras–ERK in the brain. In 2002 the initial

Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience

www.frontiersin.org

November 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 79 | 1

Fasano and Brambilla

Ras–ERK signaling in behavior

hypothesis that a general and “non-cell-speciﬁc” increase in ERK
signaling may lead to memory impairments had to be dismissed
on the basis of two publications. Firstly, the ideal system to test this
hypothesis has been represented by the ERK1 mutant mice which
show a general enhancement of ERK activity in the brain (Mazzuc-
chelli et al., 2002). This is due to a de-repression of ERK2, the main
MAP kinase. In normal conditions, ERK1 acts as a built-in partial
agonist, keeping ERK2 activity tightly regulated (Vantaggiato et al.,
2006; Indrigo et al., 2010). Despite this general effect of the bio-
chemistry of ERK2, ERK1 mutant animals do not show any sign of
cognitive deterioration as one would have predicted from the early
studies on the NF1 KO mice. On the contrary, ERK1 deﬁcient mice
manifest speciﬁc memory enhancing effects, including striatum-
dependent operant conditioning long-term memory formation,
increased fear memory consolidation and extinction, novel object
recognition memory, and cocaine-dependent associative and non-
associative learning but not spatial memory changes (Mazzucchelli
et al., 2002; Cestari et al., 2006; Ferguson et al., 2006; Tronson et al.,
2008; Berardi et al., 2011). Interestingly, while two independently
generated Ras-GRF1 KO lines seem to show behavioral responses
which are the mirror image of those found in the ERK1 mutants,
a mutant showing a mild over-expression of Ras-GRF1 manifest
a similar memory enhancing effect in most tasks but not, quite
surprisingly, in spatial memory ones (Fasano et al., 2009a; Berardi
et al., 2011; D’Isa et al., 2011). Thus, the results obtained with
the analysis of the ERK1 mutants indicate that a general enhance-
ment of Ras–ERK signaling can promote learning and memory
functions. However, this observation is still in apparent contrast
to the phenotype observed in the NF1 mice in which, supposedly,
a general ERK enhancement occurs as well. The explanation of
this discrepancy was provided by two papers in 2002 and in 2008,
both from the Silva’s lab. These two papers radically changed our
view on cell signaling mediated by Ras–ERK in the brain since
they clearly demonstrated that the Ras-dependent effect of neu-
roﬁbromin ablation is speciﬁcally linked to an increase in GABA
inhibition which is the likely cause of the learning and memory
deﬁcits. Either using the global heterozygous NF1 mice or cell-
speciﬁc promoters to drive CRE expression in conditional NF1
mutants, Silva and co-workers showed that the behavioral effect
was compatible with an enhancement of Ras activity in GABAer-
gic interneurons that in turn may affect synaptic plasticity in key
areas of the brain implicated in learning, such as the hippocam-
pus. Interestingly, the memory deﬁcits could be partially rescued
by either reducing (pharmacologically or genetically) Ras activity
(especially of the K-Ras isoform) or by partially inhibiting GABA
activity using receptor antagonists. These experimental observa-
tions are important since they provide a likely explanation why loss
of neuroﬁbromin in NF1 patients may lead to learning disabilities.
Importantly, they may also provide a rationale to understand other
genetic diseases characterized by gain of function mutations in the
Ras–ERK pathway leading to mental retardation, the now called
RASopathies or Ras–MAPK syndromes (Aoki et al., 2008; Tidy-
man and Rauen, 2009). The clinical relevance of these disorders is
such that a cogent question arising from the work on NF1 mutant
mice requires an urgent answer: why do these changes in the Ras–
ERK activity only occur in GABAergic cells and not in all neurons?
Indeed the data provided by the Silva’s 2008 paper indicate that a

mutation restricted to glutamatergic pyramidal cells, using the
CamKII promoter-CRE line has no impact on behavior. Con-
sistently, our own data on a conditional K-Ras G12V knock-in
mutant line also show that a pyramidal speciﬁc activation of this
Ras isoform has no effect on learning and memory (Papale et al.,
2010). On the contrary, the CRE line driving expression under
the Synapsin I early promoter leads to signiﬁcant learning impair-
ments in both NF1 and K-Ras12V mutants. In order to explain
these observations, some possibilities arise. Firstly, expression
analysis provided by the Allen Brain Atlas (www.brain-map.org) of
both NF1 and K-Ras genes seems to indicate that their transcrip-
tome levels are higher from late embryonic development (E18.5)
to early post-natal stages (P4), a phase in which the Synapsin I early
promoter is already active while the CamKII promoter is not. In
addition, since during the post-natal maturation of GABAergic
cells, the expression of NF1 and of K-Ras is maximal while later
during pyramidal cell development is down to lower levels the
occurrence an increased inhibition would be favored. Indeed, an
indirect evidence that K-Ras is acting early in development during
a temporal window which coincides with GABAergic development
comes from the transgenic mouse model in which the H-RasG12V
mutation is expressed under the CamKII promoter. In that case
a forced over-expression in pyramidal neurons of this gain of
function mutant leads to memory and plasticity improvements
(Kushner et al., 2005; Kaneko et al., 2010). Whether this positive
effect on memory is speciﬁc to this Ras isoform still needs to be
seen but it is unlikely. Indeed, to complicate the matter, a recently
described targeted expression of the very same H-RasG12V via
homologous recombination (gene knock-in) results in signiﬁcant
behavioral impairments which partially recapitulate the pheno-
types observed in patients affected by the Costello Syndrome, one
of the RASopathies (Viosca et al., 2009). Thus, all available data
point to the importance of “when” and “where”: if Ras–ERK sig-
naling is predominantly active in the GABAergic compartment,
then plasticity and memory impairments may occur while the
opposite is true when ERK activity is mainly activated in pyrami-
dal cells. Indeed the real scenario is probably even more complex
than that if we take into consideration the global ERK1 KO model
in which memory improves despite gene ablation is not cell-type
selective and the manipulation alters a protein hardly regulated in
development. In this speciﬁc case, a possible explanation is that
ERK1 loss causes a differential effect between excitation and inhi-
bition by favoring the former. If that is the real case still remain to
be seen since appropriated experiments, either using conditional
ERK1 mutants or viral-mediated cell-speciﬁc gene knockdowns
of ERK1, have not yet been performed. However, one prediction
which can already be made is that a speciﬁc enhancement of ERK2
activity in GABAergic cells via ERK1 ablation should recapitulate
the NF1 KO phenotype by bypassing the requirement for an ele-
vated Ras activity. Certainly, this prediction could be incorrect in
the case that other Ras-dependent signaling pathways, e.g., the PI3
Kinase cascade, signiﬁcantly contribute to the mental retardation
phenotype observed in the NF1 mutants.

One last comment is necessary on the exact mechanism
by which neuroﬁbromin and K-Ras cause the enhancement of
GABAergic activity. Currently this is unclear but the possible
explanations, not mutually exclusive are: (i) enhanced GABA

Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience

www.frontiersin.org

November 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 79 | 2

Fasano and Brambilla

Ras–ERK signaling in behavior

release; (ii) larger GABA synapses; (iii) more GABA synapses; (iv)
enhanced GABA-mediated post synaptic signaling. In any case, it is
clear that in cortical regions and in the hippocampus, future exper-
iments targeting the Ras–ERK signaling in a cell-speciﬁc manner
and at different stages of development will provide substantial new
evidence and will tell us whether the development of general cog-
nitive enhancers based on ERK manipulation will ever be a viable
therapeutic option for memory impairments.

NEURONAL CELL SIGNALING BEYOND THE RAS–ERK
PARADOX: THE STRANGE CASE OF THE STRIATUM
Most cortical and hippocampal regions function by a tight inte-
gration of excitatory and inhibitory signals. Alterations of this
balance, as we have seen above, may result in either a mem-
ory gain or a memory loss. However, not all brain areas work
in this way. For instance, the striatum, the input nucleus of
the basal ganglia system, is essentially constituted (>95%) by
GABAergic projection neurons, the so called medium spiny neu-
rons (MSN; Kreitzer and Malenka, 2008). Instead of generating
an output activity toward the thalamus and the motor cortex
by balancing excitation and inhibition within its structure, the
dorsal portion of the striatum (the ventral one, the nucleus
accumbens, may be slightly different) integrates two main neu-
rotransmitter signals, the glutamatergic and the dopaminergic
ones, and conveys their action on two distinct subclasses of
MSN: the direct pathway neurons, mainly expressing dopamine
D1 receptors, and the indirect pathway neurons, mainly express-
ing D2 receptors. In normal conditions, a balanced activa-
tion of both pathways leads to an efﬁcient activation of the
thalamus and of the cortex. However, in certain neuropsychi-
atric diseases, one of the two pathways tends to dominate:
an enhancement of the direct pathway leads to motor acti-
vation while that of
the indirect pathway results in motor
inhibition.

Not surprisingly, in recent years, the role of the Ras–ERK
pathway and downstream gene expression has extensively been
investigated in the striatum, using both pharmacological (e.g.,
SL327) or genetic approaches. The scenario which has resulted
from these studies is that in both the behavioral responses to
drugs of abuse (“drug addiction”) and in a pathological condition
resembling l-DOPA induced dyskinesia (LID) in Parkinson’s Dis-
ease, an aberrant hyperactivation of Ras–ERK appears to be a key
pathogenetic factor (Murer and Moratalla, 2011). In general terms,
the most widely studied drugs of abuse, psychostimulants (e.g.,
cocaine and amphetamine), opiates (e.g., morphine and heroine),
and cannabinoids (delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, THC) can cause
both short-term changes of motor activity or long-term behav-
ioral changes, which can include an enhanced locomotor activity
or increased reward responses, as measured in conditioned place
preference (CPP) or in self-administration procedures. The fact
that pharmacological inhibition of ERK blocks these responses is
now well established but, for the same reasons of the memory
studies discussed in the previous chapter, it provides little addi-
tional information beyond establishing a “permissive” role of this
pathway in the process.

On the contrary, mouse models of speciﬁc genes in the pathway
have signiﬁcantly contributed to outline an interesting scenario.

For instance, the original report on ERK1 KO mice that demon-
strated an “instructive” role of ERK signaling in memory con-
solidation, i.e., these mice showed better striatum-dependent
memory, also showed that CPP responses to morphine can be
signiﬁcantly enhanced (Mazzucchelli et al., 2002). This effect is
not drug-speciﬁc since the same can be seen with cocaine (Fergu-
son et al., 2006). Similar drug-dependent enhancing effects have
subsequently been seen in other mutant mice, most notably a
striatal-speciﬁc dominant negative form of the transcription factor
CREB (“killer CREB”) and an overexpressing line for Ras-GRF1
(Fasano et al., 2009a,b). The case of CREB is particularly intrigu-
ing since the same dominant negative mutant, not only causes
memory impairment when expressed in a “hippocampus” spe-
ciﬁc mouse line but also leads to instrumental learning deﬁcits
and LTP/LTD loss in a striatal-speciﬁc line (Pittenger et al., 2002,
2006). Thus, the manipulation of CREB within a given brain area,
the dorsal striatum, shows a stimulus-speciﬁc effect which is in
contrast to what was observed for other mutations in the ERK
pathway, most notably Ras-GRF1, in which the gene disruption
causes both memory loss and a reduced response to drugs (Bram-
billa et al., 1997; Fasano et al., 2009a; D’Isa et al., 2011). In the
case of CREB, a likely possibility is that a repeated administra-
tion of a drug of abuse may lead to a compensatory upregulation
of endogenous CREB, as seen previously for hypomorphic muta-
tions of the gene itself or after viral-mediated expression of either
WT or other dominant negative mutants of CREB in the Nucleus
Accumbens (see Carlezon et al., 2005). It is obvious that more
sophisticated experiments will be required to fully understand the
role of CREB in striatum speciﬁc behavioral plasticity, including
its expression speciﬁcally in either the direct or in the indirect
pathway MSN.

In that respect, the use of BAC transgenic mice expressing
the green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) in the two MSN compart-
ments has enormously facilitated the analysis of the activation
proﬁle of the Ras–ERK pathway. Drugs like cocaine speciﬁcally
activate ERK1/2 in the direct pathway MSN (Girault et al., 2007;
Bertran-Gonzalez et al., 2008). On the contrary, antipsychotics
like haloperidol, uniquely induced ERK1/2 activity in the indirect
pathway. Consistently with the molecular data, a speciﬁc activa-
tion of the direct pathway leads to motor activation whereas motor
inhibition is seen when the indirect pathway is induced.

l-DOPA induced dyskinesia is a severe condition in which
chronic administration (several years) of the gold standard treat-
ment of Parkinson’s Disease results in abnormal involuntary
movements (AIM). This pathological condition can be modeled
in rodents by causing an unilateral loss of the substantia nigra
pars compacta (SNc) neurons with the neurotoxin 6-hydroxy
dopamine (6-OHDA) followed by repeated l-DOPA injections.
LID takes several years to appear in patients while in rodents
the effect is almost immediate, after one or few injections of
the therapeutic drug. In recent years, we have started to under-
stand the molecular mechanisms underlying LID in rodents and
the key event occurring in the dorsal portion of the striatum,
the target region of the dopaminergic SNc cells, is the super-
sensitization of D1 receptor signaling through the upregulation
of Golf (Girault et al., 2007). In other words, LID is essentially
characterized by an aberrant enhancement of the striatal direct

Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience

www.frontiersin.org

November 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 79 | 3

Fasano and Brambilla

Ras–ERK signaling in behavior

pathway, a feature, as we have seen, shared with drug addic-
tion (Cenci, 2007; Jenner, 2008; Murer and Moratalla, 2011). The
intriguing similarities between LID and the responses to drugs
of abuse are also evident for what ERK signaling is concerned.
Indeed, this signaling pathway is massively upregulated in the
striatum of dyskinetic animals. To our knowledge, the induc-
tion of phosphorylated ERK1/2 in D1 receptor expressing MSN
is the strongest ever detected not only in brain but in the whole
body, accounting to up 50-fold increase over basal levels (as a
comparison, high dose of cocaine can lead to a 10-fold increase).
This enormous activation of ERK signaling is a combination of
the engagement of the larger share of D1R expressing MSN and
also, to a lesser extent, of an increase of the signal in already acti-
vated cells (Gerfen et al., 2002; Pavon et al., 2006; Westin et al.,
2007). The speciﬁcity of the cell-type implicated in ERK acti-
vation was initially demonstrated pharmacologically but then it
was conﬁrmed using the BAC transgenic mice mentioned above
as well as by causing gene ablation of the D1 receptors (San-
tini et al., 2008, 2009; Darmopil et al., 2009). As expected from
the initial observations, pharmacological inhibition of ERK using
SL327 or a partial blockade of Ras activity using statins results
in a signiﬁcant attenuation of LID onset (Santini et al., 2007;
Schuster et al., 2008). More recently, also the Ras-GRF1 mutant
mouse which was previously shown to be involved in memory
and in drug addiction has been used to test the role of this mol-
ecule in LID. Indeed, a strong reduction in the AIM proﬁle of
Ras-GRF1 KO animals was observed together with a very sig-
niﬁcant attenuation of ERK1/2 activity in the dorsal striatum of
these animals (Fasano et al., 2010). Interestingly, that work also
showed that a combined treatment with suboptimal doses of SL327
(10 mg/kg), a condition which per se is ineffective in wild-type
animals, causes an almost complete reduction of the dyskinetic
symptoms.

All these data strongly support the notion that a speciﬁc tar-
geting of neuronal components of the Ras–ERK pathway, like
Ras-GRF1, may lead to effective treatments of both drug addiction
and LID. In that respect, the scientiﬁc community still lacks phar-
macological tools which go beyond SL327 and can target other
molecular components besides MEK1/2. An interesting option is
the development of cell permeable peptides that readily cross the
brain–blood barrier and cause reversible disruptions of protein–
protein interactions (Patel et al., 2007; Heitz et al., 2009). For
instance, one can imagine that a Ras-GRF1 speciﬁc cell permeable
peptide would be a valuable tool to study the role of this mol-
ecule in diverse behavioral processes, from memory formation,
reconsolidation, and extinction, as well as for the development of
treatments for the above mentioned diseases. At the same time, it
is imperative to further advance in the development of cell-speciﬁc
genetic tools to target crucial components of the Ras–ERK path-
way with a tight temporal and spatial control. One step in that
direction is the availability of BAC transgenics expressing CRE

recombinase in a cell and brain area speciﬁc manner. For instance,
the recent report in which DARPP-32, a signal integrator which
in the striatum also controls ERK signaling, was either speciﬁcally
targeted in the MSN of the direct or the indirect pathway lead
to changes in the responses to cocaine/l-DOPA or to haloperi-
dol, respectively (Bateup et al., 2010). Also, a very signiﬁcant leap
forward would be represented by the combination of condition-
ally targeted mouse mutants with cell-speciﬁc CRE delivery via
viral vectors which would also allow us to achieve an excellent
temporal control of gene expression. At present though, since
some limitations still apply to validate viral vectors with bona ﬁde
cell-speciﬁc promoters, probably the best option would be to use
BAC transgenic lines expressing CRE in combination with vec-
tors conditionally expressing either dominant negative constructs,
cell permeable peptides, or small interfering RNAs (shRNA), as
recently suggested (Papale et al., 2009). These multiple approaches
should be able to address the major remaining question linking
drug addiction, LID and the Ras–ERK pathway in the striatum:
why is only the direct pathway affected in these diseases? The
speciﬁcity certainly lies on the hyperactivation of the D1 recep-
tors in response to l-DOPA or to drugs like cocaine but this type
of reasoning is rather circular and provides little explanation. So
far, there is no evidence that any component of the Ras–ERK path-
way is differentially expressed in the two striatal cell populations.
Thus, it is difﬁcult to judge whether the activation of Ras–ERK in
D1R expressing cells is just a “minor” consequence of upstream
events or plays a more “instructive” role. Certainly, gene ablation
of D1R completely block ERK activation and downstream events
in the striatum and affects not only LID but also learning and LTP
in the hippocampus, as well as cocaine self-administration (Caine
et al., 2007; Darmopil et al., 2009; Ortiz et al., 2010). An interest-
ing experiment in the direction to solve this problem would be
to force over-expression of one of Ras–ERK elements, e.g., Ras-
GRF1 (which is normally in both MSN types) in the indirect
pathway, which is silent in LID and in response to cocaine, and
see whether that is sufﬁcient to readjust the system. In addition,
it would be important to knockdown Ras-GRF1 individually in
each compartment and to express constitutively active mutations
in the pathway (e.g., Ras G12V) and to verify the effect at the
behavioral level. Both loss and gain of function experiments will
be crucial but certainly demanding from the technological point
of view. However, in our opinion, they will represent a necessary
new level of investigation to tackle the complexity of Ras–ERK sig-
naling in behavior which will keep us busy for at least additional
15 years.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Michael J. Fox Foundation for
Parkinson’s Research and the Parkinson’s UK as well as by the
Italian Ministry of Health, the Fondazione CARIPLO and the
Compagnia di San Paolo (to Riccardo Brambilla).

REFERENCES
Aoki, Y., Niihori, T., Narumi, Y., Kure,
S., and Matsubara, Y. (2008). The
RAS/MAPK syndromes: novel roles
of
the RAS pathway in human

genetic disorders. Hum. Mutat. 29,
992–1006.

Atkins, C. M., Selcher, J. C., Petraitis,
J. J., Trzaskos, J. M., and Sweatt, J.
D. (1998). The MAPK cascade is

required for mammalian associative
learning. Nat. Neurosci. 1, 602–609.
Bateup, H. S., Santini, E., Shen, W.,
Birnbaum, S., Valjent, E., Surmeier,
D.
J.,

J., Fisone, G., Nestler, E.

and Greengard, P. (2010). Distinct
subclasses of medium spiny neu-
rons differentially regulate striatal
motor behaviors. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 107, 14845–14850.

Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience

www.frontiersin.org

November 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 79 | 4

Fasano and Brambilla

Ras–ERK signaling in behavior

Berardi, N., Silingardi, D., Angelucci,
A., De Pasquale, R., Borsotti, M.,
Squitieri, G., Putignano, E., Bram-
billa, R., and Pizzorusso, T. (2011).
ERK pathway activation bidirection-
ally affects visual recognition mem-
ory and synaptic plasticity in the
perirhinal cortex. Front. Behav. Neu-
rosci. (in press).
Bertran-Gonzalez,

Bosch, C.,
Maroteaux, M., Matamales, M.,
Herve, D., Valjent, E., and Girault,
J. A. (2008). Opposing patterns of
signaling activation in dopamine D1
and D2 receptor-expressing striatal
in response to cocaine
neurons
and haloperidol.
J. Neurosci. 28,
5671–5685.

J.,

Brambilla, R., Gnesutta, N., Minichiello,
L., White, G., Roylance, A. J., Her-
ron, C. E., Ramsey, M., Wolfer, D. P.,
Cestari, V., Rossi-Arnaud, C., Grant,
S. G., Chapman, P. F., Lipp, H. P.,
Sturani, E., and Klein, R. (1997). A
role for the Ras signalling pathway
in synaptic transmission and long-
term memory. Nature 390, 281–286.
Caine, S. B., Thomsen, M., Gabriel,
K. I., Berkowitz, J. S., Gold, L. H.,
Koob, G. F., Tonegawa, S., Zhang,
J., and Xu, M. (2007). Lack of
self-administration of cocaine in
dopamine D1 receptor knock-out
mice. J. Neurosci. 27, 13140–13150.
Carlezon, W. A. Jr., Duman, R. S.,
and Nestler, E. J. (2005). The many
faces of CREB. Trends Neurosci. 28,
436–445.

Cenci, M. A. (2007). Dopamine dys-
regulation of movement control in
L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia. Trends
Neurosci. 30, 236–243.

Cestari, V., Costanzi, M., Castellano, C.,
and Rossi-Arnaud, C. (2006). A role
for ERK2 in reconsolidation of fear
memories in mice. Neurobiol. Learn.
Mem. 86, 133–143.

Darmopil, S., Martin, A. B., De Diego, I.
R., Ares, S., and Moratalla, R. (2009).
Genetic inactivation of dopamine
D1 but not D2 receptors inhibits L-
DOPA-induced dyskinesia and his-
tone activation. Biol. Psychiatry 66,
603–613.

Davis, S., and Laroche, S.

(2006).
protein
Mitogen-activated
regulated
kinase/extracellular
kinase
and memory
signalling
stabilization: a review. Genes Brain
Behav. 5(Suppl. 2), 61–72.

D’Isa, R., Clapcote, S. J., Voikar, V.,
Wolfer, D. P., Giese, K. P., Bram-
billa, R., and Fasano, S. (2011).
Mice lacking Ras-GRF1 show con-
textual fear conditioning but not
spatial memory impairments: con-
vergent evidence from two inde-
pendently generated mouse mutant
lines. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 5:78.
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2011.00078

Duman, C. H., Schlesinger, L., Kodama,
M., Russell, D. S., and Duman, R. S.
(2007). A role for MAP kinase signal-
ing in behavioral models of depres-
sion and antidepressant treatment.
Biol. Psychiatry 61, 661–670.

English, J. D., and Sweatt, J. D. (1996).
Activation of p42 mitogen-activated
protein kinase in hippocampal long
term potentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 271,
24329–24332.

English,

for

J. D., and Sweatt,

J. D.
the
(1997). A requirement
mitogen-activated protein kinase
cascade in hippocampal long term
potentiation.
J. Biol. Chem. 272,
19103–19106.

Fasano, S., Bezard, E., D’Antoni, A.,
Indrigo, M., Francardo, V., Qin, L.,
Dovero, S., Cerovic, M., Cenci, M.
A., and Brambilla, R. (2010). Inhi-
bition of Ras-GRF1 in the stria-
tum reverts motor symptoms asso-
ciated to L-DOPA induced Dyskine-
sia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
21824–21829.

Fasano, S., D’Antoni, A., Orban, P.
C., Valjent, E., Putignano, E., Vara,
H., Pizzorusso, T., Giustetto, M.,
Yoon, B., Soloway, P., Maldonado,
R., Caboche, J., and Brambilla, R.
(2009a). Ras-guanine nucleotide-
releasing
(Ras-GRF1)
controls activation of extracellular
signal-regulated
(ERK)
striatum and
signaling
long-term behavioral
responses
to cocaine. Biol. Psychiatry 66,
758–768.

in the

kinase

factor

1

(2009b).

Fasano, S., Pittenger, C., and Bram-
billa, R.
Inhibition of
CREB activity in the dorsal por-
tion of
the striatum potentiates
behavioral responses to drugs of
abuse. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 3:29.
doi:10.3389/neuro.08.029.2009

Ferguson, S. M., Fasano, S., Yang,
P., Brambilla, R., and Robinson,
T. E. (2006). Knockout of ERK1
enhances cocaine-evoked immedi-
ate early gene expression and behav-
ioral plasticity. Neuropsychopharma-
cology 31, 2660–2668.

Gerfen, C. R., Miyachi, S., Palet-
zki, R., and Brown, P. (2002). D1
dopamine receptor supersensitivity
in the dopamine-depleted striatum
Results from a switch in the reg-
ulation of ERK1/2/MAP kinase. J.
Neurosci. 22, 5042–5054.

Girault, J. A., Valjent, E., Caboche, J.,
and Herve, D. (2007). ERK2: a logical
AND gate critical for drug-induced
plasticity? Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 7,
77–85.

Heitz, F., Morris, M. C., and Divita,
G. (2009). Twenty years of cell-
penetrating peptides: from molecu-
lar mechanisms to therapeutics. Br.
J. Pharmacol. 157, 195–206.

Indrigo, M., Papale, A., Orellana, D., and
Brambilla, R. (2010). Lentiviral vec-
tors to study the differential function
of ERK1 and ERK2 MAP kinases.
Methods Mol. Biol. 661, 205–220.

Jenner, P. (2008). Molecular mecha-
nisms of L-DOPA-induced dyskine-
sia. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 665–677.

Kaneko, M., Cheetham, C. E., Lee, Y.
S., Silva, A. J., Stryker, M. P., and
Fox, K. (2010). Constitutively active
H-ras accelerates multiple forms of
plasticity in developing visual cor-
tex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
19026–19031.

Kreitzer, A. C., and Malenka, R. C.
(2008). Striatal plasticity and basal
ganglia circuit function. Neuron 60,
543–554.

Kushner, S. A., Elgersma, Y., Murphy,
G. G., Jaarsma, D., van Woerden, G.
M., Hojjati, M. R., Cui, Y., LeBoutil-
lier, J. C., Marrone, D. F., Choi,
E. S., De Zeeuw, C. I., Petit, T.
L., Pozzo-Miller, L., and Silva, A.
J. (2005). Modulation of presynap-
tic plasticity and learning by the
H-ras/extracellular signal-regulated
kinase/synapsin I signaling pathway.
J. Neurosci. 25, 9721–9734.

Mazzucchelli, C., Vantaggiato, C.,
Ciamei, A., Fasano, S., Porrazzo,
A., Orban, P. C., Pakhotin, P.,
Krezel, W., Wezl, H., Wolfer, D. P.,
Pagès, G., Valverde, O., Marowsky,
A., Porrazzo, A., Orban, P. C.,
Maldonado, R., Ehrengruber, M.
U., Cestari, V., Lipp, H. P., Chap-
man, P. F., Pouysségur,
J., and
Brambilla, R.
(2002). Knockout
of ERK1 MAP kinase enhances
synaptic plasticity in the striatum
and
striatal-mediated
learning and memory. Neuron 34,
807–820.

facilitates

Murer, M. G., and Moratalla, R.
signaling in L-
(2011). Striatal
DOPA-induced dyskinesia:
com-
mon mechanisms with drug abuse
and long term memory involv-
ing D1 dopamine receptor stim-
ulation. Front. Neuroanat. 5:51.
doi:10.3389/fnana.2011.00051

Ortiz, O., Delgado-Garcia,

J. M.,
Espadas, I., Bahi, A., Trullas, R.,
Dreyer,
J. L., Gruart, A., and
Moratalla, R. (2010). Associative
learning and CA3-CA1 synaptic
plasticity are impaired in D1R null,
Drd1a−/− mice and in hippocam-
pal siRNA silenced Drd1a mice. J.
Neurosci. 30, 12288–12300.

Papale, A., Cerovic, M., and Brambilla,
R. (2009). Viral vector approaches to
modify gene expression in the brain.
J. Neurosci. Methods 185, 1–14.

Papale, A., D’Isa, R., Solari, N., For-
mentini, I., Cerovic, M., Harding-
ham, N., Gangarossa, G., Fisone,
G., and Brambilla, R. (2010). “A

mouse model of cognitive impair-
ments associated to the Ras-MAPK
syndromes,” in FENS Forum Abstract
057.66, Amsterdam.

Patel, L. N., Zaro, J. L., and Shen, W.
C. (2007). Cell penetrating peptides:
intracellular pathways and pharma-
ceutical perspectives. Pharm. Res. 24,
1977–1992.

Pavon, N., Martin, A. B., Mendialdua,
A., and Moratalla, R. (2006). ERK
phosphorylation and FosB expres-
sion are associated with L-DOPA-
induced dyskinesia in hemiparkin-
sonian mice. Biol. Psychiatry 59,
64–74.

bidirectional

Pittenger, C., Fasano, S., Mazzocchi-
Jones, D., Dunnett, S. B., Kandel,
E. R., and Brambilla, R. (2006).
Impaired
synaptic
plasticity and procedural memory
striatum-speciﬁc
formation
cAMP response
element-binding
protein-deﬁcient mice. J. Neurosci.
26, 2808–2813.

in

Pittenger, C., Huang, Y. Y., Paletzki,
R. F., Bourtchouladze, R., Scan-
lin, H., Vronskaya, S., and Kandel,
E. R. (2002). Reversible inhibition
of CREB/ATF transcription factors
in region CA1 of the dorsal hip-
pocampus disrupts hippocampus-
dependent spatial memory. Neuron
34, 447–462.

Samuels, I. S., Saitta, S. C., and Landreth,
G. E. (2009). MAP’ing CNS devel-
opment and cognition: an ERKsome
process. Neuron 61, 160–167.

Santini, E., Alcacer, C., Cacciatore, S.,
Heiman, M., Herve, D., Greengard,
P., Girault, J. A., Valjent, E., and
Fisone, G. (2009). L-DOPA acti-
vates ERK signaling and phospho-
rylates histone H3 in the striatoni-
gral medium spiny neurons of hemi-
parkinsonian mice. J. Neurochem.
108, 621–633.

Santini, E., Valjent, E., and Fisone,
G.
(2008). Parkinson’s disease:
levodopa-induced dyskinesia and
signal transduction. FEBS J. 275,
1392–1399.

Santini, E., Valjent, E., Usiello, A.,
Carta, M., Borgkvist, A., Girault,
J. A., Herve, D., Greengard, P.,
and Fisone, G.
(2007). Critical
involvement of cAMP/DARPP-32
and extracellular
signal-regulated
protein kinase signaling in L-DOPA-
induced dyskinesia. J. Neurosci. 27,
6995–7005.

Schuster, S., Nadjar, A., Guo, J. T., Li,
Q., Ittrich, C., Hengerer, B., and
Bezard, E. (2008). The 3-hydroxy-
3-methylglutaryl-CoA
reductase
inhibitor lovastatin reduces severity
of
abnormal
involuntary movements in exper-
imental Parkinson’s
J.
Neurosci. 28, 4311–4316.

L-DOPA-induced

disease.

Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience

www.frontiersin.org

November 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 79 | 5

Fasano and Brambilla

Ras–ERK signaling in behavior

Jacks, T.,

Silva, A. J., Frankland, P. W., Marowitz,
Z., Friedman, E., Lazlo, G., Ciofﬁ,
D.,
and Bourtchu-
ladze, R. (1997). A mouse model
for
and memory
deﬁcits associated with neuroﬁ-
bromatosis type I. Nat. Genet. 15,
281–284.

learning

the

Tidyman, W. E., and Rauen, K. A.
(2009). The RASopathies: develop-
mental syndromes of Ras/MAPK
pathway dysregulation. Curr. Opin.
Genet. Dev. 19, 230–236.

Tronson, N. C., Schrick, C., Fis-
F.,
and
(2008). Regulatory

cher,
Pages, G., Pouyssegur,
Radulovic,

Sananbenesi,
J.,

A.,

J.

fear
depression-like

mechanisms of
and
Neuropsychopharmacology
1570–1583.

extinction
behavior.
33,

Vantaggiato, C., Formentini, I., Bon-
danza, A., Bonini, C., Naldini, L.,
and Brambilla, R. (2006). ERK1
and ERK2 mitogen-activated pro-
tein kinases affect Ras-dependent
cell signaling differentially. J. Biol. 5,
14.

Viosca, J., Schuhmacher, A. J., Guerra,
C., and Barco, A. (2009). Germline
expression of H-Ras(G12V) causes
neurological deﬁcits associated to
Costello syndrome. Genes Brain
Behav. 8, 60–71.

Westin,

M.,

E., Vercammen,
E.

J.
L.,
Strome,
Konradi,
C., and Cenci, M. A.
(2007).
Spatiotemporal pattern of striatal
ERK1/2 phosphorylation in a rat
model of L-DOPA-induced dysk-
inesia and the role of dopamine
D1 receptors. Biol. Psychiatry 62,
800–810.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 02 August 2011; paper pend-
ing published: 19 August 2011; accepted:
03 November 2011; published online: 24
November 2011.
Citation: Fasano S and Brambilla R
(2011) Ras–ERK signaling in behav-
ior: old questions and new perspec-
tives. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 5:79. doi:
10.3389/fnbeh.2011.00079
Copyright © 2011 Fasano and Bram-
billa. This is an open-access article sub-
ject to a non-exclusive license between the
authors and Frontiers Media SA, which
permits use, distribution and reproduc-
tion in other forums, provided the original
authors and source are credited and other
Frontiers conditions are complied with.

Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience

www.frontiersin.org

November 2011 | Volume 5 | Article 79 | 6

