Editorial
Trials That Matter: Two Faces of Progress in the Treatment of
Age-Related Macular Degeneration
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a common

Annals of Internal Medicine

ocular condition that may destroy central vision and
have a devastating effect on the quality of life of people
over the age of 55. Since the population of the United
States is now living longer, more people are at risk for
developing the disease as the population ages. By age 70,
nearly 1 of 3 people shows signs of at least mild AMD on
ophthalmologic examination.

The earliest recognizable manifestation of AMD is the
presence of drusen—white deposits that can be observed in
the macula during an ophthalmoscopic examination. Pa-
tients with drusen are classiﬁed as having early (dry) AMD.
These patients may have no visual symptoms or may re-
quire additional light to read small print. Most patients
with dry AMD will never develop severe vision loss or
progress to late (wet) AMD.

Some patients with drusen, however, develop leaky
blood vessels, a form of wet AMD known as choroidal
neovascularization. Leakage of ﬂuid or blood from choroi-
dal neovascularization can cause a precipitous loss of cen-
tral vision. Fluorescein angiography, a diagnostic technique
used frequently by retina specialists, facilitates the catego-
rization of patients with choroidal neovascularization into
3 groups: predominantly classic, minimally classic, and oc-
cult. These angiographic categories have been useful in pre-
dicting the outcome of the disease and in developing
guidelines for photodynamic therapy of AMD.

Until recently, the only pharmacologically based ther-
apies for treatment of patients with wet macular degener-
ation have been photodynamic therapy with verteporﬁn
and intravitreous injections of pegaptanib sodium. Al-
though the pathophysiology of AMD is still poorly under-
stood,
it is increasingly clear that vascular endothelial
growth factor A plays an important role in the promotion
of neovascularization and the vessel leakage that leads to
loss of central vision. While vascular endothelial growth
factor A occurs in several biologically active forms, a re-
combinant, humanized monoclonal antibody Fab, ranibi-
zumab (marketed as Lucentis [Genentech, Inc., Vacaville,
California]), neutralizes all forms of this growth factor.
Two recently published phase 3 trials give hope for better
control of neovascular AMD but also raise major issues
about appropriate management strategies that use this ex-
pensive new drug.

WHAT DID THESE LANDMARK TRIALS SHOW?

The ﬁrst

trial, a 2-year, prospective, randomized,
double-blind, sham-controlled, multicenter study of monthly
intravitreous injections of ranibizumab, enrolled 716 pa-
tients with minimally classic or occult choroidal neovascular-
ization (1). The goal was to evaluate the efﬁcacy of ranibi-

532 © 2007 American College of Physicians

zumab in slowing visual loss over the course of the trial.
After randomization of the patients into 3 groups, investi-
gators administered intravitreous injections at 2 different
dose levels (0.3 mg or 0.5 mg) of ranibizumab or sham
injections every 4 weeks. Ninety-ﬁve percent of patients
who received either dose of ranibizumab maintained stable
vision (deﬁned as fewer than 3 lines of vision loss) at 12
months, compared with 62% in the sham group. In addi-
tion, one quarter of the patients treated with the lower
dose of ranibizumab and one third of those treated with
the higher dose actually gained signiﬁcant visual acuity
during the course of the study, compared with 5% of those
in the sham injection group. Improvement in visual acuity
scores was evident in the ranibizumab-treated patients
within 7 days after the ﬁrst injection. Serious ocular ad-
verse events included presumed endophthalmitis in 1.0%
of patients, which was attributed to the injection proce-
dure, and uveitis in 1% to 2% of patients, which was
attributed to ranibizumab. Nonocular adverse events of the
type that have been associated with intravenous adminis-
tration of the drug, such as vascular and thromboembolic
events, are common in an elderly population. However,
these events occurred in fewer than 4% of participants and
did not differ signiﬁcantly in frequency or severity between
those receiving intravitreous ranibizumab and those receiv-
ing sham injections. The results were similar at 24 months.
The second trial, published simultaneously with the
ﬁrst, compared ranibizumab with a well-established modi-
ﬁcation of laser therapy that depends on concentration of
intravenously administered photosensitizing pigment in
abnormal subfoveal vessels followed by application of low-
intensity laser therapy. This trial reports the results of the
ﬁrst year of a 2-year, phase 3 comparison of the efﬁcacy
and safety of repeated intravitreous ranibizumab injections
versus photodynamic therapy with verteporﬁn in patients
with predominantly classic neovascular lesions (2). Patients
in this trial received either 0.3 or 0.5 mg of ranibizumab
plus sham verteporﬁn therapy (140 patients in each group)
or sham injections plus active verteporﬁn photodynamic
therapy (143 patients). The primary efﬁcacy end point
consisted of a measure of loss of visual acuity identical to
that used in the ﬁrst trial and showed that signiﬁcantly
more patients retained a prespeciﬁed level of visual acuity
in the ranibizumab groups (94.3% of patients who re-
ceived 0.3 mg and 96.4% of those who received 0.5 mg
ranibizumab)
received verteporﬁn
(64.3%). As in the ﬁrst trial, signiﬁcant improvement in
visual acuity occurred more frequently in the ranibizumab
groups (35.7% in patients treated with 0.3 mg and 40.3%
in patients treated with 0.5 mg) than in those treated with
verteporﬁn (5.6%). Serious ocular adverse events were un-

than those who

Two Faces of Progress in the Treatment of Age-Related Macular Degeneration

Editorial

common: 1 patient had endophthalmitis and 2 patients
had uveitis in the higher-dose ranibizumab group. One
episode of rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (detach-
ment resulting from a hole or tear in the retina) and 1
episode of vitreous hemorrhage occurred in patients receiv-
ing the lower dose of ranibizumab.

HOW DO THESE TRIALS ADVANCE KNOWLEDGE?

Inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth factor A have
held tempting possibilities for the treatment of choroidal
neovascularization since the ﬁrst of this class of drugs,
bevacizumab (marketed as Avastin [Genentech, Inc.]), was
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in
2004. Bevacizumab was initially approved for treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer, in which it functioned as an
inhibitor of tumor-vessel growth. Shortly after its approval
for that indication, ophthalmologists began off-label use of
the intravenous preparation to treat the vascular lesions of
AMD (3). The idea of using a much lower dose of bevaci-
zumab by intravitreous injection for AMD was conceived
because the cost of treatment could be dramatically de-
creased by using much smaller doses administered locally
to the eye, and the smaller doses could reduce the risk for
systemic exposure. Use of intravitreous bevacizumab for
treatment of AMD quickly gained traction among oph-
thalmologists despite the absence of data from any ran-
domized clinical trial to support its use. The factors that
drove this phenomenon included both the reasonable cost
and the fact that a therapeutic effect was obvious within 24
hours of the ﬁrst treatment. Bevacizumab was quickly and
widely adopted as a ﬁrst-line therapy for neovascular AMD
by many retina specialists in the United States because
ranibizumab had not been approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration. Subsequent uncontrolled, consecu-
tive case series supported the contention that bevacizumab
is effective for treatment of neovascular AMD (4, 5).

Ranibizumab, the subject of the 2 trials described
above, is biologically related to bevacizumab but is specif-
ically formulated for use in the eye. Whereas bevacizumab
is a complete monoclonal antibody with a relatively large
molecular size (150 kd), ranibizumab is a much smaller
fragment (49 kd) of a monoclonal antibody that may be
able to penetrate the retina more easily, thereby making it
a more effective therapeutic agent. The 2 randomized, con-
trolled trials described here reliably demonstrate that
ranibizumab is highly effective and has an acceptable safety
proﬁle.

SHOULD CLINICIANS ADOPT RANIBIZUMAB AS THE
STANDARD THERAPY FOR AMD?

Although these trials suggest that ranibizumab is a sig-
niﬁcant step forward in the treatment of neovascular age-
related macular degeneration, no evidence suggests that it
is better than bevacizumab. The question of relative efﬁ-

cacy is one of great medical, social, and ﬁnancial impor-
tance. Ranibizumab—at a cost of $1950 per injection—is
50 times more expensive than bevacizumab, and current
regimens call for an injection every 28 days for 2 years.
With up to 200 000 new cases of neovascular AMD annu-
ally in the United States, the annual drug cost alone would
exceed $10 billion. Bevacizumab costs $50 per injection
and its treatment frequency— usually much less than once
per month—is based on clinical response. The calculation
of cost is further complicated by the fact that the optimum
duration of therapy with these drugs is not known, owing
to the lack of long-term studies. Ranibizumab must not
only be proven effective to be accepted as standard therapy,
it must be proven substantially more effective than its
much less expensive alternative. Since no study comparing
these drugs has been performed, such proof does not exist.
However, the National Eye Institute, part of the National
Institutes of Health, has recently funded investigators at
Emory University, University of Pennsylvania, and Duke
University to conduct a head-to-head comparison of bev-
acizumab and ranibizumab. The researchers plan to enroll
1200 patients at 40 clinical centers across the United States
in this multicenter, randomized clinical trial, which will
compare these 2 drugs directly, evaluate different dosing
strategies, and determine other variables that might predict
a favorable outcome with less frequent injections.

Age-related macular degeneration is a disease that se-
riously degrades the quality of life of many patients under
the care of general internists. The prospect of developing
and testing effective treatments for this disease should gal-
vanize the internal medicine community, increasing its vig-
ilance for early signs of AMD in patients and encouraging
an active interest in the evidence basis for treatments that
hold promise for its control. Now that the scientiﬁc possi-
bilities for control of AMD are expanding, proceeding with
a direct head-to-head comparison of the 2 drugs is the only
socially responsible way to provide answers. The ﬁnancial
cost of such a study will be high, but the cost of failing to
provide a reliable answer may be even higher.

Paul Epstein, MD
Deputy Editor, Annals of Internal Medicine

Acknowledgments: The author
thanks Stuart Fine, MD; Daniel
Martin, MD; and Maureen Maguire, PhD, for ophthalmologic advice
and review of the manuscript.

Potential Financial Conflicts of Interest: None disclosed.

Requests for Single Reprints: Customer Service, American College of
Physicians, 190 N. Independence Mall West, Philadelphia, PA 19106.

Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:532-534.

www.annals.org

3 April 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 146 (cid:127) Number 7 533

Editorial Two Faces of Progress in the Treatment of Age-Related Macular Degeneration

References
1. Rosenfeld PJ, Brown DM, Heier JS, Boyer DS, Kaiser PK, Chung CY, et al.
Ranibizumab for neovascular age-related macular degeneration. N Engl J Med.
2006;355:1419-31. [PMID: 17021318]
2. Brown DM, Kaiser PK, Michels M, Soubrane G, Heier JS, Kim RY, et al.
Ranibizumab versus verteporﬁn for neovascular age-related macular degeneration.
N Engl J Med. 2006;355:1432-44. [PMID: 17021319]
3. Michels S, Rosenfeld PJ, Puliaﬁto CA, Marcus EN, Venkatraman AS. Sys-
temic bevacizumab (Avastin) therapy for neovascular age-related macular degen-

eration. Twelve-week results of an uncontrolled open-label clinical study. Oph-
thalmology. 2005;112:1035-47. [PMID: 15936441]
4. Avery RL, Pieramici DJ, Rabena MD, Castellarin AA, Nasir MA, Giust MJ.
Intravitreal bevacizumab (Avastin) for neovascular age-related macular degenera-
tion. Ophthalmology. 2006;113:363-372.e5. [PMID: 16458968]
5. Avery RL, Pearlman J, Pieramici DJ, Rabena MD, Castellarin AA, Nasir
MA, et al. Intravitreal bevacizumab (Avastin) in the treatment of proliferative
diabetic retinopathy. Ophthalmology. 2006;113:1695.e1-15. [PMID: 17011951]
© 2007 American College of Physicians

534 3 April 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 146 (cid:127) Number 7

www.annals.org

