elifesciences.org

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Transient inhibition of the ERK pathway 
prevents cerebellar developmental defects 
and improves long-term motor functions 
in murine models of neurofibromatosis 
type 1
Edward Kim1†, Yuan Wang1,2,3†, Sun-Jung Kim1,2, Miriam Bornhorst1,2,4, 
Emmanuelle S Jecrois1,2, Todd E Anthony5, Chenran Wang6, Yi E Li1,  
Jun-Lin Guan1,6, Geoffrey G Murphy7,8, Yuan Zhu1,2,3*

1Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, United States; 2Gilbert Family 
Neurofibromatosis Institute, Center for Cancer and Immunology Research and 
Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Medical Center, Washington, 
United States; 3Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, United States; 4Division of Hematology and 
Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Mott Children’s Hospital, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, United States; 5Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Rockefeller 
University, New York, United States; 6Department of Cancer Biology, University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, United States; 7Molecular and Behavioral 
Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, United 
States; 8Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, United States

Abstract Individuals with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) frequently exhibit cognitive and 
motor impairments and characteristics of autism. The cerebellum plays a critical role in motor 
control, cognition, and social interaction, suggesting that cerebellar defects likely contribute to 
NF1-associated neurodevelopmental disorders. Here we show that Nf1 inactivation during early, 
but not late stages of cerebellar development, disrupts neuronal lamination, which is partially 
caused by overproduction of glia and subsequent disruption of the Bergmann glia (BG) scaffold. 
Specific Nf1 inactivation in glutamatergic neuronal precursors causes premature differentiation 
of granule cell (GC) precursors and ectopic production of unipolar brush cells (UBCs), indirectly 
disrupting neuronal migration. Transient MEK inhibition during a neonatal window prevents cerebellar 
developmental defects and improves long-term motor performance of Nf1-deficient mice. This 
study reveals essential roles of Nf1 in GC/UBC migration by generating correct numbers of glia and 
controlling GC/UBC fate-specification/differentiation, identifying a therapeutic prevention strategy 
for multiple NF1-associcated developmental abnormalities.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.001

Introduction
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a genetically inherited disorder that afflicts 1 in 2700 newborns (Evans 
et al., 2010). NF1 is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the NF1 tumor suppressor gene, which 
encodes  neurofibromin,  a  negative  regulator  of  proto-oncogene  RAS  (Cichowski  and  Jacks,  2001; 

*For correspondence: yzhu@
childrensnational.org

†These authors contributed 
equally to this work

Competing interests: The 
authors declare that no 
competing interests exist.

Funding: See page 24

Received: 13 October 2014
Accepted: 22 December 2014
Published: 23 December 2014

Reviewing editor: Duojia Pan, 
Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, 
United States

 Copyright Kim et al. This 

article is distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use and 
redistribution provided that the 
original author and source are 
credited.

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

1 of 27

Research article

eLife digest Neurofibromatosis type 1 is a condition characterized by the growth of tumors 
along the nerves of the body. It is caused by mutations in a gene called NF1, which codes for a 
protein that normally works to inhibit the activity of another protein called Ras. In healthy cells, Ras 
is needed to stimulate the cells to grow and divide. However, if the Ras protein is not turned off at 
the right time or if it is activated at the wrong time, it can force cells to keep growing and dividing; 
this leads to the growth of tumors.

Along with being prone to developing cancer, individuals with neurofibromatosis type 1 also 

develop a range of neurodevelopmental disorders that alter their learning, motor skills and social 
interactions. Some also exhibit behaviors that are associated with autism. This led Kim, Wang et al. 
to investigate whether a region of the brain—called the cerebellum—that has recently been 
associated with autism is also affected in a mouse model of neurofibromatosis type 1.

The cerebellum is best known for its role in coordinating movement, although it also has 

functions in cognition, behavior and other processes. Ras is involved in the development of the 
cerebellum; and so Kim, Wang et al. asked whether the loss of the Nf1 gene from cells in the mouse 
cerebellum might cause the neurodevelopmental defects associated with neurofibromatosis type 1.

Loss of Nf1 during early (but not in late) development of the cerebellum disrupted the normal 
organization of the nerve cells (or neurons) into specific cell layers. These defects were caused, in 
part, by the over-growth of a type of supporting cell—called glia cells—at a specific developmental 
stage—that would normally form a scaffold to help neurons migrate to their correct position. Nf1 
also controls the generation of the correct types of neurons in the right time and at right location 
during the early development of the cerebellum.

Next, Kim, Wang et al. treated newborn mice with a compound that inhibits Ras signaling via 

their mother's milk for 3 weeks. In mice with an inactive Nf1 gene, the treatment helped to prevent 
some defects in the cerebellum and the mice had improved motor coordination several months 
later. Whether this could form the basis of a preventative treatment for neurodevelopmental 
disorders associated with neurofibromatosis type 1 in humans remains a question for future work.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.002

Upadhyaya  and  Cooper,  2012).  RAS  mediates  multiple  signaling  pathways  including  extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) subfamily of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK), phosphatidylin-
ositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) (Schubbert et al., 
2007; Mendoza et al., 2011). In addition to the development of tumors in the peripheral and central 
nervous system (CNS), neurodevelopmental deficits are highly prevalent among children with NF1, 
negatively  impacting  cognition,  motor  function,  and  social  interaction  (Hyman  et  al.,  2005,  2006; 
Johnson et al., 2010; Krab et al., 2011; Lorenzo et al., 2011; Lehtonen et al., 2013; Walsh et al., 
2013; Garg et al., 2013a, 2013b; Adviento et al., 2014; Champion et al., 2014; Plasschaert et al., 
2014). While cognitive impairments associated with NF1 have been well documented, motor dysfunc-
tion, social and behavioral deficits including autism spectrum disorders (ASD) have only recently been 
established as common features of NF1 in childhood (Johnson et al., 2010; Krab et al., 2011; Lorenzo 
et al., 2011; Walsh et al., 2013; Garg et al., 2013a, 2013b; Champion et al., 2014). Approximately 
50–80% of children with NF1 have impairments in fine and gross motor function, which can be identi-
fied as early as at the toddler stage (Johnson et al., 2010; Krab et al., 2011; Lorenzo et al., 2011). 
One recent study has shown that impairments of gross motor skills and cognitive functioning in NF1 
are often co-morbidities, suggesting the potential existence of a common pathological mechanism 
underlying both motor and cognitive impairments (Champion et al., 2014).

The cerebellum is traditionally known as a motor organ, which controls both motor coordination 
and motor learning (Sillitoe and Joyner, 2007). However, it has been increasingly recognized that the 
cerebellum also plays a critical role in higher-order brain functions such as cognition, learning, affect 
and  behavior  (Schmahmann  and  Caplan,  2006;  Strick  et  al.,  2009;  Basson  and  Wingate,  2013). 
About 80% of individuals with ASD exhibit anatomical abnormalities in the cerebellum, among which 
gliosis and Purkinje cell loss are most commonly identified (Bailey et al., 1998; Palmen et al., 2004; 
Vargas et al., 2005; Fatemi et al., 2012). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies on children with 
ASD  discovered  increased  white  matter  and  reduced  gray  matter  volumes  in  the  cerebellum 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

2 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

(Courchesne et al., 2001; Bloss and Courchesne, 2007). In addition, T2-weighted hyperintensities in 
the cerebellum are one of the most consistent brain abnormalities observed in individuals with NF1 
(Feldmann et al., 2010; Payne et al., 2014). These findings suggest that individuals with NF1, partic-
ularly  those  with  co-morbidity  of  cognitive,  motor  and  social  deficits,  might  have  developmental 
abnormalities of the cerebellum.

During development, major cerebellar cell populations are derived from two germinal zones. Radial 
glial (RG) stem cells in the ventricular zone of the fourth ventricle (IV–VZ) give rise to all the GABAergic 
neuronal lineages—Purkinje cells and GABAergic interneurons including small deep cerebellar nuclei 
(DCN), Golgi, basket, and stellate cells (Sillitoe and Joyner, 2007; Buffo and Rossi, 2013). Cerebellar 
astrocytes including Bergmann glia (BG) are also derived from RG cells in the IV-VZ. A secondary ger-
minal zone in the anterior portion of the rhombic lip (RL) generates glutamatergic neuronal lineages, 
including large DCN, unipolar brush cells (UBCs), and granule cells (GCs) (Englund et al., 2006; Sillitoe 
and Joyner, 2007; Mugnaini et al., 2011; Buffo and Rossi, 2013). At the onset of mouse cerebellar 
neurogenesis, projection neurons (Purkinje cells and DCN) are first generated between embryonic day 
10.5–11.5 (E10.5–11.5) (Hatten, 1999). At E12.5, Math1 (also known as Atoh1)-expressing proliferat-
ing precursors migrate out of the RL and spread across the surface of the cerebellum to form the 
external granule layer (EGL) (Hatten, 1999). Around postnatal day 4–5 (P4–5), GC precursors (GCPs) 
in the EGL start to exit cell cycle and form a pre-migratory zone along the edge of the EGL. Post-
mitotic cells then migrate along the BG scaffold, across the molecular layer (ML), and form the internal 
granule layer (IGL), where they become mature GCs and form synapses with Purkinje cells through 
mossy fibers (Hatten, 1999; Sillitoe and Joyner, 2007). Besides GCs, RL-derived Math1+ precursors 
also generate the second type of glutamatergic excitatory interneurons, UBCs. UBCs exit the RL at 
perinatal stages and migrate through the white matter (WM) into the IGL of the cerebellum (Englund 
et al., 2005; Mugnaini et al., 2011). The molecular and cellular mechanisms regulating migration and 
lineage specification of GC/UBC precursors remain largely unknown.

It has been shown that the components of RAS/ERK and PI3K signaling pathways play diverse and 
critical roles in different cell types and at distinct stages during cerebellar development (Yue et al., 
2005; Fogarty et al., 2007; Lin et al., 2009; Yu et al., 2011; Müller Smith et al., 2012; Li et al., 
2014; Meier et al., 2014). However, recent studies have shown that Nf1 heterozygous mice exhibit no 
defect in cerebellum-specific motor tests and that children with NF1 do not appear to have a general 
dysfunction of the cerebellum (Krab et al., 2011; van der Vaart et al., 2011). These observations 
suggest that mono-allelic NF1/Nf1 inactivation is not sufficient to cause developmental and functional 
deficits in the cerebellum. Thus, we hypothesize that bi-allelic Nf1 inactivation in neural stem and pro-
genitor cells during development is required for producing cellular pathologies in the cerebellum. In 
this study, we utilize four genetically engineered mouse (GEM) models that target bi-allelic Nf1 inacti-
vation into different cell lineages or in the same lineage(s) at different stages during cerebellar devel-
opment. We identify a specific time window of susceptibility of glial and neuronal precursors to Nf1 
mutation during early, but not late stages of cerebellar development. Accordingly, we develop a tran-
sient therapeutic strategy during a neonatal window, which prevents cerebellar developmental defects 
and provides long-term benefits on motor functions.

Results
Bi-allelic inactivation of Nf1 at early developmental stages disrupts 
neuronal lamination in the cerebellum
We first utilized a Cre transgenic strain controlled by human glial fibrillary acidic protein promoter 
(hGFAP-cre)  to  inactivate  Nf1  in  RG  stem  cells  in  the  IV-VZ  around  E12.5  (Figure  1—figure  
supplement 1A,A′). RG cells targeted by hGFAP-cre in the E12.5 IV-VZ give rise to glutamatergic 
neuronal precursors populating the RL and astrocyte precursors producing astrocytes in cerebellar 
parenchyma (Zhu et al., 2005; Sillitoe and Joyner, 2007; Yang et al., 2008). Of note, the majority 
of oligodendrocytes in the cerebellum do not arise from RG cells in the IV-VZ, but from sources in 
the  ventral-lateral  mid/hindbrain  (that  was  also  targeted  by  hGFAP-cre)  (Yang  et  al.,  2008; 
Grimaldi et al., 2009; Mecklenburg et al., 2011). Glutamatergic neurons (including GCs) and glia, 
but not GABAergic Purkinje cells, were targeted by hGFAP-cre-mediated recombination, revealed 
by β-galactosidase (β-gal) expression of the Rosa26-LacZ reporter and PCR analysis (Figure 1—
figure supplement 1A,B,B′) (Soriano, 1999). The hGFAP-cre driven Nf1 conditional knockout mice 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

3 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

(hereafter referred to as Nf1hGFAPCKO) displayed severe defects in motor behaviors including abnor-
mal hind limb crossing and vertical projection of tails. Most of the Nf1hGFAPCKO mice had ataxic hind 
limbs and some exhibited a unique ‘handstand’ behavior during postnatal stages (Figure 1—figure 
supplement 1C; Video 1). The motor dysfunction observed in neural-specific Nf1hGFAPCKO mice sug-
gests possible defects in the cerebellum. As revealed by Hematoxylin & Eosin (H&E) staining, neuronal 
lamination in all folia of the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum was disrupted with a varying degree of severity 
(Figure 1A). In the severely affected areas (e.g., folia V/VI), the patterning of Calbindin+ Purkinje cells 
was disrupted, and failed to form the single Purkinje cell layer (PCL) observed in controls (Figure 1B). 
Since  hGFAP-cre  was  not  targeted  to  Purkinje  cells,  the  disorganized  Purkinje  cells  still  expressed 
neurofibromin (Figure 1C; Figure 1—figure supplement 1B) (Zhu et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2008). 
Thus, the disrupted patterning of Purkinje cells must be non-cell-autonomous, and secondary to Nf1 
inactivation in other cerebellar neurons and/or glia. To further confirm the notion, we utilized L7-cre to 
inactivate Nf1 specifically in Purkinje cells (Figure 1—figure supplement 1D) (Tsai et al., 2012). No 
overt defect was identified in the Nf1L7CKO cerebellum, confirming that Nf1 is relatively dispensable 
in the development of Purkinje cells (Figure 1—figure supplement 1E,F).

In  contrast  to  the  normal  cerebellum  with  three  distinct  laminar  layers—ML,  PCL  and  IGL,  the 
boundary between these three layers in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum was less clearly defined, and the 
cell  number  in  the  ML  was  dramatically  increased  with  a  concomitant  reduction  of  cells  in  the  IGL 
(Figure 1A–A′′; Figure 1—figure supplement 1A′). Some of the abnormally accumulated cells in the 
Nf1hGFAPCKO ML were found on the pial surface of the cerebellum, corresponding to the EGL—a struc-
ture that transiently exists during development, but disappears after the completion of GC migration 
(arrows, Figure 1Ab′′). No significant difference was found in the total number of NeuN+ neurons in 
the ML and IGL (per surface area) between the control and Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. Instead, the distribu-
tion of NeuN+ neurons was greatly altered between the control and Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellar cortex—
the number of NeuN+ neurons was increased over 20-fold in the mutant ML (Figure 1D,D′). While no 
cells in the control ML expressed GABA receptor alpha 6 subunit (GABARα6), a marker for mature 
GCs,  60%  of  abnormally  accumulated  neurons  in  the  Nf1hGFAPCKO  ML  were  positive  for  GABARα6 
(Figure 1D,D′′). These observations are most consistent with a model wherein a subset of Nf1-deficient 
GCs fail to migrate inward from the EGL, across 
ML and PCL, to the IGL. The arrested migration 
of  GCs  leads  to  abnormal  neuronal  patterning 
and lamination of the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum.

We next investigated the integrity of the BG 
scaffold—an essential glial structure for GC migra-
tion  during  development  (Sillitoe  and  Joyner, 
2007).  In  the  control  cerebellum,  BG  cells  were 
located  either  immediately  below  or  inter-
spersed between Purkinje cell bodies, forming 
a Purkinje cell and BG (PC/BG) monolayer (arrows, 
Figure 1E,F) (Buffo and Rossi, 2013). In contrast, 
Nf1-deficient  BG  cells  failed  to  form  a  PC/BG 
monolayer,  which  appeared  to  be  caused  by 
excess  number  and  mispositioning  of  BG  cells 
(arrows, Figure 1E,E′,F). A strong correlation was 
observed between the severity of neuronal pat-
terning  defects  and  the  abnormalities  in  the 
number and position of BG cells and the integrity 
of the PC/BG monolayer (Figure 1F). Importantly, 
the capacity of Nf1-deficient BG cells to extend 
their processes to the pial surface was relatively 
uncompromised—this was even true for some of 
the BG cells that were located in the areas out-
side  the  PC/BG  layer  in  the  Nf1hGFAPCKO  cere-
bellum  (Figure  1G).  Based  on  these  results,  we 
propose  a  model  wherein  inactivation  of  Nf1 
during early embryonic stages overproduces BG 

Video 1. Behavioral defects of Nf1hGFAPCKO mice 
before and after MEKi treatment. This video illustrates 
the typical phenotypes seen in vehicle-treated and 
untreated Nf1hGFAPCKO mice compared to controls 
including scruffy fur, unbalanced gait, vertical projection 
of the tail, hyperactivity, hind-limb crossing, and 
hand-standing. Following MEKi treatment, the 
G-responders appear similar to the controls except the 
vertical projection of the tail, while the P-responders 
are more similar to the vehicle-treated mutants. All the 
mice in this video are P21 except the mouse with the 
hand-standing phenotype, which was videotaped at  
4 months of age.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.003

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

4 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 1. Nf1 inactivation during early cerebellar development disrupts neuronal lamination and causes BG abnormalities. (A) Sagittal sections 
from control and Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebella at 2 months of age were stained with H&E and imaged at three increasing magnifications. Each cerebellar 
folium is numbered by Roman numerals. Arrows in (A, B) highlight folia V/VI where mutants exhibited extra foliation and arrows in (B′′) point to the cells 
clustered in the ML and on the pial surface of the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. The total number of cells in the ML and IGL were quantified in (A′) and (A′′). 
(B) Cerebellar sections were stained for Calbindin (CalB) /NeuN. Arrows point to mispositioned CalB+ Purkinje cells. (C) Sections from adult Nf1hGFAPCKO 
cerebellum were stained with β-gal/CalB and Nf1. Purkinje cells (arrows) were β-gal− and expressed Nf1. (D) Cerebellar sections were stained for NeuN 
and GABARα6. The insets are the high magnification images of the boxed areas highlighting the co-localizing cells. The number of NeuN+ cells in the 
Figure 1. Continued on next page

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

5 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 1. Continued
ML and IGL were quantified in (D′) and the percentage of NeuN+ cells in the IGL among total NeuN+ cells (ML + IGL) is shown. The percentage of 
GABARα6+NeuN+/NeuN+ cells in the ML was quantified in (D′′). (E) The cell bodies (arrows) and processes of BG in control and mutant cerebella were 
labeled by BLBP staining. The total number of BLBP+ BG cells was quantified in (E′). (F) Sections were stained for CalB/BLBP. Boxed areas compare the 
Purkinje cell alignment in the less affected areas (lower box) and severely affected areas (upper box) in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. Note the correlation 
between increased number/misalignment of BG and the severity of the disruption of Purkinje cell layer. (G) Sections were stained for CalB/GFAP. Boxed 
areas highlight the severely disrupted BG alignment and Purkinje cell patterning. All the quantification data are presented as mean ± SEM. DAPI labels 
the nuclei. Scale bars: 50 μm.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.004
The following figure supplement is available for figure 1:
Figure supplement 1. Purkinje cell defects in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum are non-cell-autonomous. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.005

cells, thus impairing the formation of the PC/BG monolayer, and consequently, the alignment of the 
BG scaffold. The defective BG scaffold non-cell-autonomously arrests GC migration and subsequently 
disrupts Purkinje cell patterning during cerebellar development.
Nf1 inactivation increases astrocyte proliferation at an intermediate 
precursor stage
We investigated the mechanism by which Nf1 inactivation during early cerebellar development over-
produced BG cells in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. No defect was observed in the overall structure and 
the distribution of RL-derived Math1+ neuronal precursors in the EGL, Purkinje cells or BLBP+ cells in 
the E17.5 Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum (Figure  2—figure  supplement  1A). Furthermore, no difference 
was identified in the number of BLBP+ RG cells (including proliferating BLBP+Ki67+ population) in the 
IV-VZ  (Figure  2—figure  supplement  1B).  However,  an  increased  number  of  both  total  BLBP+  and 
proliferating  BLBP+Ki67+  cells  was  observed  in  the  prospective  white  matter  (PWM)  of  the  E17.5 
Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum compared to controls (Figure 2A,A′). More importantly, mitotic index, deter-
mined by the ratio of proliferating BLBP+Ki67+ cells to the total BLBP+ cells, was significantly increased 
in the E17.5 Nf1hGFAPCKO PWM (Figure 2A,A′). These observations suggest that Nf1 specifically con-
strains the proliferation of astrocyte precursors in the PWM, but not multipotent RG cells of the IV-VZ 
in the E17.5 cerebellum. At P0.5, both Purkinje cells and BLBP+ BG cells (except for those populating 
future  folia  IX  and  X)  were  situated  into  a  more  defined  Purkinje  cell  plate  (or  rudimentary  PC/BG 
layer); BG cells, particularly those in the anterior cerebellum, underwent differentiation extending their 
GFAP+BLBP+ fibers to the pial surface (Figure 2—figure supplement 1C). Unexpectedly, the increased 
mitotic index was no longer detected in the more differentiated BLBP+ BG cells in the anterior folia, 
but only in the posterior folia (IX and X) of the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum where BG cells had not formed 
a rudimentary PC/BG layer at P0.5 (Figure 2B,B′,2C,C′; Figure 2—figure supplement 1D). The differ-
entiation of BG cells was accompanied by the transition of (1) the anatomical location from the PWM 
to  rudimentary  PC/BG  layer  and  (2)  the  subcellular  expression  of  BLBP  from  nuclei  to  cytoplasm. 
Specifically, BLBP staining in the anterior folia of the P0.5 control cerebellum became largely cytoplas-
mic, while a robust nuclear BLBP staining was typically found in less differentiated BLBP+ cells in both 
the E17.5 control and Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum (arrows, Figure 2A). Consistently, an increase of cells 
with strong nuclear BLBP staining in the P0.5 Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum was identified, suggesting a 
persistent increase of proliferating BG cells into postnatal stages (Figure 2D). Similarly, BLBP+ cells in 
the  PWM,  the  precursors  of  WM  astrocytes,  still  exhibited  an  increased  mitotic  index  in  the  P0.5 
Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum (Figure 2—figure supplement 1D–D′′). At P8 when BG cells had formed 
a  rudimentary  PC/BG  layer  throughout  the  cerebellum,  the  mitotic  index  of  BLBP+  BG  cells  was  no 
longer increased in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum, despite a significant increase of both total BLBP+ and 
proliferating BLBP+Ki67+ BG cells (Figure 2—figure supplement 1E,E′). Together, these results suggest 
that Nf1 constrains the proliferation of the BG/astrocyte lineage cells specifically at an intermediate 
precursor stage located in the PWM, but not at an earlier RG stem cell stage or a more differentiated 
BG stage, thereby identifying a window of susceptibility of astrocyte precursors to Nf1 mutation.
Nf1 is not required for late stages of BG development
At P8, control BG cells labeled by nuclear Cre staining formed a rudimentary 2 to 3 cell-layer lining 
within the APC+ Purkinje cell layer (Figure 2E). In contrast, excess BG cells failed to form a similar 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

6 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 2. Nf1 inactivation leads to increased proliferation of intermediate glial precursors and subsequent glial/neuronal defects during perinatal 
development. (A) Sections of control and Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebella were stained for BLBP and Ki67. Boxed areas in (A) are shown in high magnification on 
the right. Dashed lines delineate the boundary between the prospective white matter (PWM) and cerebellar cortex. IV, fourth ventricle. The number and 
mitotic index of BLBP+ cells were quantified in (A′). (B, C) Cerebellar sections were stained for BLBP/Ki67 and imaged at anterior fissure (B) and posterior 
fissure (C). Dashed lines delineate the boundary of the PWM. The mitotic index of BLBP+ cells in respective fissures was quantified in (B′) and (C′). 
(D) Sections were stained for GFAP and BLBP. BLBP in the mutant cerebellum exhibit strong nuclear staining (arrows). (E) Sections were stained for Cre/
GFAP (A–B′) and APC/BLBP (C, D). White bars mark the rudimentary PC/BGL in the control and the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. The arrow points to an 
abnormal BG cell located close to the EGL in the mutant cerebellum. (C, D) Arrowheads point to BG cell bodies. (F) Sections were stained for CalB/
GFAP. Arrowheads point to BG cell bodies. (G) Sections were stained by H&E. Lower panels are the high magnification view of folia V/VI. Arrows point to 
folia V/VI (upper panels) where the mutants exhibit the extra foliation. In lower panels, arrows point to the cell clusters in the mutant ML. The total cell 
number in the ML was quantified in (G′). (H) Sections were stained for NeuN. The total number of NeuN+ cells in the ML was quantified in (H′). All the 
quantification data are presented as mean ± SEM. DAPI labels the nuclei. Scale bars: 50 μm.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.006
The following figure supplement is available for figure 2:
Figure supplement 1. Nf1 regulates cerebellar astrocyte proliferation during an immediate precursor stage. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.007

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

7 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

PC/BG  layer,  but  were  aberrantly  distributed  throughout  the  Nf1hGFAPCKO  cerebellar  cortex  
(Figure 2E,F). Consequently, some Nf1-deficient BG cells extended their processes from ectopic loca-
tions  of  the  cerebellum  including  the  WM,  ML  and  IGL,  accompanied  by  misalignment  of  the  BG 
scaffold (Figure 2E,F; Figure 2—figure supplement 1F). Similar to the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum in 
adulthood, disrupted patterning of GCs and Purkinje cells often co-existed with the misalignment of 
BG cells at P8 (Figure 2F; Figure 2—figure supplement 1F). Indeed, all major defects observed in BG 
cells, GCs and Purkinje cells of the adult Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum were identified at P8, suggesting that 
these defects manifest during neonatal stages (Figure 2G–H′; Figure 2—figure supplement 1F–H′′). 
These  results  supports  a  model  wherein  overproduction  of  astrocyte  precursors  during  embryonic 
stages is the primary defect causing both glial and neuronal abnormalities in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cere-
bellum. To rule out a role of Nf1 in late stages of glial development, we sought to more specifically 
inactivate Nf1 in glial cell lineages during late embryonic stages by employing an inducible system. This 
inducible system utilized a Nestin-creER (NCreER) transgene, which can be activated in Nestin-expressing 
neural  stem  and  progenitor  cells  by  tamoxifen  (TM)  treatment  (Figure  3—figure  supplement  1A) 
(Burns et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2012). Upon a single TM pulse at E17.5, NCreER-targeted cells ana-
lyzed at P21 were restricted to glial lineage cells in both the control and Nf1NCreERCKO cerebellum with 
only one exception in folium X, where a significant number of both glia and GCs in the IGL were tar-
geted (Figure 3A,B; Figure 3—figure supplement 1B,C). Given the sequential differentiation from 
the anterior to posterior cerebellum, this targeting strategy would inactivate Nf1 in more differenti-
ated  glial  cells  in  the  anterior  folia  compared  to  those  in  the  posterior  folia.  No  alteration  in  the 
number of BLBP+ cells or the BG scaffold was observed in any of the anterior folia (I to V) between the 
control and Nf1NCreERCKO cerebellum (Figure 3A). Furthermore, neurons did not abnormally accumu-
late in the ML of the anterior Nf1NCreERCKO folia (Figure 3A,A′; Figure 3—figure supplement 1D,D′). 
In folium X, the number of Nf1-deficient BLBP+ cells (BLBP+β-gal+) was significantly increased, though 
this was subtle compared to the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum (Figure 3B,C). Indeed, the other posterior 
folia (e.g., VI–IX) exhibited a slightly, but significantly increased number of Nf1-deficient BLBP+ cells 
(Figure 3—figure supplement 1C,C′). The overproduction of BLBP+β-gal+ BG cells in the posterior 
folia of the Nf1NCreERCKO cerebellum appeared to be caused by cell-autonomous Nf1 inactivation, as 
the number of non-NCreER-targeted BLBP+β-gal- cells in the same areas was not altered (Figure 3B,C). 
Importantly, the overproduction of BLBP+ BG cells was accompanied by focal misalignment of the BG 
scaffold and abnormal accumulation of both Nf1-deficient (NeuN+β-gal+) and Nf1-intact (NeuN+β-gal−) 
neurons in the ML of the Nf1NCreERCKO cerebellum (Figure 3B,D; Figure 3—figure supplement 1E). 
These results suggest that overproduction of this particular astrocytic lineage causes impaired forma-
tion of the PC/BG monolayer and BG scaffold, non-cell-autonomously arresting GC migration.

Cell-autonomous function of Nf1 in the glutamatergic interneuronal 
lineages
To determine whether Nf1 also plays a cell-autonomous role in the glutamatergic neuronal lineages, 
we utilized Math1-cre, which specifically targets Math1+ neuronal precursors in the developing RL that 
give rise to both GCs and UBCs (Englund et al., 2006; Schuller et al., 2008). Math1-cre-mediated 
recombination was almost exclusively restricted to the cells in the IGL of the adult cerebellum (Figure 4A). 
Double staining of β-gal and other lineage markers showed that β-gal+ cells were restricted to GCs 
in the IGL, but not Purkinje cells or glial cells, including BG cells (Figure 4B,B′). No defect in Purkinje 
cells  or  glial  cells,  particularly  the  BG  scaffold,  was  observed  in  the  adult  Nf1Math1CKO  cerebellum 
(Figure 4B,B′). Consequently, unlike the severely disrupted Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum, the Nf1Math1CKO 
cerebellum was relatively unimpaired (Figure 4—figure supplement 1A). However, the Nf1Math1CKO 
cerebellum did exhibit one major defect observed in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum—abnormal accumu-
lation of cells in the ML including some on the pial surface (arrows, Figure 4A,B–B′′; Figure 4—figure 
supplement  1A,A′).  The  number  of  NeuN+β-gal+,  but  not  NeuN+β-gal−  neurons,  was  significantly 
increased, suggesting that the increased neuronal density in the ML of the Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum 
was caused by abnormal accumulation of Nf1-deficient NeuN+ neurons in a cell-autonomous manner 
(Figure 4A,B,B′′). Despite that no defect in the BG scaffold was observed, abnormal accumulation of 
neurons was evident in the ML of the P8 Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum, suggesting a developmental defect 
during neonatal stages (Figure 4—figure supplement 1B). To investigate the mechanism underlying 
the arrested migration of Nf1-deficient GCs, we performed BrdU pulse-chase experiments to deter-
mine the time course of the differentiation and migration of newly generated GCs during neonatal 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

8 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 3. Nf1 is not required for BG function in late developmental stages. Control and Nf1NcreERCKO mice were tamoxifen (TM)-induced at E17.5 and 
analyzed at P21. Adjacent sections were triple-stained for BLBP/β-gal/NeuN or GFAP/β-gal/NeuN staining, and were imaged at folium V (A) and folium 
X (B). NeuN staining (*, Alexa 647) was artificially converted to green. The insets in (B) highlight BLBP+β-gal+ cells and NeuN+β-gal+ cells in the boxed 
areas. The number of BLBP+ cells (A′, C) and NeuN+ cells (D) was quantified and their co-localization with β-gal was compared. Note that in folia V, none 
of the NeuN+ cells co-localized with β-gal. Arrows point to representative co-localizing cells, and arrowheads label non-co-localizing cells. All the 
quantification data are presented as mean ± SEM. DAPI labels the nuclei. Scale bars: 50 μm.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.008
The following figure supplement is available for figure 3:
Figure supplement 1. Inactivation of Nf1 in Nestin-expressing progenitor cells at E17.5 induces overproduction of glia cells in the posterior cerebellar folia. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.009

stages. We analyzed P8 control and Nf1Math1CKO cerebella 24, 32 and 48 hr after BrdU pulse by deter-
mining the location and differentiation status of BrdU-labeled cells. 24 hr after pulse, BrdU+ cells in 
both the control and Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum remained exclusively in the EGL and exhibited similar 
cell cycle profiles, suggesting that Nf1 is not required for proliferation and cell-cycle exit of GC precur-
sors (GCPs) (Figure 4—figure supplement 1C–C′′). However, 32 hr after BrdU pulse, a subset of BrdU+ 
cells in the control cerebellum started departing from the EGL and entered the ML, not yet reaching 
the IGL (Figure 4C). While migrating GCs in the control ML did not express MAP2, a marker for mature 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

9 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 4. Neuron-specific Nf1 inactivation leads to cell-autonomous defects in the glutamatergic interneuron lineages. (A) X-gal staining on P21 control 
and Nf1Math1CKO cerebella labeled cells that underwent Math1-cre-mediated recombination. Arrows point to the abnormally accumulated cells in the ML 
of the mutant cerebellum. (B, B′) Cerebellar sections were stained for NeuN/β-gal and Cal/β-gal, and GFAP/β-gal and BLBP/β-gal. The total number of 
NeuN+/β-gal+ and NeuN+/β-gal− cell per high magnification field was quantified in (B′′). (C–D) Control and Nf1Math1CKO mice were analyzed 32 hr and 
48 hr after BrdU-pulse at P8. Cerebellar sections were stained for BrdU/MAP2 and imaged at folium V. High magnification images comparing the nuclear 
morphology of BrdU+ cells are shown in (C′) and (D′). (E, E′) Cerebella sections from P8 control and Nf1Math1CKO mice were stained for Tbr2/MAP2 (E) and 
Tbr2/NeuN (E′) and imaged at folium V. The inset in (E) shows an example of Tbr2+MAP2+ cells in the mutant ML. (F, G) 24 hr and 48 hr after BrdU-pulse, 
cerebellar sections from P8 control and Nf1Math1CKO mice were stained for Tbr2/BrdU. The distribution of Tbr2+BrdU+ cells (arrows) in the EGL-ML-IGL 
Figure 4. Continued on next page

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

10 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 4. Continued
was quantified 24 hr and 48 hr after BrdU-pulse in (F′) and (G′), respectively. (H) Golgi staining was performed on P8 cerebellar sections. Cells with UBC 
morphology are highlighted by red arrows and shown in high magnification (lower panels). Dashed red lines delineate the ML. PC, Purkinje cell; GC, 
granule cell; bt, the brush tip of UBCs. (I) Cerebellar sections from adult control and Nf1Math1CKO cerebella were stained for Tbr2/NeuN and imaged at 
folium V. (I′) The number of Tbr2+NeuN+ (arrows) and Tbr2+NeuN− cells (arrowheads) in the ML of folium V per high magnification image was quantified 
and compared with Nf1hGFAPCKO mice. The percentage of Tbr2+NeuN+ cells among total NeuN+ cells was also quantified. (J) A proposed model 
summarizes the role of Nf1 in preventing the ectopic differentiation of GCPs into UBCs. As a comparison, the timeline of normal UBC genesis is shown in (J′).  
All the quantification data are presented as mean ± SEM. DAPI labels the nuclei. Scale bars: 50 μm.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.010
The following figure supplement is available for figure 4:
Figure supplement 1. Neuron-specific Nf1 inactivation does not impact on the proliferation or migration of GCPs. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.011

GCs in the IGL, and had nuclei with a spindle-shaped migrating morphology, many BrdU+ cells in the 
Nf1Math1CKO ML already acquired MAP2 expression with rounded nuclei—typical neuronal differentia-
tion features for mature GCs in the IGL (arrows, Figure 4C,C′). After 48-hr BrdU pulse, BrdU+MAP2+ cells 
in the Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum progressively accumulated in the ML and EGL whereas control BrdU+ cells 
did not express MAP2 until they reached the IGL (Figure 4D; Figure 4—figure supplement 1D,D′). 
Newly generated neurons were abnormally accumulated in the ML/EGL of the Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum, 
leading to an increased number of differentiated BrdU+Ki67− and p27+ cells in the ML/EGL with a con-
comitant reduction in the IGL (Figure 4—figure supplement 1E,E′,F,F′). These observations suggest 
that a subset of Nf1-deficient GCPs undergo accelerated and premature neuronal differentiation, thereby 
arresting their migration in the EGL and ML. This conclusion was further supported by in vitro studies. 
2 days after being plated in culture, significantly more Nf1-deficient GCPs expressed MAP2 than control 
cells, confirming an accelerated neuronal differentiation rate in a cell-autonomous manner (Figure 4— 
figure supplement 1G,G′). Importantly, Nf1-deficient GCs could efficiently interact with wild-type 
glia in a co-culture system and migrated normally in a trans-well migration assay (Figure 4—figure 
supplement 1H,H′). Together, both in vivo and in vitro assays argue that instead of causing defects 
directly  on  migration,  Nf1  inactivation  promotes  premature  neuronal  differentiation  of  a  subset  of 
GCPs, leading to abnormal accumulation of differentiated neurons in the ML and EGL.

Fate-specification defects in Nf1-deficient glutamatergic neuronal lineages
Strikingly, many of the prematurely differentiated neurons in the ML of the P8 Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum 
expressed  Tbr2,  a  marker  specific  for  UBCs  in  the  cerebellum  (Figure  4E,E′).  UBCs  are  the  other 
known  RL-derived  glutamatergic  interneurons  that  are  enriched  in  folia  responsible  for  vestibular 
motor function (folia IX and X) (Mugnaini et al., 2011). While GCs arise from GCPs in the EGL and 
migrate across ML to IGL between P4–P21, Tbr2+ UBCs exit the RL during late embryonic stages, and 
then migrate through the PWM into the IGL until P10 (Englund  et  al.,  2006; Sillitoe  and  Joyner, 
2007; Mugnaini et al., 2011). While Tbr2+ UBCs were rarely identified in the control ML (Englund 
et al., 2006), Tbr2+ cells including the newly generated Tbr2+BrdU+ cells were readily identified in the 
P8 Nf1Math1CKO EGL and ML (Figure 4E,E′,F,F′). Tbr2 expression was ectopically acquired in a subset 
of  newly  generated  cells  even  before  migrating  out  of  the  EGL,  and  over  time  these  Tbr2+BrdU+ 
double-positive cells progressively accumulated from the EGL, ML to IGL (Figure 4F,F′,G,G′). These 
observations demonstrate that Nf1 inactivation ectopically generates Tbr2+ UBCs from GCPs in the 
EGL, which appear to migrate along the same pathway as GCs. More importantly, cells with the classic 
morphology of UBCs were identified in the ML of the P8 Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum, but not in the 
control cerebellum, indicating that these Tbr2+ cells not only acquire UBC-specific Tbr2 expression, 
but  also  undergo  morphological  differentiation  of  UBCs  (Figure  4H)  (Mugnaini  and  Floris,  1994). 
Consequently, approximately 30–40% of abnormally accumulated NeuN+ neurons in the ML of the 
adult Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum expressed Tbr2 (Figure 4I,I′). Together, these observations identify cell-
autonomous Nf1 functions in suppressing GCPs to ectopically differentiate into UBCs (Figure 4J,J′).

Ectopic generation of Tbr2+NeuN+ UBCs is responsible for non-GC 
accumulation in the ML of the adult Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum
Ectopic  generation  of  Tbr2+  UBCs  from  Nf1-deficient  GCPs  prompted  us  to  investigate  whether 
GABARα6-negative neurons abnormally accumulated in the ML of the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum were 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

11 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

UBCs (Figure 1D,D′′). Indeed, a dramatic increase of Tbr2+ cells was also observed in the ML through-
out  the  adult  Nf1hGFAPCKO  cerebellum,  which  was  most  evident  in  folia  V/VI  (Figure  5A–A′′).  The 
increase of Tbr2+ cells in the ML (98%) and IGL (94%) of the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum was almost 
entirely contributed by UBCs that expressed a moderate level of Tbr2 as well as NeuN (Tbr2+NeuN+) 
(arrows, Figure 5B,B′). Almost all UBCs in the control folium V expressed high levels of Tbr2, but no 
NeuN (Tbr2highNeuN−) and were mainly distributed in the IGL (arrowheads, Figure 5B,B′). It should be 
noted that the number of Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs was not significantly different between the control and 
the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. The distinction between Tbr2+NeuN+ and Tbr2highNeuN− UBC popula-
tions was further supported by the different percentage of these two types of UBCs expressing a high 
level of Calretinin (CRhigh). CRhigh is a marker for a subset of UBCs due to its low expression in granule 
cells (Mugnaini et al., 2011). Tbr2+NeuN+ UBCs in the ML and IGL of the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum 
expressed CRhigh at a significantly lower percentage (36% and 38%) than Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs (67%) 
typically observed in the IGL (Figure 5—figure supplement 1A,A′). Importantly, the absolute number 
of Tbr2+NeuN+ UBCs was similar in the ML of folium V between the Nf1Math1CKO and Nf1hGFAPCKO 
cerebellum, further supporting the notion that ectopic generation of these UBCs results from loss 
of cell-autonomous Nf1 function in the glutamatergic neuronal lineages (Figure 4I′). Similar to the 
Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum, ectopic Tbr2+NeuN+ UBCs were continuously generated in the ML and IGL of 
the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum during postnatal stages (arrows, Figure 5—figure supplement 1B,B′,C,C′), 
well beyond the developmental window of the generation of control Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs (Figure 4J,J′). 
Together, these observations demonstrate that the Tbr2+ UBCs ectopically generated in both the 
Nf1Math1CKO and Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum are different from those previously described in the nor-
mal cerebellum in 6 critical aspects: (1) the marker expression, Tbr2+NeuN+ vs Tbr2highNeuN−, (2) the 
low vs high percentage expressing CRhigh, (3) the location, ML and IGL vs IGL, (4) the developmental 
origin, precursors in the EGL vs RL, (5) the timing of birth, neonatal vs embryonic stages, and (6) the 
migratory pathway, EGL-ML-IGL vs RL-PWM-IGL. Thus, we suggest the existence of two UBC sublin-
eages.  Importantly,  the  majority  of  GABARα6-negative  neurons  were  Tbr2+NeuN+  cells,  while  no 
significant  difference  was  observed  in  GABAergic  neurons  between  the  control  and  Nf1hGFAPCKO 
cerebellum (Figure 5—figure supplement 1D,E,E′). These observations suggest that Tbr2+NeuN+ 
UBCs  are  the  major  contributors  to  the  non-GCs  abnormally  accumulated  in  the  ML  of  the 
Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum (Figure 1D–D′′).

Glia-dependent migratory defect of Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs
As observed in the rest of mutant folia, the number of Tbr2+ cells was also significantly increased in the 
ML of the folium X of the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum (Figure 5C,C′; Figure 5—figure supplement 1E). 
However, the number of Tbr2+ cells was unexpectedly reduced in the IGL of folium X of the Nf1hGFAPCKO 
cerebellum concomitant with ectopic presence of Tbr2+ cells in the surrounding WM (Figure 5C,C′; 
Figure 5—figure supplement 2A). As in Folium V, the Tbr2+NeuN+ UBC sublineage contributed to 
almost the entire UBC population in the ML of both the control (97%) and Nf1hGFAPCKO (99%) folium X 
(Figure 5D,D′). Similarly, Tbr2+NeuN+ UBCs were indeed increased in the IGL of Nf1hGFAPCKO folium 
X,  and  thus  the  reduction  of  Tbr2+  UBCs  was  exclusively  attributed  to  a  decreased  number  of 
Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs in the IGL (Figure 5D,D′). Consistently, UBCs in both the Nf1hGFAPCKO WM and 
IGL were the Tbr2highNeuN− sublineage, which was normally located in the IGL of the control cere-
bellum  with  a  higher  percentage  expressing  CRhigh  (Figure  5—figure  supplement  2B–B′′).  More 
importantly, the total number of Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs was almost identical, when the number of the 
Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs in the WM and IGL of the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum was combined to compare 
with the number of Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs in the IGL of the control cerebellum, suggesting arrested migra-
tion in the WM (Figure 5D–D′′). Consistently, no alteration in the number and distribution of Tbr2+ 
UBCs was observed at early stages of UBC development before they migrated out of the RL or entered 
the PWM during perinatal stages (Figure 5—figure supplement 2C,C′). Instead, abnormal accumulation 
of Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs in the Nf1hGFAPCKO WM was evident at P8, a time point when normal UBCs had 
already  migrated  through  the  PWM  and  entered  the  IGL  (Figure  5—figure  supplement  2D,D′). 
Together, these results suggest that the abnormal accumulation of Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs in the WM of 
the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum was caused by arrested migration of UBCs in the PWM on the way from 
the RL to the IGL during neonatal development (Englund et al., 2006).

Importantly, no ectopic Tbr2+ UBCs were observed in the WM of the Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum, sug-
gesting a non-cell-autonomous mechanism (Figure 5F). Consistently, abnormally increased numbers 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

12 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 5. Glia-independent and -dependent UBC abnormalities in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. (A) The overall expression pattern of Tbr2 in the adult 
control and Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebella was compared. High magnification images were merged to provide a high-resolution view. (A′) Tbr2 staining in folium 
V/VI was compared. Arrows point to Tbr2+ cells in the ML. The total number of Tbr2+ cell in the ML of each folium was quantified in (A′′). (B) Sections 
Figure 5. Continued on next page

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

13 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 5. Continued

were stained for Tbr2/NeuN and imaged at folium V. The number of Tbr2+NeuN+ cells and Tbr2+NeuN− cells per high magnification field was quantified 
in (B′). The percentage of Tbr2+NeuN+ cells among Tbr2+ cells is illustrated. (C) Tbr2 staining in folium X was compared. The total number of Tbr2+ cells 
in the ML, IGL and WM of folia X was quantified in (C′). (D) Sections were stained for Tbr2/NeuN and imaged at folium X. The number of Tbr2+NeuN+ 
cells and Tbr2+NeuN− cells per high magnification field was quantified in (D′) and (D′′). The percentage of Tbr2+NeuN+ cells is illustrated. (E) Sections 
were stained for GFAP and BLBP and imaged at folium X. The total number of GFAP+ cells in the WM was quantified in (E′). (F) Cerebellar sections 
from control and Nf1Math1CKO were stained for Tbr2/NeuN and compared. (G–G′′) Control and Nf1NcreERCKO mice were TM-induced at E17.5 and 
analyzed at P21. Tbr2/β-gal staining was imaged at folium X (G) and high magnification views of the white matter (G′) and ventral folium X (G′′) 
were compared. Dashed lines mark the border between the WM and IGL in folium X. Of note, ectopic Tbr2+ cells in the WM of Nf1NcreERCKO were 
exclusively β-gal-negative (Nf1-wildtype) (G′). In contrast, the increase of Tbr2+ cells in the mutant ML was mostly contributed by Tbr2+β-gal+ cells 
(Nf1-deficient) (arrows, G′′). Arrows label co-localizing cells and arrowheads label non-co-localizing cells. All the quantification data are presented as 
mean ± SEM. DAPI labels the nuclei. Scale bars: 50 μm.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.012
The following figure supplements are available for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. The ectopic accumulation of Tbr2+ UBC in the ML of Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebella occurs during postnatal development. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.013
Figure supplement 2. A subpopulation of UBCs in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebella fail to migrate into the IGL and are ectopically present in the WM during 
postnatal development. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.014

of GFAP+BLBP− astrocytes were observed in the enlarged WM of the adult Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum, 
raising the possibility that excess astrocytes in the WM could impede the migration of UBCs from 
the WM to the IGL (Figure 5E,E′). In the TM-induced Nf1NCreERCKO cerebellum where the number of 
glial cells was increased specifically in the posterior folia, a subpopulation of Tbr2high UBCs, all of 
which were wild-type for Nf1 (not labeled by β-gal expression), ectopically accumulated in the WM 
of folium X (arrowheads, Figure 5G,G′). Of note, excess Tbr2+ UBCs in the ML of the TM-induced 
Nf1NCreERCKO  cerebellum  appears  to  result  from  overproduction  of  Nf1-deficient  Tbr2+β-gal+ 
UBCs—a cell-autonomous mechanism as described in the Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum (Figure 5G,G′′). 
These  results  suggest  that  overproduction  of  astrocytes  in  the  WM  of  the  Nf1hGFAPCKO  and 
Nf1NCreERCKO cerebella produces a physical barrier that exerts non-cell-autonomous effect, arresting 
migration of Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs in the WM.

MEK inhibition rescues neuronal defects in the developing Nf1Math1CKO 
cerebellum
To develop a therapeutic strategy to rescue cerebellar defects caused by Nf1 inactivation, we analyzed 
three  major  downstream  effectors  of  Ras-mediated  signaling  pathways:  Erk/MAPK,  PI3K/Akt  and 
mTORC1. Although Western blot analysis showed a significant reduction of neurofibromin expression, 
Erk/MAPK  was  the  only  downstream  signaling  pathway  that  was  consistently  hyperactivated  in 
Nf1Math1CKO cerebella (Figure 6A). Consistent with the specificity of Math1-cre transgene, cell cultures 
with  enriched  P6  GCPs  showed  almost  a  complete  loss  of  neurofibromin  expression  with  a  robust 
increase  of  Erk  activation  (Figure  6A′).  A  high  level  of  phosphorylated  Erk  (p-Erk)  expression  was 
observed in a subset of IGL cells, while a low level in the ML and a complete absence of p-Erk in the 
EGL was found in the control cerebellum at P8 (Figure 6B). The pattern of p-Erk expression is con-
sistent with a possible role of a high level of Erk signaling in neuronal differentiation. A robust increase 
of p-Erk expression was observed in the P8 Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum including the inner edge of the 
EGL (pre-migratory zone), the ML, and IGL (Figure 6B). Importantly, the NeuN+ neurons abnormally 
accumulated  in  the  ML  of  the  P8  Nf1Math1CKO  cerebellum  expressed  a  high  level  of  p-Erk  (arrows, 
Figure 6B). These results demonstrate that Nf1 is a major regulator that suppresses Erk signaling in 
migrating GCs in the pre-migratory EGL and migratory zone (ML) of the developing cerebellum. To 
test whether hyperactive Erk signaling is responsible for Nf1-deficient GCPs to undergo premature 
differentiation and ectopically adopt a UBC fate, we treated newborn control and Nf1Math1CKO pups 
with  a  MEK  inhibitor  (PD0325901)  or  vehicle  from  P0.5  to  P21  for  3  weeks  (Sebolt-Leopold  and 
Herrera, 2004; Wang et al., 2012). This 3-week treatment protocol exhibited no adverse effect on 
normal  cerebellar  development,  but  reduced  p-Erk  expression  in  both  MEKi-treated  control  and 
Nf1Math1CKO cerebella (data not shown). Strikingly, MEK inhibition completely eliminated ectopic Tbr2 
expression in the ML of MEKi-treated Nf1Math1CKO cerebella (Figure 6C). MEK inhibition consistently 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

14 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 6. Glia-independent neuronal defects in the Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum are rescued by P0.5–P21 MEKi-treatment. Western blot analysis was 
performed on P8 whole cerebellar lysates (A) or P6 cultured GCP lysates (A′) from control and Nf1Math1CKO mice. (B) Cerebellar sections from P8 control 
and Nf1Math1CKO mice were stained for NeuN and p-Erk. Arrows highlight the NeuN+p-Erk+ cells in the mutant EGL and ML. (C) Control and Nf1Math1CKO 
mice were treated with vehicle or MEKi (5 mg/kg) from P0.5–P21 and analyzed at P21. Cerebellar sections were stained for Tbr2/NeuN, and imaged at 
low magnification (upper panels) and folium V (lower panels). (C′) The number of NeuN+ cells in the ML was quantified and compared. Of note, the 
yellow triangles represent 3 MEKi-treated mutant cerebella that still displayed cell clusters near the pial surface. Individual data points are presented, as 
well as mean ± SEM for each group. DAPI labels the nuclei. Scale bars: 50 μm.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.015
The following figure supplement is available for figure 6:
Figure supplement 1. Rapamycin treatment during neonatal stages does not rescue the neuronal defects in the Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum, but causes 
adverse effects. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.016

reduced  over  60%  of  abnormally  accumulated  neurons  in  the  ML  of  the  Nf1Math1CKO  cerebellum 
(Figure 6C,C′). Since an increase of p-S6 staining was also identified in purified GCPs from the P6 
Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum compared to controls (Figure 6A′), we treated control and Nf1Math1CKO mice 
with  rapamycin,  an  mTORC1  inhibitor  (Guertin  and  Sabatini,  2009).  Rapamycin  treatment  had  no 
benefit on neuronal defects in the Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum, but caused adverse effects on neuronal 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

15 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

migration  in  both  the  control  and  mutant  cerebellum  (Figure  6—figure  supplement  1).  Together, 
these results demonstrate that Nf1-mediated MEK/Erk inhibition is the major mechanism underlying 
the  suppression  of  a  subset  of  GCPs  that  otherwise  would  undergo  premature  differentiation  and 
ectopically adopt a UBC fate in the developing cerebellum.

Short- and long-term benefits of MEKi treatment on cerebellar and 
motor defects of Nf1hGFAPCKO mice
Based on the success of MEK inhibition on the developing Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum, we sought to inves-
tigate whether MEK inhibition could also rescue the more severely affected Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. 
The MEKi-treated Nf1hGFAPCKO mice displayed a varying degree of therapeutic responses in glial 
and neuronal defects in the developing cerebellum as well as their general behaviors (Video 1). Of 
14 MEKi-treated Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebella analyzed, 9 mice (good-responders or G-responders) exhib-
ited a significant rescue in the number of neurons abnormally accumulated in the ML of the developing 
cerebellum at a level similar to what was achieved in the MEKi-treated Nf1Math1CKO mice (green color, 
Figure  7A–A′′).  However,  the  remaining  5  of  the  MEKi-treated  Nf1hGFAPCKO  mice  (poor-responders  or 
P-responders) only exhibited marginal improvement in the neuronal defect (yellow color, Figure 7A–A′′). 
Importantly, G- and P-responders could be readily distinguished by the presence or absence of res-
cues (to the control levels) in the number of BG cells, alignment of the BG scaffold, the number of 
mispositioned Purkinje cells and arrested UBCs in the WM (Figure 7A,B,B′,C,C′). It should be noted 
that both G-responders and P-responders exhibited a complete rescue of ectopic Tbr2 expression in 
the ML of the MEKi-treated Nf1hGFAPCKO mice (Figure 7D,D′). Therefore, the fundamental difference 
in the cerebella of G- and P-responders lies in the presence or absence of rescue in glia-dependent 
cerebellar defects, which could result from inconsistent inhibition of much higher levels of hyperactive 
Erk signaling in Nf1-deficient glial lineage cells than that in Nf1-deficient immature neurons in the ML 
(Figure 7E; Figure 7—figure supplement 1A,B). Consistently, when we increased the dose of MEKi 
from 5 mg/kg to 20 mg/kg to lactating females, more consistent rescues were observed in the cere-
bella of MEKi-treated Nf1hGFAPCKO pups (Figure 7F; Figure 7—figure supplement 2).

We next sought to determine whether the transient P0.5–P21 treatment protocol could exert  
a long-term and sustained therapeutic benefit. When analyzed at P45–P60—1 month after MEKi 
treatment was terminated, MEKi-treated Nf1hGFAPCKO G-responders exhibited the rescue effects 
on both glial and neuronal defects, while P-responders continued to have defects similar to those 
observed after acute treatment at P21 (Figure 8A,A′). To investigate whether the rescue of the 
cerebellar cellular and structural defects could improve motor functions, we performed a Rotarod 
test on control and Nf1hGFAPCKO mice for 4 consecutive days immediately after 3-week MEKi treat-
ment. The MEKi-treated Nf1hGFAPCKO mice stayed significantly longer on the Rotarod compared 
to vehicle-treated mutant mice (Figure 8B). Moreover, while vehicle-treated Nf1hGFAPCKO mice did 
not  improve  motor  performance  over  the  4-day  training  course,  the  MEKi-treated  mutant  mice 
exhibited a significant improvement similar to controls, suggesting MEKi treatment also enhanced 
motor learning (Figure 8B). Importantly, the improved motor performance was maintained at least 
1  month  after  MEKi  treatment  was  terminated,  though  the  rescue  in  motor  learning  was  lost 
(Figure  8B′;  Video  2).  G-responders  stayed  significantly  longer  on  Rotarod  than  P-responders, 
providing a nice correlation between recues in cerebellar developmental defects and motor func-
tions  of  MEKi-treated  Nf1hGFAPCKO  mice  (Figure  8C).  Together,  these  results  demonstrate  that 
transient MEKi treatment during neonatal stages prevents cerebellar developmental defects and 
provides long-term benefits on motor functions of Nf1hGFAPCKO mice.

Discussion
By  utilizing  four  GEM  models,  we  have  identified  essential  roles  of  Nf1  tumor  suppressor  gene 
during early, but not late stages of cerebellar development. Mechanistically, Nf1 is required for the 
formation  of  the  BG  monolayer  and  scaffold  by  controlling  astrocyte  precursor  proliferation  at  a 
specific precursor stage, but dispensable for BG cells during late stages of cerebellar development 
and adulthood. Similarly, Nf1 indirectly regulates glutamatergic neuronal migration by controlling 
the  timely  differentiation  and  suppressing  ectopic  UBC  differentiation  of  GCPs  during  postnatal 
cerebellar development. The timely requirement of Nf1 during cerebellar development allows us to 
develop  a  therapeutic  prevention  strategy  for  treating  these  developmental  disorders  with  long-
term behavioral benefits.

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

16 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 7. MEKi treatment rescues glia-dependent cerebellar defects in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. (A) Cerebellar sections of vehicle- and MEKi-treated 
(5 mg/kg) control and Nf1hGFAPCKO mice were stained for GFAP/NeuN and CalB/BLBP and imaged at folium V. 9 out 14 MEKi-treated mutant mice 
(G-responder) exhibited a significant improvement, although the remaining 5 (P-responder) still had large number of cells in the EGL/ML and displayed 
Figure 7. Continued on next page

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

17 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 7. Continued
severe laminar disruption. The number of NeuN+ cells in the ML was quantified and compared in (A′). For MEKi-treated mutants, green and yellow 
color represents G-responders and P-responders, respectively. G-responders and P-responders were separated into two groups and compared in (A′′). 
(C, D) Cerebellar sections were stained for Tbr2/NeuN and imaged at folia V and X. (B, B′, C′, D′) The correlation between the number of NeuN+ cells in 
the ML, and the number of BLBP+ BG cells (B), mispositioned Purkinje cells (B′), ectopic Tbr2+ cells in the WM (C′) and ML (D′) was plotted and com-
pared. (E) Sections of P8 control and Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebella were stained for GFAP and p-Erk. Arrows highlight the GFAP+p-Erk+ cells in the ML, IGL and 
WM of the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. (F) Three Nf1hGFAPCKO mice treated with MEK inhibitor at 20 mg/kg from P0.5–P21 were analyzed at P60. GFAP/
NeuN and CalB/BLBP staining show consistent rescue of both neuronal and glial defects. Individual data points are presented, as well as mean ± SEM 
for each group. DAPI labels the nuclei. Scale bars: 50 μm.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.017
The following figure supplements are available for figure 7:
Figure supplement 1. Ras/Erk signaling is differentially activated in neuronal and glial precursors of the developing Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.018
Figure supplement 2. High-dose MEKi-treatment produces more consistent phenotypic rescue. 
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.019

Nf1 regulates astrocyte proliferation at a specific precursor stage
Astrocytes,  the  most  abundant  cells  in  the  brain,  play  diverse  roles  in  both  the  developing  and 
mature brain (Barres, 2008; Molofsky et al., 2012; Freeman and Rowitch, 2013). Compared to the 
other two major CNS cell types, neurons and oligodendrocytes, the identity of astrocyte precursors 
remains poorly understood. This is largely due to a lack of known markers that can reliably define 
astrocytes at distinct developmental stages (Molofsky et al., 2012; Freeman and Rowitch, 2013). 
BG cells have a unique and well-defined migratory pathway coupled with differentiation that allows 
us to define the role of Nf1 in this particular astrocyte lineage at different developmental stages 
(Buffo and Rossi, 2013). Before becoming terminally differentiated in the PC/BG monolayer, BG 
precursors proliferate at three distinct stages of differentiation that can be distinguished by different 
anatomical  locations  during  development  (Figure  8D).  These  three  stages  include:  Stage  I,  RG/
early-precursor stage in the IV-VZ; Stage II, BG intermediate-precursor stage in the PWM; Stage III, 
BG late-precursor stage in the rudimentary PC/BG layer. In the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum, increased 
proliferation was not observed in E17.5 IV-VZ RG cells (Stage I), or in BG late-precursors following 
migration into the rudimentary PC/BG layer in P0.5 anterior folia, or throughout P8 folia (Stage III). 
In contrast, a significant increase of proliferation index was specifically identified in Nf1-deficient BG 
intermediate-precursors in the E17.5 PWM and P0.5 posterior folia (Stage II), leading to an increased 
number of both total BLBP+ and proliferating BLBP+Ki67+ cells. These observations suggest that Nf1 
plays a robust role in constraining BG proliferation specifically at an intermediate precursor stage 
(Stage  II),  but  not  during  earlier  or  later  stages  (Stage  I  or  Stage  III).  This  conclusion  is  further 
confirmed  by  acute  inactivation  of  Nf1  in  the  E17.5  developing  cerebellum  using  an  inducible 
Nf1NCreERCKO model. Thus, the temporal and regional phenotypic differences upon Nf1 loss observed 
in the BG lineage can be strictly attributed to differences in the differentiation status of this partic-
ular  astrocyte  lineage.  Moreover,  Nf1-deficient  astrocytes  in  the  developing  WM  also  exhibited 
increased proliferation. Since gliogenesis occurs at different time points in different regions of the 
developing  brain,  this  ‘differentiation-based’  model  might  provide  an  explanation  for  conflicting 
results on the role of Nf1 in neural stem and progenitor cells among previously published studies 
(Dasgupta  and  Gutmann,  2005; Zhu  et  al.,  2005; Hegedus  et  al.,  2007; Becher  and  Holland, 
2010; Lee da et al., 2010; Lee da et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2012). It should be noted that region-
specific  mechanisms  underlying  glial  pathologies  induced  by  Nf1  loss  do  exist  within  the  dorsal 
brain. While increased proliferation in Nf1-deficient astrocyte precursors appears to be responsible for 
the increase of glial cells in the dorsal hindbrain (e.g., cerebellum), altered fate-specification of 
Nf1-deficient neural stem and progenitor cells in the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricle 
causes the increase of glial cells in the corpus callosum by promoting gliogenesis at the expense of 
neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb (Wang et al., 2012).

It is not entirely clear why Nf1 plays a critical role in suppressing astrocyte proliferation at a 
specific precursor stage. Loss of function studies in mice have shown that receptor tyrosine kinase 
(RTK) signaling, particularly fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) signaling, is essential for the 
transition from RG to BG cells (Lin et al., 2009; Muller Smith et al., 2012; Meier et al., 2014). 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

18 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Figure 8. Transient MEKi treatment provides long-term rescue of the cerebellar defects and improves the motor performance of Nf1hGFAPCKO mice. 
(A) Control and Nf1hGFAPCKO mice were treated with vehicle or MEK inhibitor (MEKi) from P0.5–P21 and analyzed for BLBP/NeuN staining between P50 
and P60. The number of NeuN+ cells in the ML and BLBP+ BG cells were quantified, respectively (A′). (B, B′) Rotarod tests were performed on transiently 
vehicle- and MEKi-treated control and Nf1hGFAPCKO mice for consecutive days from P21–P24 (B) or P45–P48 (B′) and the duration time for the mice to  
stay on the Rotarod was documented and compared. The correlation between the number of NeuN+ cells in the ML and duration time on the Rotarod  
at P48 was plotted in (C). (D) A model is proposed to summarize cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous defects in Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum and the 
underlying mechanisms. See main text. (E) A schematic diagram illustrates the differential Erk activation in the P8 control and Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebella. In 
controls, p-Erk expression is mostly restricted in the IGL neurons and a subset of WM glia, while in mutants, high level of p-ERK expression is identified in 
migrating neurons in the ML and the majority of WM glia. Note that in Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebella, p-ERK level is much higher in glia compared to neurons. 
Individual data points are presented, as well as mean ± SEM for each group. DAPI labels the nuclei. Scale bars: 50 μm.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.020

Most strikingly, loss of Shp2, also known as Ptpn11 (Protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor 
type 11), completely blocks the transition from RG to BG cells, which can be rescued by constitu-
tively active MEK (Li et al., 2014). These studies suggest that activation of Shp2-dependent FGF/
MEK/Erk signaling is essential for the transition from RG to BG cells during cerebellar develop-
ment (from Stage I to II). Accordingly, our study suggests that Erk signaling must be constrained 
by pathway inhibitors such as Nf1 to ensure the generation of the correct number of BG cells. 
Consistently, the most robust Erk/MAPK activation upon Nf1 loss was observed in astrocyte pre-
cursors at Stage II and early Stage III (Figure 8E).

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

19 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Glia-dependent and –independent 
Nf1 functions in glutamatergic 
interneurons
Our study provides several lines of evidence sup-
porting  the  notion  that  the  correct  number  of 
astrocytes is essential for the formation of the PC/
BG  monolayer  and  the  BG  scaffold,  and  subse-
quently  glutamatergic  interneuronal  migration. 
First, in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum, the severity 
of glial and neuronal defects is not uniform, but 
highly correlated with the excess number of BG 
cells in the affected areas. Indeed, the capacity of 
Nf1-deficient BG cells to extend their radial fibers 
appeared  relatively  uncompromised  even  for 
those projected from the areas outside of the PC/
BG layer. Second, considering the time required 
for  TM  induced,  Cre-mediated  Nf1  deletion  at 
E17.5 and the half-life of neurofibromin protein, 
we expect that a complete loss of Nf1 would be 
fully achieved in targeted cells around P0.5 when 
BG cells in the anterior folia (I–V) are at Stage III, 
while BG cells in the posterior folia (IX and X) 
are  still  proliferating  in  the  PWM  at  Stage  II. 
Consistently, a significant increase of Nf1-deficient 
BG  cells  was  observed  in  the  posterior  folia  
(IX, X), but not in the anterior folia of the same 
Nf1NCreERCKO cerebellum. Moreover, failed for-
mation of the PC/BG monolayer, misalignment 
of the BG scaffold, and abnormal accumulation 
of  both  Nf1-intact  and  Nf1-deficient  neurons  in 
the ML were only observed in the posterior folia 
of the E17.5 TM-induced Nf1NCreERCKO cerebellum. It should be noted that glial and neuronal defects 
in the posterior folia of the E17.5 TM-induced Nf1NCreERCKO cerebellum are significantly less severe 
than those observed in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum. This is likely due to a relatively greater window 
for the expansion of Nf1-deficient glial precursors in the Nf1hGFAPCKO cerebellum (from E12.5 on) than 
E17.5  TM-induced  Nf1NCreERCKO  cerebellum.  Third,  transient  treatment  of  MEKi  exhibited  a  robust 
long-term rescue of glial and neuronal defects in the cerebella of G-responders in which neurons and 
glia were still deficient for Nf1 after the treatment. Taken together, these results suggest that as long 
as the excess number of glia is therapeutically fixed during a specific window of cerebellar develop-
ment, a long-term rescue could be achieved, as Nf1 is relatively dispensable for glial cell proliferation 
during late stages of development and adulthood.

Video 2. Rotarod testing. Representative P48 control 
and Nf1hGFAPCKO mice were videotaped on the final 
(fourth) day of rotarod performance testing. During 
the test, the vehicle-treated mutants had difficulty 
walking in a constant forward direction, rotated with 
the rotarod, and had frequent slippage with difficulty 
maintaining a grip on the rotarod ultimately resulting 
in a fall before 5 min. The MEKi-treated mice all had 
improved performance on the rotarod test, staying on 
the rotarod for the entire duration, but had a variable 
response to the treatment, as some of the MEKi-
treated mice continued to show evidence of motor 
dysfunction (e.g., more likely to cling onto the rotarod 
instead of walking). The video includes clips from 
different time points and speeds during the rotarod 
test as a representation of the mouse performance 
during the task.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151.021

Our study also shows that the correct number of astrocytes in the developing WM of the cere-
bellum is essential for the migration of UBCs from the PWM to the IGL. This neuronal migratory defect 
appears  to  result  from  loss  of  a  non-cell-autonomous  Nf1  function  in  glial  cells.  This  conclusion  is 
based on the observations that (1) neuron-specific Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum exhibited no such defect 
in the WM, and (2) Nf1-intact UBCs were arrested in the WM of the E17.5 TM-induced Nf1NCreERCKO 
cerebellum where excess astrocytes were present. Furthermore, the migratory defect of UBCs was 
completely rescued in the transiently MEKi-treated cerebella of G-responders, which contained a rel-
atively normal number of glial cells. Together, our study demonstrates that Nf1 not only plays a critical 
role in suppressing neoplastic transformation of glial cells, but also is essential for controlling the gen-
eration of the correct number of normal astrocytes—which is required for the migration of both types 
of glutamatergic interneurons (GCs and UBCs) during cerebellar development.

Analysis of the neuron-specific Nf1Math1CKO cerebellum supports the existence of two UBC subline-
ages. One UBC sublineage characterized by Tbr2highNeuN− is relatively well studied, which exit cell 
cycles during perinatal stages and migrate from the RL via the PWM to the IGL (Englund et al., 2006; 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

20 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Mugnaini et al., 2011). Although Nf1-regulated glial number is essential for the migration of this UBC 
sublineage through the PWM, Nf1 is not required for the generation and migration of the Tbr2highNeuN− 
UBC sublineage. In contrast, the other rare Tbr2+NeuN+ UBC sublineage appears to be suppressed 
by Nf1-regulated Erk signaling in GCPs in a cell-autonomous mechanism. Thus, our study demon-
strates that Nf1 is indirectly required for GC migration by suppressing GCPs to undergo premature 
terminal differentiation and ectopic differentiation to Tbr2+NeuN+ UBCs in the EGL and ML. It is still 
possible that Nf1 loss causes abnormal migration of the Tbr2highNeuN− sublineage from the RL to the 
EGL, and then switches them to the Tbr2+NeuN+ UBC sublineage in the EGL. However, no Tbr2+ 
cells were found in the EGL of the mutant cerebellum at E17.5 or P0.5, when Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs 
migrate out of the RL into the PWM (Figure 5—figure supplement 2C,C′). This observation argues 
against the possibility of abnormal migration of Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs into the EGL. Indeed, Nf1 loss 
has little or no impact on the generation, migration and total number of Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs in the 
mutant cerebellum. Furthermore, in contrast to the precursors of Tbr2highNeuN− UBCs that exit cell 
cycles during perinatal stages, Nf1-deficient precursors of Tbr2+NeuN+ UBCs continue proliferating 
in the EGL at least until P8 at the peak of GCP proliferation. Together, these observations suggest 
that Nf1 plays a specific role in the Tbr2+NeuN+ UBC sublineage by controlling the fate-specification 
of GCPs in differentiating into GCs vs Tbr2+NeuN+ UBCs. The involvement of UBCs in cerebellar 
vestibular functions raises the possibility that the UBC defects in these Nf1 GEM models could con-
tribute to the impairments of motor and balance observed in individuals with NF1 (Mugnaini et al., 
2011; Champion et al., 2014).

Clinical implications
Our previous study showed that MEKi could be delivered to neonatal pups through milk from MEKi-
treated lactating females (Wang et al., 2012). This ‘MEKi in milk’ treatment protocol allows a low dose 
of MEKi to get into pups without introducing any physical distress. When lactating females received 
MEKi  at  5  mg/kg  (body  weight),  a  mild  30–40%  of  Erk  inhibition  was  observed  in  the  brains  of 
Nf1hGFAPCKO pups (MB, EJ and YZ, unpublished observations). Strikingly, this mild Erk inhibition 
robustly and consistently rescued developmental defects in the cerebella of 100% of MEKi-treated 
Nf1Math1CKO mice, as well as over 60% of the MEKi-treated Nf1hGFAPCKO mice (G-responders). It should 
be noted that the remaining P-responders are not ‘non-responders’, as these MEKi-treated Nf1hGFAPCKO 
mice still exhibited a complete rescue of ectopic Tbr2 expression in their cerebella, and consistent 
rescues in the defects in the corpus callosum and SVZ, as described previously (Wang et al., 2012). 
The  inconsistent  rescue  in  the  glia-dependent  defects  observed  in  the  cerebella  of  MEKi-treated 
Nf1hGFAPCKO mice is likely due to the extremely high levels of Erk activation in Nf1-deficient glial cells 
in the developing cerebellum compared to other cells. Indeed, when the dose of MEKi was increased 
to 20 mg/kg, a more consistent rescue in cerebellar defects was observed in the cerebella of the MEKi-
treated Nf1hGFAPCKO mice (Figure 7F). More importantly, this ‘MEKi in milk’ treatment protocol pro-
vides robust long-term rescues on cerebellar developmental defects and motor performance. It should 
be emphasized that this transient MEKi treatment protocol also rescued structural defects in the other 
regions of the Nf1hGFAPCKO brain including the enlarged corpus callosum, a brain structural defect 
associated with severe cognitive impairments in a subset of NF1 patients (Wang et al., 2012). Thus, 
motor performance improvement by this protocol is a collective reflection of rescues of multiple NF1-
associated brain structural defects including those in the cerebellum and corpus callosum. Given that 
cognitive  and  motor  impairments  are  often  co-morbidities  in  children  with  NF1  (Champion  et  al., 
2014), our findings suggest that this transient ‘MEKi in milk’ protocol can serve as a common preven-
tion strategy for multiple NF1-associated neurodevelopmental disorders.

Materials and methods
Control and mutant mice
Three independent Cre transgenic strains under the control of hGFAP, Math1 and L7 promoters 
were utilized to target an Nf1 mutation into different cell lineages during cerebellar development. 
The control mice for Nf1hGFAPCKO mice are a pool of phenotypically indistinguishable mice: hGFAP-
cre-;Nf1flox/flox, hGFAP-cre−;Nf1flox/+ and hGFAP-cre+;Nf1flox/+. The control mice with similar genetic 
configurations were used for Nf1Math1CKO and Nf1L7CKO mice. All the CKO mice have genotypes 
of Cre+;Nf1flox/flox. Nf1hGFAPCKO, Nf1Math1CKO, Nf1L7CKO and control mice were maintained in the 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

21 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

mixed  backgrounds  of  C57Bl6,  129Svj  and  FVB,  which  improved  overall  health  and  lifespan  of 
Nf1hGFAPCKO mice. Age- and littermate-matched control and mutant mice were used for analysis. 
Tamoxifen  inducible  strain  Nf1NcreERCKO  is  described  in  later  sections  along  with  the  tamoxifen 
administration protocol. All mice in this study were cared for according to the guidelines that were 
approved by the Animal Care and Use Committees of the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, MI 
and the Children's National Medical Center in Washington, DC.

MEK inhibitor treatment
MEK inhibitor (MEKi, PD0325901, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was dissolved in DMSO at a con-
centration of 25 mg/ml and resuspended in vehicle (0.5% hydroxypropyl methyl-cellulose with 0.2% 
Tween80, Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of 1 mg/ml. The solution was administered by oral gavage 
at the dosage of 5 mg/kg or 20 mg/kg (body weight) daily to lactating females for the treatment of 
P0.5–P21 mice. MEKi-treated mice were collected and compared to littermate control mice and vehi-
cle-treated Nf1hGFAPCKO and Nf1Math1CKO mice.

Tissue preparation and histological analysis
Both paraffin and frozen sections were utilized for histological analysis. Control and mutant littermates 
at various time points were perfused with Phosphate buffered saline (PBS) followed by 4% paraform-
aldehyde (PFA) (Sigma-Aldrich). Brains were divided into two hemispheres along the midline and each 
hemisphere was processed for either frozen blocks (for in situ hybridization and X-gal staining, see 
below) or paraffin-embedded blocks. For paraffin sections, brains were dissected and post-fixed in 
4% PFA overnight at 4°C. Fixed brains were sagittally sectioned at 5 μm thickness. Slides from histo-
logically comparable positions were stained by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and imaged with a light 
microscope (Olympus BX51, Olympus America Inc., Center Valley, PA).

Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
Immunohistochemistry was performed on paraffin sections as previously described (Wang et al., 
2009). The visualization of primary antibodies was performed with the avidin-biotin horseradish 
peroxidase system (Vectastain ABC kit, Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA). The dilutions of primary anti-
bodies used on paraffin sections in this study were: BLBP (1:2000, rabbit, a kind gift from Dr. Todd 
Anthony), Calbindin (1:1000, mouse, Sigma-Aldrich), GFAP (1:2000, rabbit, DAKO, Carpinteria, CA) 
and  BrdU  (1:1000,  rat,  Abcam,  Cambridge,  MA).  Immunofluorescence  was  performed  on  both 
paraffin  and  frozen  sections.  Primary  antibodies  were  visualized  by  Cy2  (or  Alexa  488),  Cy3  (or 
Alexa 555) and Cy5 (or Alexa 647)-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:200, Cy2/Cy3/Cy5, Jackson 
Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA; 1:400, Alexa 488/555/647, Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY). The dilu-
tions of primary antibodies used in this study were as follows: GFAP (1:2000, mouse, BD Pharmingen, 
San Jose, CA), GFAP (1:2000, rabbit, DAKO), NeuN (1:400, mouse, Millipore, Billerica, MA), BLBP 
(1:500, rabbit, a gift from Nathaniel Heintz), Calbindin (1:1000, mouse, Sigma-Aldrich), GABARα6 
(1:500,  rabbit,  Millipore),  BrdU  (1:1000,  rat,  Abcam),  Ki-67  (1:500,  mouse,  BD  Pharmingen),  Tbr2 
(1:1000, rabbit, Abcam), Calretinin (1:1000, mouse, Millipore), MAP2 (1:1000, mouse, Sigma-Aldrich), 
P27 (1:250, rabbit, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX), β-gal (1:1000, rabbit, 5 prime-3 prime, 
Gaithersburg, MD), β-gal (1:3000, chicken, Abcam), p-Erk (1:200, rabbit, Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA), 
p-S6 (1:1000, rabbit, Cell Signaling). Sections were examined under a light/fluorescence microscope 
(Olympus BX51).

In situ hybridization
Brains were removed immediately after decapitation, frozen in a bed of crushed dry ice, sectioned in 
a sagittal plane at 14 µm with a cryostat, mounted on RNase-free slides, and treated with 4% para-
formaldehyde, and incubated in 0.1 M triethanolamine with acetic anhydrate. Radioactive riboprobes 
were synthesized from template DNA and labeled by S35-UTP. For hybridization, an 800 bp Math1 
antisense probe was made from a plasmid pLA1-HindIII containing 600 bp of the Math1-coding region 
and approximately 200 bp of the 5′-flanking sequence (Helms and Johnson, 1998). The Zic1 antisense 
probe was a 690-bp XhoI–SalI segment from the mouse Zic1 cDNA (Aruga et al., 1994). After hybrid-
ization, slides were dipped in photographic emulsion, counterstained, dehydrated and cover-slipped. 
Tissue were visualized and photographed with darkfield using an Olympus BX51 microscope. Detailed 
protocol was described previously (Martin-Zanca et al., 1990).

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

22 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Tamoxifen administration in Nestin-creER inducible mice
Tamoxifen (Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in corn oil (Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of 20 mg/ml 
and stored at −20°C. Pregnant female mice were intra-peritoneal (IP) injected once with tamoxifen 
at a dosage of 100 μg/g body weight at E17.5. Their offspring carrying Nestin-creER transgene were 
collected at P21 for analysis. Nestin-creER+; Nf1flox/+; R26LacZR mice were used as controls and Nestin-
creER+; Nf1flox/flox; R26LacZR mice were used as mutants (Nf1NcreERCKO).
X-gal staining
The R26LacZR allele was introduced to the control, Nf1hGFAPCKO, Nf1Math1CKO, Nf1L7CKO and Nf1NcreERCKO 
mice as a reporter to monitor Cre-mediated recombination. Dissected brains were prepared for frozen 
sections and sliced at 12 μm and subjected to X-gal staining for 1 hr to overnight, according to the 
signal  intensity.  X-gal  staining  was  performed  as  described  previously  (Zhu  et  al.,  1998,  2001). 
Co-localization of β-gal expressing cells with other lineage markers was obtained by double immuno-
fluorescence labeling with anti-β-gal antibody.
Golgi staining
Brains from P8 mice were dissected and subjected to Golgi staining for 10 days using a previously 
published protocol (Glaser and Van der Loos, 1981). Brains were then sagittally sectioned at 50 μm 
on a vibrotome and mounted on slides (Leica, Germany). Sections were then developed in the darkroom 
(20 min 20% Ammonium hydroxide, Sigma-Aldrich + 10 min 20% Kodak fixer, Kodak, Rochester, NY) 
and dehydrated in ethanol and xylene.
BrdU assay
Neonatal mice received a single injection of 50 μg/g (gram, body weight) BrdU (Sigma-Aldrich). For 
proliferation assay, mice were perfused with 4% PFA 2 hr after the last pulse. For cell cycle and dif-
ferentiation assay, neonatal mice were injected with BrdU 24, 32 and 48 hr prior to analysis at P8. For 
P8–P18 BrdU differentiation assay, mice were sacrificed 10 days after the initial pulse. In both assays, 
brains were dissected and processed for paraffin-embedded sections. BrdU immunofluorescence was 
performed as described previously (Wang et al., 2009).
Neuron/glia co-culture, granule cell trans-well migration assay, and in 
vitro granule cell differentiation assay
Cerebella from P6 control and Nf1Math1CKO were dissected and dissociated into single-cell suspen-
sion using a previously published protocol (Lee et al., 2009). Granule cells and glia were separated 
and cultured differently. For neuron/glia co-cultures, cultured glial cells were released by trypsination. 
Following trypsin inhibition, glial cells were counted, spun down, re-suspended in culture medium, and 
added to 1-day-old cultures of purified cerebellar neurons at a ratio of 2:1. Trans-well migration assay 
was performed as described previously (Watkins and Sontheimer, 2011) with the following modifica-
tions.  Millicell  cell  culture  inserts  (Millipore)  were  placed  into  24-well  culture  plate  (Corning  Inc., 
Corning, NY) and granule cells (5.0 × 103) were added in each upper inserts. The bottom wells con-
tained 10 μg/ml fibronectin as chemo-attractant. They were then incubated for 4 hr in a 37°C humidi-
fied CO2 incubator. At the end of the experiment, remaining cells in the well (top) were stripped with 
Q-tips. Cells on the opposite side (bottom) of the insert membrane were fixed with 4% PFA for 30 min 
and stained with DAPI. The number of cells migrated through the membrane was counted based on 
high-power images of membranes and the average cell number of 5 areas (up, down left, right, center) 
and was subjected to statistical analysis. For in vitro differentiation assay, dissociated cerebellar gran-
ule cell progenitors were plated on Poly-D-Lysine-coated cell culture plates in growth media without 
EGF and FGF. Cells were fixed after 72 hr and stained for MAP2 and DAPI. Both trans-well migration 
assay and in vitro differentiation assay were repeated with cells obtained from at least three mice.
Western blot analysis
Snap-frozen tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer for 20 min on ice and subjected to centrifuga-
tion at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Equal amounts of protein samples were mixed with 1X SDS 
loading buffer [50 mM Tris-HCL (pH6.8), 2% SDS, 0.05% bromophenol blue, 10% glycerol, 100 mM 
β-mercaptoethanol] (Biorad, Hercules, CA). Samples were separated on SDS-PAGE gel and trans-
ferred onto NC membranes (Millipore). The blots were then blocked in 5% non-fat milk in TBST, fol-
lowed by incubation of primary antibodies at 4°C overnight. After washing, the blots were incubated 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

23 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

in  horseradish  peroxidase  (HRP)-conjugated  secondary  antibodies  at  room  temperature  for  1  hr. 
Signals were detected using ECL or ECL plus (GE healthcare, UK) followed by film development. 
The  primary  antibodies  used  were  as  follows:  p-Erk,  Erk,  p-S6,  S6,  p-Akt,  Akt  (1:1000,  rabbit,  Cell 
Signaling) and Nf1 (1:1000, rabbit, Upstate, Lake Placid, NY).
Rapamycin treatment
Rapamycin (Millipore) was dissolved in 100% sterile-filtered ethanol at a concentration of 10 mg/ml 
and resuspended in vehicle (5.2% PEG400 with 5.2% Tween80, Sigma-Aldrich) at a final concentration 
of 0.4 mg/ml. The solution was administered by intraperitoneal injection at the dosage of 4 mg/kg 
(body weight) every other day from P0.5–P21. Rapamycin-treated mice were collected and compared 
to littermate control and Nf1hGFAPCKO mice treated with vehicle.
Rotarod test
Motor function and motor learning were evaluated by rotarod apparatus. 1 hr before the rotarod test, mice 
were transferred from the holding room to the experimental room. Mice were tested for 4 consecutive days 
at P21–P24 and P45–P49. The speed of the rotarod was constantly accelerated from 4 to 34 rpm over 
a 5-min period. The latency to fall from the rod was recorded. The test was stopped at 12 min.

Quantification and statistical analysis
Anatomically comparable sections from control and mutant brains were visualized under an Olympus 
BX51 microscope. Images were captured and subjected to analysis. Lengths, areas and the number of 
cells  were  quantified  using  the  ImageJ  software  package.  Statistical  analysis  was  carried  out  using 
unpaired two-tailed Student's t-test. Comparisons across more than two groups were based on Anova 
test. At least three animals from each group were used for quantification. Data were presented as 
mean ± Standard Error Mean (SEM). p < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

When quantifying cells in specific folia, we used the following criteria to define the areas to quan-
tify. ‘Folia V/IV’ refers to the junction between folia V and IV at 20× magnification (i.e., Figure 1A 
middle panels) and the quantification covered this entire area. Similarly, ‘Folia IX/X’ refers to the 
junction between folia IX and X at 20× magnification (i.e., Figure 5—figure supplement 2A). ‘Folium 
V’ or ‘Folium X’ refers to 40× images in these folia close to the center of the cerebellum that were 
imaged at comparable positions in controls and mutants.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr L Parada for support during the early phase of the study; G Tomasek for technical assis-
tance; members of the Zhu lab for support; Drs A Messing for providing hGFAP-cre mice, D Rowitch 
for Math1-cre mice, L Chang for Nestin-creER mice, N Heintz for BLBP antibody, B Novitch for 
Olig2 antibody; Drs R Packer, C Wang, and J Guan for critically reading the manuscript. This work is 
supported by grants from the DOD (W81XWH-11-1-0251), NIH/NINDS (1R01 NS053900 and 1R01 
NS073762) and NIH/NCI (1U54 CA168512-01) (YZ).

Additional information

Funding
Funder
U.S. Department of Defense      W81XWH-11-1-0251
National Institutes of Health     
National Cancer Institute     

1R01 NS053900, 1R01 NS073762
1U54 CA168512-01

Grant reference number

Author
Yuan Zhu
Yuan Zhu
Yuan Zhu

The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the  
decision to submit the work for publication.

Author contributions
EK, YW, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting 
or revising the article; S-JK, GGM, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data; MB, 
Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article; ESJ, Acquisition 

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

24 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

of data, Drafting or revising the article, Contributed unpublished essential data or reagents; TEA, 
Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Contributed unpublished essential data 
or  reagents;  CW,  YEL, J-LG, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Contributed 
unpublished essential data or reagents; YZ, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and 
interpretation  of  data,  Drafting  or  revising  the  article,  Contributed  unpublished  essential  data  or 
reagents

Ethics
Animal experimentation: All mice in this study were cared for according to the guidelines that were 
approved by the Animal Care and Use Committees of the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, MI and 
the Children's National Medical Center in Washington, DC. The approved protocol number at the 
University of Michigan is PRO00004481. The project (ID# 30001543) was approved by the IACUC 
(Protocol#: 309-13-09) of the Children's National Medical Center at Washington.

References
Adviento B, Corbin IL, Widjaja F, Desachy G, Enrique N, Rosser T, Risi S, Marco EJ, Hendren RL, Bearden CE, 

Rauen KA, Weiss LA. 2014. Autism traits in the RASopathies. Journal of Medical Genetics 51:10–20.  
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-101951.

Aruga J, Yokota N, Hashimoto M, Furuichi T, Fukuda M, Mikoshiba K. 1994. A novel zinc finger protein, zic, is 
involved in neurogenesis, especially in the cell lineage of cerebellar granule cells. Journal of Neurochemistry 
63:1880–1890. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1994.63051880.x.

Bailey A, Luthert P, Dean A, Harding B, Janota I, Montgomery M, Rutter M, Lantos P. 1998. A clinicopathological 

study of autism. Brain 121:889–905. doi: 10.1093/brain/121.5.889.

Barres BA. 2008. The mystery and magic of glia: a perspective on their roles in health and disease. Neuron 

60:430–440. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.10.013.

Basson MA, Wingate RJ. 2013. Congenital hypoplasia of the cerebellum: developmental causes and behavioral 

consequences. Frontiers in Neuroanatomy 7:29. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2013.00029.

Becher OJ, Holland EC. 2010. Evidence for and against regional differences in neural stem and progenitor cells 

of the CNS. Genes & Development 24:2233–2238. doi: 10.1101/gad.1988010.

Bloss CS, Courchesne E. 2007. MRI neuroanatomy in young girls with autism: a preliminary study. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 46:515–523. doi: 10.1097/chi.0b013e318030e28b.
Buffo A, Rossi F. 2013. Origin, lineage and function of cerebellar glia. Progress in Neurobiology 109:42–63. 

doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.08.001.

Burns KA, Ayoub AE, Breunig JJ, Adhami F, Weng WL, Colbert MC, Rakic P, Kuan CY. 2007. Nestin-CreER 

mice reveal DNA synthesis by nonapoptotic neurons following cerebral ischemia hypoxia. Cerebral Cortex 
17:2585–2592. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhl164.

Champion JA, Rose KJ, Payne JM, Burns J, North KN. 2014. Relationship between cognitive dysfunction, gait, 

and motor impairment in children and adolescents with neurofibromatosis type 1. Developmental Medicine and 
Child Neurology 56:468–474. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12361.

Cichowski K, Jacks T. 2001. NF1 tumor suppressor gene function: narrowing the GAP. Cell 104:593–604. 

doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(01)00245-8.

Courchesne E, Karns CM, Davis HR, Ziccardi R, Carper RA, Tigue ZD, Chisum HJ, Moses P, Pierce K, Lord C, 

Lincoln AJ, Pizzo S, Schreibman L, Haas RH, Akshoomoff NA, Courchesne RY. 2001. Unusual brain growth patterns 
in early life in patients with autistic disorder: an MRI study. Neurology 57:245–254. doi: 10.1212/WNL.57.2.245.

Dasgupta B, Gutmann DH. 2005. Neurofibromin regulates neural stem cell proliferation, survival, and 

astroglial differentiation in vitro and in vivo. The Journal of Neuroscience 25:5584–5594. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.4693-04.2005.

Englund C, Fink A, Lau C, Pham D, Daza RA, Bulfone A, Kowalczyk T, Hevner RF. 2005. Pax6, Tbr2, and Tbr1 are 

expressed sequentially by radial glia, intermediate progenitor cells, and postmitotic neurons in developing 
neocortex. The Journal of Neuroscience 25:247–251. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2899-04.2005.

Englund C, Kowalczyk T, Daza RA, Dagan A, Lau C, Rose MF, Hevner RF. 2006. Unipolar brush cells of the 

cerebellum are produced in the rhombic lip and migrate through developing white matter. The Journal of 
Neuroscience 26:9184–9195. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1610-06.2006.

Evans DG, Howard E, Giblin C, Clancy T, Spencer H, Huson SM, Lalloo F. 2010. Birth incidence and prevalence 
of tumor-prone syndromes: estimates from a UK family genetic register service. American Journal of Medical 
Genetics. Part A 152A:327–332. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33139.

Fatemi SH, Aldinger KA, Ashwood P, Bauman ML, Blaha CD, Blatt GJ, Chauhan A, Chauhan V, Dager SR, 
Dickson PE, Estes AM, Goldowitz D, Heck DH, Kemper TL, King BH, Martin LA, Millen KJ, Mittleman G, 
Mosconi MW, Persico AM, Sweeney JA, Webb SJ, Welsh JP. 2012. Consensus paper: pathological role of the 
cerebellum in autism. The Cerebellum 11:777–807. doi: 10.1007/s12311-012-0355-9.

Feldmann R, Schuierer G, Wessel A, Neveling N, Weglage J. 2010. Development of MRI T2 hyperintensities and 
cognitive functioning in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1. Acta Paediatrica 99:1657–1660. doi: 10.1111/ 
j.1651-2227.2010.01923.x.

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

25 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Fogarty MP, Emmenegger BA, Grasfeder LL, Oliver TG, Wechsler-Reya RJ. 2007. Fibroblast growth factor blocks 

Sonic hedgehog signaling in neuronal precursors and tumor cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of USA 104:2973–2978. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0605770104.

Freeman MR, Rowitch DH. 2013. Evolving concepts of gliogenesis: a look way back and ahead to the next 

25 years. Neuron 80 613–623. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.034.

Garg S, Green J, Leadbitter K, Emsley R, Lehtonen A, Evans DG, Huson SM. 2013a. Neurofibromatosis type 1 

and autism spectrum disorder. Pediatrics 132:e1642–e1648. doi: 10.1542/peds.2013-1868.

Garg S, Lehtonen A, Huson SM, Emsley R, Trump D, Evans DG, Green J. 2013b. Autism and other psychiatric 
comorbidity in neurofibromatosis type 1: evidence from a population-based study. Developmental Medicine 
and Child Neurology 55:139–145. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12043.

Glaser EM, Van der Loos H. 1981. Analysis of thick brain sections by obverse-reverse computer microscopy: 

application of a new, high clarity Golgi-Nissl stain. Journal of Neuroscience Methods 4:117–125. doi: 10.1016/ 
0165-0270(81)90045-5.

Grimaldi P, Parras C, Guillemot F, Rossi F, Wassef M. 2009. Origins and control of the differentiation of inhibitory 

interneurons and glia in the cerebellum. Developmental Biology 328:422–433. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio. 
2009.02.008.

Guertin DA, Sabatini DM. 2009. The pharmacology of mTOR inhibition. Science Signaling 2:pe24. doi: 10.1126/

scisignal.267pe24.

Hatten ME. 1999. Central nervous system neuronal migration. Annual Review of Neuroscience 22:511–539. 

doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.22.1.511.

Hegedus B, Dasgupta B, Shin JE, Emnett RJ, Hart-Mahon EK, Elghazi L, Bernal-Mizrachi E, Gutmann DH. 2007. 

Neurofibromatosis-1 regulates neuronal and glial cell differentiation from neuroglial progenitors in vivo by both 
cAMP- and Ras-dependent mechanisms. Cell Stem Cell 1:443–457. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.07.008.

Helms AW, Johnson JE. 1998. Progenitors of dorsal commissural interneurons are defined by MATH1 expression. 

Development 125:919–928.

Hyman SL, Arthur Shores E, North KN. 2006. Learning disabilities in children with neurofibromatosis type 1: 
subtypes, cognitive profile, and attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder. Developmental Medicine and Child 
Neurology 48:973–977. doi: 10.1017/S0012162206002131.

Hyman SL, Shores A, North KN. 2005. The nature and frequency of cognitive deficits in children with neurofibro-

matosis type 1. Neurology 65:1037–1044. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000179303.72345.ce.

Johnson BA, Macwilliams BA, Carey JC, Viskochil DH, D'astous JL, Stevenson DA. 2010. Motor proficiency  

in children with neurofibromatosis type 1. Pediatric Physical Therapy 22:344–348. doi: 10.1097/PEP. 
0b013e3181f9dbc8.

Krab LC, de Goede-Bolder A, Aarsen FK, Moll HA, De Zeeuw CI, Elgersma Y, van der Geest JN. 2011. Motor 

learning in children with neurofibromatosis type I. The cerebellum 10:14–21. doi: 10.1007/s12311-010-0217-2.
Lee HY, Greene LA, Mason CA, Manzini MC. 2009. Isolation and culture of post-natal mouse cerebellar granule 

neuron progenitor cells and neurons. Journal of Visualized Experiments. doi: 10.3791/990.

Lee da Y, Gianino SM, Gutmann DH. 2012. Innate neural stem cell heterogeneity determines the patterning of 

glioma formation in children. Cancer Cell 22:131–138. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.05.036.

Lee da Y, Yeh TH, Emnett RJ, White CR, Gutmann DH. 2010. Neurofibromatosis-1 regulates neuroglial progenitor 
proliferation and glial differentiation in a brain region-specific manner. Genes & Development 24:2317–2329. 
doi: 10.1101/gad.1957110.

Lehtonen A, Howie E, Trump D, Huson SM. 2013. Behaviour in children with neurofibromatosis type 1: cognition, 
executive function, attention, emotion, and social competence. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology 
55:111–125. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2012.04399.x.

Li K, Leung AW, Guo Q, Yang W, Li JY. 2014. Shp2-dependent ERK signaling is essential for induction of 
Bergmann glia and foliation of the cerebellum. The Journal of Neuroscience 34:922–931. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.3476-13.2014.

Lin Y, Chen L, Lin C, Luo Y, Tsai RY, Wang F. 2009. Neuron-derived FGF9 is essential for scaffold formation of 

Bergmann radial fibers and migration of granule neurons in the cerebellum. Developmental Biology 329:44–54. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.011.

Lorenzo J, Barton B, Acosta MT, North K. 2011. Mental, motor, and language development of toddlers with 

neurofibromatosis type 1. The Journal of Pediatrics 158:660–665. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.10.001.

Martin-Zanca D, Barbacid M, Parada LF. 1990. Expression of the trk proto-oncogene is restricted to the 
sensory cranial and spinal ganglia of neural crest origin in mouse development. Genes & Development 
4:683–694. doi: 10.1101/gad.4.5.683.

Mecklenburg N, Garcia-López R, Puelles E, Sotelo C, Martinez S. 2011. Cerebellar oligodendroglial cells have a 

mesencephalic origin. Glia 59:1946–1957. doi: 10.1002/glia.21236.

Meier F, Giesert F, Delic S, Faus-Kessler T, Matheus F, Simeone A, Holter SM, Kuhn R, Weisenhorn DM, Wurst W, 
Prakash N. 2014. FGF/FGFR2 signaling regulates the generation and correct positioning of bergmann glia cells 
in the developing mouse cerebellum. PLOS ONE 9:e101124. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101124.

Mendoza MC, Er EE, Blenis J. 2011. The Ras-ERK and PI3K-mTOR pathways: cross-talk and compensation. 

Trends in Biochemical Sciences 36:320–328. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2011.03.006.

Molofsky AV, Krencik R, Ullian EM, Tsai HH, Deneen B, Richardson WD, Barres BA, Rowitch DH. 2012. Astrocytes 

and disease: a neurodevelopmental perspective. Genes & Development 26:891–907. doi: 10.1101/gad.188326.112.
Mugnaini E, Floris A. 1994. The unipolar brush cell: a neglected neuron of the mammalian cerebellar cortex. The 

Journal of Comparative Neurology 339:174–180. doi: 10.1002/cne.903390203.

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

26 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cellsResearch article

Mugnaini E, Sekerková G, Martina M. 2011. The unipolar brush cell: a remarkable neuron finally receiving 

deserved attention. Brain Research Reviews 66:220–245. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2010.10.001.

Müller Smith K, Williamson TL, Schwartz ML, Vaccarino FM. 2012. Impaired motor coordination and disrupted 
cerebellar architecture in Fgfr1 and Fgfr2 double knockout mice. Brain Research 1460:12–24. doi: 10.1016/j.
brainres.2012.04.002.

Palmen SJ, van Engeland H, Hof PR, Schmitz C. 2004. Neuropathological findings in autism. Brain 127 

2572–2583. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh287.

Payne JM, Pickering T, Porter M, Oates EC, Walia N, Prelog K, North KN. 2014. Longitudinal assessment of 

cognition and T2-hyperintensities in NF1: an 18-year study. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A 
164A:661–665. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36338.

Plasschaert E, Descheemaeker MJ, Van Eylen L, Noens I, Steyaert J, Legius E. 2014. Prevalence of autism 

spectrum disorder symptoms in children with neurofibromatosis type 1. American Journal of Medical Genetics. 
Part B, Neuropsychiatric Genetics 168:72–80. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32280.

Schmahmann JD, Caplan D. 2006. Cognition, emotion and the cerebellum. Brain 129:290–292. doi: 10.1093/

brain/awh729.

Schubbert S, Shannon K, Bollag G. 2007. Hyperactive Ras in developmental disorders and cancer. Nature 

Reviews Cancer 7:295–308. doi: 10.1038/nrc2109.

Schuller U, Heine VM, Mao J, Kho AT, Dillon AK, Han YG, Huillard E, Sun T, Ligon AH, Qian Y, Ma Q, Alvarez-Buylla A, 

McMahon AP, Rowitch DH, Ligon KL. 2008. Acquisition of granule neuron precursor identity is a critical 
determinant of progenitor cell competence to form Shh-induced medulloblastoma. Cancer Cell 14:123–134. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.07.005.

Sebolt-Leopold JS, Herrera R. 2004. Targeting the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade to treat cancer. 

Nature Reviews Cancer 4:937–947. doi: 10.1038/nrc1503.

Sillitoe RV, Joyner AL. 2007. Morphology, molecular codes, and circuitry produce the three-dimensional 

complexity of the cerebellum. Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 23:549–577. doi: 10.1146/
annurev.cellbio.23.090506.123237.

Soriano P. 1999. Generalized lacZ expression with the ROSA26 Cre reporter strain [letter]. Nature Genetics 

21:70–71. doi: 10.1038/5007.

Strick PL, Dum RP, Fiez JA. 2009. Cerebellum and nonmotor function. Annual Review of Neuroscience 32:413–434. 

doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.060407.125606.

Tsai PT, Hull C, Chu Y, Greene-Colozzi E, Sadowski AR, Leech JM, Steinberg J, Crawley JN, Regehr WG, Sahin M. 
2012. Autistic-like behaviour and cerebellar dysfunction in Purkinje cell Tsc1 mutant mice. Nature 488:647–651. 
doi: 10.1038/nature11310.

Upadhyaya MA, Cooper DN. 2012. Neurofibromatosis Type 1: Molecular and Cellular Biology. Springer-Verlag 

Berlin Heidelberg.

van der Vaart T, van Woerden GM, Elgersma Y, de Zeeuw CI, Schonewille M. 2011. Motor deficits in neurofi-
bromatosis type 1 mice: the role of the cerebellum. Genes, Brain, and Behavior 10:404–409. doi: 10.1111/ 
j.1601-183X.2011.00685.x.

Vargas DL, Nascimbene C, Krishnan C, Zimmerman AW, Pardo CA. 2005. Neuroglial activation and neuroinflam-

mation in the brain of patients with autism. Annals of Neurology 57:67–81. doi: 10.1002/ana.20315.

Walsh KS, Velez JI, Kardel PG, Imas DM, Muenke M, Packer RJ, Castellanos FX, Acosta MT. 2013. Symptomatology 

of autism spectrum disorder in a population with neurofibromatosis type 1. Developmental Medicine and Child 
Neurology 55:131–138. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12038.

Wang Y, Kim E, Wang X, Novitch BG, Yoshikawa K, Chang LS, Zhu Y. 2012. ERK inhibition rescues defects in  

fate specification of Nf1-deficient neural progenitors and brain abnormalities. Cell 150:816–830. doi: 10.1016/ 
j.cell.2012.06.034.

Wang Y, Yang J, Zheng H, Tomasek GJ, Zhang P, Mckeever PE, Lee EY, Zhu Y. 2009. Expression of mutant p53 

proteins implicates a lineage relationship between neural stem cells and malignant astrocytic glioma in a murine 
model. Cancer Cell 15:514–526. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.04.001.

Watkins S, Sontheimer H. 2011. Hydrodynamic cellular volume changes enable glioma cell invasion. The Journal 

of Neuroscience 31:17250–17259. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3938-11.2011.

Yang ZJ, Ellis T, Markant SL, Read TA, Kessler JD, Bourboulas M, Schuller U, Machold R, Fishell G, Rowitch DH, 
Wainwright BJ, Wechsler-Reya RJ. 2008. Medulloblastoma can be initiated by deletion of Patched in lineage-
restricted progenitors or stem cells. Cancer Cell 14:135–145. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.07.003.

Yu T, Yaguchi Y, Echevarria D, Martinez S, Basson MA. 2011. Sprouty genes prevent excessive FGF signalling in 

multiple cell types throughout development of the cerebellum. Development 138:2957–2968. doi: 10.1242/
dev.063784.

Yue Q, Groszer M, GIL JS, Berk AJ, Messing A, Wu H, Liu X. 2005. PTEN deletion in Bergmann glia leads to 
premature differentiation and affects laminar organization. Development 132:3281–3291. doi: 10.1242/dev.01891.

Zhu Y, Harada T, Liu L, Lush ME, Guignard F, Harada C, Burns DK, Bajenaru ML, Gutmann DH, Parada LF. 2005. 

Inactivation of NF1 in CNS causes increased glial progenitor proliferation and optic glioma formation. 
Development 132:5577–5588. doi: 10.1242/dev.02162.

Zhu Y, Richardson JA, Parada LF, Graff JM. 1998. Smad3 mutant mice develop metastatic colorectal cancer. Cell 

94:703–714. doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81730-4.

Zhu Y, Romero MI, Ghosh P, Ye Z, Charnay P, Rushing EJ, Marth JD, Parada LF. 2001. Ablation of NF1 

function in neurons induces abnormal development of cerebral cortex and reactive gliosis in the brain. 
Genes & Development 15:859–876. doi: 10.1101/gad.862101.

Kim et al. eLife 2014;3:e05151. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05151 

27 of 27

Developmental biology and stem cells